Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 119

The Three Nephites

If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? (John 21:22.)

Thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people. (D&C 7:3.)

They Shall Never Taste of Death

(3 Nephi 28:1-12)

It appearing that the allotted time of his Nephite ministry is over, Jesus prepares to return to his Father. Before doing so, he asks the Twelve: "What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father?" Nine of them reply: "We desire that after we have lived unto the age of man, that our ministry, wherein thou hast called us, may have an end, that we may speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom." We conclude from this that they desired to remain in paradise for but a short time, after which they would come forth in immortal glory and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, to go no more out. Jesus grants their request. "Blessed are ye because ye desired this thing of me," he said, "therefore, after that ye are seventy and two years old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shall find rest."

Jesus then turns to the other three. "What will ye that I should do unto you, when I am gone unto the Father?" he asks. Though they are spiritual giants and feel themselves on intimate terms with the Lord, they sorrow in their hearts and dare not give vocal expression to their desires. "Behold, I know your thoughts," Jesus says, "and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me." These three Nephite disciples, because of their desires, had in store for themselves such blessings as we have no way of comprehending, nor has the Lord seen fit to do more than reveal a sliver of what was to be in their future lives.

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.

Eternal life—no, not that glorious immortality in which resurrected beings become like their God, but to live forever on earth, as mortals, without disease or sorrow, having health and vigor, preaching the gospel and being witnesses to and participants in all that was to be! What a tempting prospect. How many faithful souls would rejoice in such a ministerial assignment. And wonder of wonders, for them it was to be.

And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the thinking of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father.

Will translated beings ever die? Remember John's enigmatic words relative to his own translation: "Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" (John 21:23.) Note the distinction between avoiding death as such and living till the Lord comes. Then note that Jesus promises the Three Nephites, not that they shall not die, but that they "shall never taste of death" and shall not "endure the pains of death." Again it is an enigmatic declaration with a hidden meaning. There is a distinction between death as we know it and tasting of death or enduring the pains of death. As a matter of doctrine, death is universal; every mortal thing, whether plant or animal or man, shall surely die. Jacob said: "Death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator." (2 Ne. 9:6.) There are no exceptions, not even among translated beings. Paul said: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) Again the dominion of death over all is acclaimed. But the Lord says of all his saints, not that they will not die, but that "those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter." (D&C 42:46-47.) The distinction is between dying as such and tasting of death itself. Again the Lord says: "He that liveth when the Lord shall come, and hath kept the faith, blessed is he; nevertheless, it is appointed to him to die at the age of man. Wherefore, children shall grow up until they become old; old men shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye." (D&C 63:50-51.) Thus, this change from mortality to immortality, though almost instantaneous, is both a death and a resurrection. Thus, translated beings do not suffer death as we normally define it, meaning the separation of body and spirit; nor do they receive a resurrection as we ordinarily describe it, meaning that the body rises from the dust and the spirit enters again into its fleshly home. But they do pass through death and are changed from mortality to immortality, in the eternal sense, and they thus both die and are resurrected in the eternal sense. This, we might add, is why Paul wrote: "Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed." (1 Cor. 15:51-52.)

And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand.

During the Millennium all men will be translated, as it were; in that day "there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree; And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious." (D&C 101:29-31.)

And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one;

And the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me; and the Father giveth the Holy Ghost unto the children of men, because of me.

These words—the last recorded words spoken by Jesus in his Nephite ministry—contain the greatest doctrinal concept ever revealed. They are the Book of Mormon pronouncement that as God now is, man may become; they are the Book of Mormon proclamation that those who gain eternal life inherit, receive, and possess all that the Father hath; they are the Book of Mormon announcement that man—in glorious exaltation—becomes one with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

And as we hear such words as these fall from the lips of the Son of God, there is no better place to insert our witness of the truth and divinity of that volume of holy scripture—the Book of Mormon—which contains the account of Jesus' Nephite ministry. In words of soberness we say: No man having the Spirit of the Lord as his guide can read the Book of Mormon account without knowing in the depths of his soul that it came from God and is verily true. No such man can read it and think that either Joseph Smith or any man wrote the account of himself. It came from God by the power of the Holy Ghost, and it is the mind and will and voice of the Lord to all men. And because it came forth through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, it follows that the book itself, being true, is a witness, beyond any peradventure of doubt, that Joseph Smith was called of God.

But back to our Nephite setting. After Jesus had spoken the wondrous words which burn with eternal conviction in our heart, he touched the nine apostles, but not the three, with his finger, "and then he departed."

Their Transfiguration and Ministry

(3 Nephi 28:13-40)

Mortal man—shackled as it were in a tabernacle of clay; imprisoned on a single planet that is itself but a speck of dust in an endless universe; bound by time and space, and living for only a few brief moments—mortal man, a spirit son of God, dwells in the depths of ignorance, away from his Father, without a knowledge of eternal things. We are born, we live, we die, and in the process we are privileged—some of us—to receive a few little glimmerings of eternal truth by revelation. And there are few among us, even in sober moments, who ponder the wonders of eternity and seek to know what lies beyond the ken of humankind. What of creation itself, of worlds without number, all inhabited, all crowned with an infinite variety of life? How did Gods begin to be, and whence came the order and system in a universe whose outer limits we shall never see? How little we know of preexistence, both ours and that of all forms of life; or of death and the world of waiting spirits; or of the resurrection which raises sleeping dust to glorious life. What are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob doing today? How can Moroni hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye? Where are Annas and Caiaphas and Pilate, and what kind of a life are they living? How little we know about creation, about redemption, about immortal glory.

And yet there are those—a favored few—who break the time-bound bands, who see beyond the veil, who come to know the things of eternity. Portions of what they learn they are permitted to reveal to the rest of us. Enoch, after his translation, was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father and the Son, where he saw and heard things of infinite wonder and glory, some few of which are recorded in the Book of Moses. Moriancumer saw and beheld and knew and recorded such glorious things that they were withheld from the children of men until after the resurrection of Christ, and even then they were shown only to the Nephites, and that for a brief season. Since then they have been sealed up, and, as we suppose, they shall not be manifest again until after the Second Coming of the Son of Man. John the Revelator saw the wonders of eternity, some few of which he was permitted to record, in figures and types and shadows, in the Book of Revelation. Others of the prophets—and for aught we know their number may be many—have seen and heard and felt and known far more than has come to us in any of our scriptures. Among these are the Three Nephite Disciples.

We do not know the great things revealed to the chosen three, nor could we comprehend them if they were recorded in our holy books. Milk must precede meat, and those who have yet to learn the basics of arithmetic can scarcely comprehend the mysteries of calculus. Hence, as Alma said: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." (Alma 12:9.) Of the experience of the Three Nephites, Mormon wrote: "And behold, the heavens were opened, and they were caught up into heaven, and saw and heard unspeakable things. And it was forbidden them that they should utter; neither was it given unto them power that they could utter the things which they saw and heard; And whether they were in the body or out of the body, they could not tell; for it did seem unto them like a transfiguration of them, that they were changed from this body of flesh into an immortal state, that they could behold the things of God."

It was with them as with Paul and Joseph Smith and others of the prophets. There are no words that can convey the spiritual feelings or the truths learned by those who receive these greater manifestations of divine understanding. Speaking of himself, Paul says he was "caught up to the third heaven," which is the celestial kingdom—"whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth," he says—and that he "heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter." (2 Cor. 12:1-4.) After recording the vision of the degrees of glory, Joseph Smith spoke similarly of other things that he had seen and heard while enwrapped in the heavenly manifestation then vouchsafed to him. [^1]

In recording that the Three Disciples were caught up into heaven, Mormon first wrote: "Whether they were mortal or immortal, from the day of their transfiguration, I know not." After pondering and praying about their status, however, he said: "Since I wrote, I have inquired of the Lord, and he hath made it manifest unto me that there must needs be a change wrought upon their bodies, or else it needs be that they must taste of death; Therefore, that they might not taste of death there was a change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow save it were for the sins of the world. Now this change was not equal to that which shall take place at the last day; but there was a change wrought upon them, insomuch that Satan could have no power over them, that he could not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh, that they were holy, and that the powers of the earth could not hold them. And in this state they were to remain until the judgment day of Christ; and at that day they were to receive a greater change, and to be received into the kingdom of the Father to go no more out, but to dwell with God eternally in the heavens." These words apply equally to John the Beloved, whose mission and ministry is the same as that of his Nephite brethren.

As to their ministry among those of that generation, they went forth preaching the gospel, baptizing, conferring the Holy Ghost, and building up the Church of Christ, until all of that generation were blessed as Jesus had promised.

As to their later ministry among the Nephites, though they continued to serve with unwearying diligence, opposition arose. They were cast into prisons, which were rent at their word, and they went forth free. They were cast into pits of the earth and freed by the power of God. "And thrice they were cast into a furnace and received no harm. And twice were they cast into a den of wild beasts; and behold they did play with the beasts as a child with a suckling lamb, and received no harm." Finally, in the days of Mormon, in about A.D. 322, the Lord took them from among the people (Morm. 1:13), and in the year A.D. 401, Moroni records that, though their whereabouts was unknown, they had ministered unto him and his father (Morm. 8:10-11).

As to their continuing mortal ministry, we know only that they shall be among the Jews, and among the Gentiles, and among "all the scattered tribes of Israel," and among "all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls." And this also applies to John the Beloved. "And they are as the angels of God, and if they shall pray unto the Father in the name of Jesus they can show themselves unto whatsoever man it seemeth them good. Therefore, great and marvelous works shall be wrought by them, before the great and coming day when all people must surely stand before the judgment-seat of Christ; Yea even among the Gentiles shall there be a great and marvelous work wrought by them, before that judgment day."

At this point in his writing, Mormon, as moved upon by the Holy Ghost, gives us this word from the Lord:

And wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day;

And it would be better for them if they had not been born. For do ye suppose that ye can get rid of the justice of an offended God, who hath been trampled under feet of men, that thereby salvation might come?

Jesus and his servants are one; to believe in those whom he hath sent is to believe in him, and to reject his messengers is to reject him.

Nephite, Jewish, and Gentile Apostasy

(3 Nephi 29, 30; 4 Nephi; Mormon 1 to 9; Moroni 1 to 10)

We cannot leave our study of the life of him whose gospel is the power that saves without recording what happened to the saving truths he gave to men on both continents. Jesus restored the gospel in the Old World and set up his earthly kingdom among men. In the New World he added to the gospel truths they already had, perfected his kingdom, and shed forth upon them such rays of heavenly light as have seldom pierced the gloom and darkness of earth. In the Old World the true Church was set up in the midst of worldly forces, and after a century or so the world prevailed, the saints became sinners, and the churches of men and of devils replaced the true Church of Christ. Among the Nephites all the people were converted, and for 167 or so years, until A.D. 201, perfect peace and righteousness prevailed. Then apostasy began; false churches sprang up; wickedness prevailed; wars swept the land; and except for a few saints, the true Church was overcome by the world. By A.D. 421 Satan's triumph was complete and the whole Nephite civilization had been destroyed, with Moroni only remaining true to the faith.

We can scarcely imagine the gospel blessings that first prevailed among the Nephites. Contentions and disputations ceased; every man dealt justly with his brother; they had all things common among them; there were no rich nor poor; none were in bondage; all were free and partook of the heavenly gift. "And there were great and marvelous works wrought by the disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of miracles did they work among the children of men." Of these American saints Mormon said: "There was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings."

But beginning in the 201st year some were lifted up in pride; they began to wear costly apparel; the people no longer had all things in common; society was divided into classes; and men "began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ." Soon "there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness." And "there was another church which denied the Christ; and they did persecute the true church of Christ, because of their humility and their belief in Christ; and they did despise them because of the many miracles which were wrought among them." These were the days when the Three Disciples were persecuted and imprisoned and cast into fiery furnaces.

By the day of Mormon, miracles and healings had ceased; "there were no gifts from the Lord, and the Holy Ghost did not come upon any, because of their wickedness and unbelief." Once again the Gadianton robbers infested the land, and "there were sorceries, and witchcrafts, and magics; and the power of the evil one was wrought upon all the face of the land." There was war, and blood, and carnage, and revolution everywhere; women and children were sacrificed to idols, and the judgments of God rested upon the land. "It is impossible for the tongue to describe," Mormon said, "or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually. And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people." Those whose fathers had been more righteous and who had received greater blessings than any in all Israel had now sunk to greater wickedness and were more severely cursed than any of the chosen seed had ever been.

Our inspired records let us speak thus—with accuracy and verity—of what transpired in the Americas. In principle it was the same among the Jews and Gentiles of the Old World. Grievous wolves attacked the flock; lewd and evil men led them astray; pride welled up in the hearts of many; and shortly after the death of the apostles the apostasy was complete. As in the New World "there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel." All manner of wickedness prevailed, and sacred ordinances were administered to those who were unworthy. Gifts and miracles ceased, and darkness covered the earth. Wars and anarchy and desolation have been poured out upon all nations ever since, and it will continue so to be until the great and dreadful day of the Lord comes.

In this setting we return to the writings of Mormon. He refers to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon as a sign "that the covenant which the Father hath made with the children of Israel, concerning their restoration to the lands of their inheritance, is already beginning to be fulfilled." Mormon is directing his words to us in this day, to the scattered remnants of Israel, and to the Gentile nations. When the Book of Mormon comes forth, "Ye may know that the words of the Lord, which have been spoken by the holy prophets, shall all be fulfilled," he says, "and ye need not say that the Lord delays his coming unto the children of Israel."

And further: "Ye need not imagine in your hearts that the words which have been spoken are vain, for behold, the Lord will remember his covenant which he hath made unto his people of the house of Israel. And when ye shall see these sayings coming forth among you, then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the Lord, for the sword of his justice is in his right hand; and behold, at that day, if he shall spurn at his doings he will cause that it shall soon overtake you." Then come these superlative words of power and inspiration:

Wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the Lord; yea, wo unto him that shall deny the Christ and his works!

Yea, wo unto him that shall deny the revelations of the Lord, and that shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by healings, or by the power of the Holy Ghost!

Yea, and wo unto him that shall say at that day, to get gain, that there can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ; for he that doeth this shall become like unto the son of perdition, for whom there was no mercy, according to the word of Christ!

Next he delivers a message as to what our attitude should be toward the Jews. "Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Israel; for behold, the Lord remembereth his covenant unto them, and he will do unto them according to that which he hath sworn. Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel."

Our great and good friend, in fine, issues a mighty proclamation to the Gentiles: "Hearken, O ye Gentiles," he says, "and hear the words of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, which he hath commanded me that I should speak concerning you, for, behold he commandeth me that I should write, saying":

Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] In chapter 9 we reasoned that the disciples were in fact in the temple itself when the Pentecostal fires of the Spirit fell so mightily upon them. This seems more likely than the suggestion here given that they could have been in the upper room.
