Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 120

The Ascension

It is finished. (John 19:30.)

I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. (John 20:17.)

For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. (Job 19:25-27.)

Jesus Returns to His Father

(Acts 1:14; Mark 16:19-20; Luke 24:50-53)

The day has arrived; the hour is at hand; the Lord Jesus who descended from the courts of glory is about to return to the presence of the Father forever. He who "made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men" is about to be exalted above all thrones and principalities and to sit down "on the right hand of the Majesty on high." He who was "found in fashion as a man," who "humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross," is about to ascend the throne of eternal power and wear a kingly crown. He who, "being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God," is about to be given a name above all names. (Philip. 2:5-11; Heb. 1:3.)

"It is finished." His mortal work is done; the atonement hath been wrought; let all men praise his holy name forever. "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing." (Rev. 5:12.)

"I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do!" He has glorified the name of the Father on earth. His High Priestly Prayer is about to be answered: "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:4-5.)

He is going to his Father; they are one; let both their holy names be in every worshipping heart and on every praising lip forever. "Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." (Rev. 5:13.)

What work has he done; what wonders hath he wrought; what achievements now are his? By the grace of God—by the condescension, mercy, and love of the Father—he came to earth, because his Father sent him, to die upon the cross for the sins of the world. By his own goodness and grace—by the condescension, mercy, and love of the Son—he stepped down from the throne of eternal power, to be like man almost, to save men from their sins. He came as the Light of the World to lead all men to salvation.

He marked the path and led the way, And every point defines To light and life and endless day Where God's full presence shines. —Hymns, no. 68

And by him salvation comes. He paid the price for Adam's fall; he ransomed men from death and hell; he gave his life that man might live.

For us the blood of Christ was shed, For us on Calvary's cross he bled, And thus dispelled the awful gloom That else were this creation's doom. The law was broken; Jesus died That justice might be satisfied, That man might not remain a slave Of death, of hell, or of the grave, But rise triumphant from the tomb, And in eternal splendor bloom, Freed from the power of death and pain, With Christ, the Lord, to rule and reign. —Hymns, no. 217

And now his work is done. A God has died; a God has risen; a God ascends to his Father.

The rising Lord forsook the tomb. In vain the tomb forbade him rise; Cherubic legions guard him home, And shout him welcome to the skies. —Hymns, no. 263

From the Sunday of his rising to the holy day of his ascension was forty days, and from the Friday of his crucifixion to the day of Pentecost was fifty days. Thus he died on a Friday; he rose on a Sunday (which was three days as the Jews counted time); he ministered among his disciples, from time to time, for forty days; he then ascended to his Father; and on the day of Pentecost they received the gift of the Holy Ghost. "They were all with one accord in one place," on the day of Pentecost. "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting." They could have been in that same memorable upper room where so many of the wonders of eternity had been poured out upon them. [^1] "And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." We shall note shortly the names and identities of those who in all probability were present, and who received this divine outpouring of grace from on high. "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance."

When word of this Pentecostal outpouring of heavenly fire was "noised abroad," a great "multitude came together." Among them were "Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven." And they "were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language. And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?" Then Peter, the chief disciple, preached a mighty sermon and bore a powerful testimony of Jesus his Lord. "Let all the house of Israel know assuredly," he said by way of climax, "that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ."

Having seen the miracle, having heard the sermon, and having felt the power of the Spirit, as Luke tells us, "they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?" Faith was beginning to sprout in their hearts. They were believers of the Eternal Word; the Holy Ghost changes the hearts of men. Peter said:

Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

"And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles. And all that believed were together, and had all things common; And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, Praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved." (Acts 2:1-47.) And thus, by the power of the Holy Ghost, the work went forth among the Jews, even as it would among the Nephites in due course.

But let us return to the Ascension. As Luke tells us, the Risen Lord "shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." We have considered such of these infallible proofs of the resurrection as are found in holy writ. And there is no more infallible proof than the testimony of one who has seen with his eyes and felt with his hands and known by the power of the Spirit that the Risen One now has a body of flesh and bones. How else can the resurrection be proved except by testimony?

Thus Jesus was with them "until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen." These commandments included one that they "should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." And so, having kept their appointment on the mountain in Galilee, having been taught all that it was expedient for them to know at that time, and having been commanded and commissioned to go into all the world, to preach the gospel, and to build up the kingdom, they are now back in Jerusalem awaiting the receipt of the gift of the Holy Ghost.

They are assembled together. Jesus leads them out toward Bethany. It is their last walk with him, reminiscent of all the other times they have traversed this same course. They arrive at the Mount of Olives. He is about to ascend, but they are still troubled with one thing. They ask: "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?"

What words are these? Restore again the kingdom to Israel! Are these the Nephite Twelve who are speaking? Reversing the chronology—that a more cohesive account of the life of our Lord might be given—we have already considered in extenso Jesus' discussion about the restoration of the kingdom to his people in the latter days. Surely the kingdom will be restored as of old, for so all the prophets have foretold. Indeed, the ponderings of their hearts, the desires of their souls, and their continuing petitions to the Majesty on High—all sought for the restoration of Israel. And further: All the prophets knew that the children of the prophets—the children of the covenant—should again receive the ancient promise of eternal life and the assurance that in them and in their seed all generations should be blessed. Jehovah's word to Abraham would not return unto him void. And so we have seen that the sign letting all men know when these things shall be is the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. How plainly and how repetitively it was said among the Nephites.

Now the apostles in Jerusalem desire to learn the same thing. But the Old World witnesses—whose lack of faith had kept them from knowing of their Nephite brethren—are not to learn the sign, at least not in its plainness and perfection. It is true that Peter and the others will hereafter speak of the restoration of all things (including the kingdom to Israel); that is, they will talk of a universal apostasy and of the setting up anew of God's kingdom on earth in the latter days—but they shall not, as mortals, learn the account with that fulness which was given to the "other sheep." And so Jesus said:

It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.

But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

That is, in a day subsequent to New Testament times, the Lord will perform a mighty work with Israel. He will give them their kingdom as of old; they will have revelation and visions and prophets; the heavens will be opened again; the covenants and promises made to the ancients will be fulfilled; Israel will be gathered into all their lands of promise; Zion shall be built up again; a New Jerusalem shall rise; the waste places of the Old Jerusalem shall be reclaimed; the children of the prophets and the children of the covenant will glory in the ancient promises given anew in their times; and the Lord—the God of Israel—will reign gloriously among his saints. But this is not to be the work of the apostles of that day; other apostles must arise to do the work of latter days. Those who were with him then are to be witnesses of his name unto the uttermost parts of the earth. Let them preach to those then living; their successors in interest and in power and in faith shall carry on the work of latter days when the times and the seasons shall arrive.

"And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld"—and while with uplifted hands he blessed them—"he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; Which also said,"

Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

These apostles, all of whom were Galileans (Judas only, the one traitor among them, was a Judean), were now left to do the work appointed for them. After Pentecost, with the Holy Spirit of God as their monitor, how gloriously they succeeded! But we cannot leave this scene on Olivet without testifying that Jesus' ascension was literal and personal and real. A Man having a body of flesh and bones—a Personal Being who walked and talked and ate with his disciples—ascended bodily into heaven. "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also." (D&C 130:22.) And Jesus our Lord has just "ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father." (D&C 20:24.) And as he went up, so is he now; and as he is now, so will he be when he comes again to reign on earth a thousand years; and as he will be during the Millennium, so will he remain to all eternity: a glorified, perfected, exalted Man—the Son of Man of Holiness, who is his Father. Praise ye the Lord.

After the Ascension, as Luke writes in his Gospel account, "They worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God." Quite naturally they would go to the temple, the holiest spot known to them, to continue their worship. The break with the past would come by degrees. In his account in Acts, Luke says: "Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day's journey. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James. These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren."

We have speculated, in connection with the Last Supper, that the upper room was in the home of the father of John Mark and have given our reasons therefor. All of the Eleven have come together and are living at the same place as they await the Pentecostal outpouring of the Spirit that will soon come upon them. What is more natural than that they should come to this same large and spacious building? We suppose that it was the same upper room where the saints were assembled at meat when Jesus, following the walk on the Emmaus Road, appeared and invited them to handle and feel and learn that he had a body of flesh and bones. Still further, on the day of Pentecost they—and we assume this means the apostles and others—were in a "house" when the Spirit first fell upon them. Again we suggest that this may have been the upper room of note and fame. And when Peter standing in the midst of a hundred and twenty of them arranged for the selection of a successor to Judas, we suppose it was in the same meeting place. We must keep in mind also that there were believers other than the apostles present on all these sacred occasions, including that Pentecostal day when cloven tongues of fire rested upon them. "Mary the mother of Jesus," and her other children, "his brethren," and those called only "the women," meaning Mary Magdalene and the others, are named as being among the saints on these memorable occasions. The new kingdom was starting out, not as a church for apostles only, but as the New Sheepfold for all believers, including the more than three thousand converts who were baptized on the day of Pentecost.

Jesus Is the Son of God

(John 20:30-31; 21:24-25)

Jesus hath ascended into heaven to sit down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. "When he ascended up on high," Paul says, "he led captivity captive," meaning that he broke the bands of death which up to then held all men captive, and he "gave gifts unto men." (Eph. 4:8-16.) Glorious doctrine this! The effects of Jesus' resurrection pass upon all men so that all shall rise from the dead, all shall become immortal, all shall live forever having bodies of flesh and bones. And also, he "gave gifts unto men." What gifts? Paul names apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers (those who teach the gospel). We add elders, seventies, and high priests, deacons, teachers (holders of the ordained office), priests, and bishops, and all the officers of the kingdom of God on earth. Apostles, prophets, and seventies, in particular, and all officers in general, are appointed to be witnesses of the name of Christ, to bear record of his divine Sonship, and to teach his gospel to the world.

Our revelations in naming the gifts of the Spirit list as the first the gift of prophecy, which gift, by definition, is to have the testimony of Jesus, "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost," the revealed word says, "to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world." Then the inspired word adds: "To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful." (D&C 46:13-14.)

We have, thus, two gifts named as coming from the Ascended One. The first is to know by personal revelation, given of God by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Lord, the Son of the Highest, whose atoning blood ransoms men from the spiritual and temporal death brought into the world by the fall of Adam. The second gift is to believe the testimony of those officers who are appointed to bear witness of his divine Sonship and of the salvation which he has made available. And those who believe the testimony of His witnesses, and continue faithful, shall have eternal life in his everlasting kingdom.

In this setting, then, we come to the words of the Beloved John, who says of his Gospel account (called by Joseph Smith The Testimony of St. John), "These are written," meaning the things in his Gospel account, "that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name."

Thus, the heart and core of our message; the very purpose of all the scriptures ever given; the reason why there are legal administrators, sent of God, to preach the gospel—all that the Lord has given us is to bear testimony and to prove that Jesus, who is called Christ, is in literal reality the Son of the living God and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. And we have written this work—in agony and in ecstasy; in sweat and in tears; in depression and in elation; through seasons of sorrow and in times of unbounded joy—all to the end that man might believe and know that God's Almighty Son ministered as a Man among men, and that believing, perchance, they might be faithful and gain eternal life.

We know that "god is no respecter of persons," and that "in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness," is acceptable before him. And, with Peter, we testify that salvation is for "the children of Israel," and for the Gentiles, and for those of every nation and kindred and tongue and people; and that the word of God—"preaching peace by Jesus Christ: he is Lord of all"—that word is for all men everywhere. We know that "God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power"; that he "went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him"; that he was slain "and hanged on a tree"; that "Him God raised up on the third day, and shewed him openly, Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God"; and that they "did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead." And we testify that he has commanded us, as he commanded them, "to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead." And further: "To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins." (Acts 10:34-43.)

We testify, with Paul, that "God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory." (1 Tim. 3:16.) We rejoice that "God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind"; that we, therefore, are "not . . . ashamed of the testimony of our Lord," but account it, rather, a privilege to partake "of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God." We glory in the fact that he "hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began"; and above all that "our Saviour Jesus Christ, . . . hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel." (2 Tim. 1:7-10.)

We say with Peter: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.) And with Martha: "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world." (John 11:27.) And with Mary Magdalene: "Rabboni." (John 20:16.) And with Thomas: "My Lord and my God." (John 20:28.) And with Joseph Smith: "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17.) And again: "We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:2-4.) And yet again: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.) And all of these witnesses are our witness also.

With John we have seen him, as it were, in heaven, upon a white horse, bearing the name "Faithful and True," and judging and making war "in righteousness." "His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns. . . . He was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:11-16.)

And, in fine, let Job's words be our words: "I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (Job 19:25.) We need not multiply witnesses. This work itself is our witness. It testifies that he was God before the worlds were; that he was born of Mary in a stable, God himself being his Father; that he ministered among men, preaching the gospel and working miracles; that he was delivered into the hands of wicked men, and by them hanged upon a tree; that he bore the sins of all who believe and obey; that he is the Resurrection and the Life; that immortality and eternal life come by him; that he hath risen from the dead; and that finally he ascended to his Father, there to reign with almighty power until he shall come again to reign on earth. The fact of the resurrection is the most certain surety in all history; a cloud of witnesses testify thereto, including those in our day who also have seen and felt and handled; and all who will, may receive the same sure witness from the Holy Spirit of God. The resurrection from the dead—above all else—proves he is the Son of God. This is our witness; there is no doubt whatever: Jesus Christ is the Son of the Living God who was crucified for the sins of the world.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 67:11-13. In this connection, note these words spoken by the Lord to Moses: "Thou canst not see my face at this time, lest mine anger be kindled against thee also, and I destroy thee, and thy people; for there shall no man among them see me at this time, and live, for they are exceeding sinful. And no sinful man hath at any time, neither shall there be any sinful man at any time, that shall see my face and live." (JST Ex. 33:20.)
