Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 121

"The Bridegroom Cometh"

And, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. (Matt. 28:20.)

Let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord. (D&C 133:10.)

Jesus Is with Us Yet

Lo, he is with us—always!

Though he has returned to his Father, yet where two or three are gathered together in his name, having perfect faith and worshipping the Father in his name, he will be in their midst—by the power of his Spirit.

Some of the faithful and elect, on occasion, see his face and hear his voice. "It is your privilege, and a promise I give unto you," he says to all the faithful elders of his kingdom, "that inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, . . . the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am—not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual." (D&C 67:10.) His command to his ministers is: "Sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:68.) And his promise to all is: "It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.)

Such is his law, and he is no respecter of persons. The reason more people do not pierce the veil and see his face is simply that more do not live the law qualifying them for such a transcendent spiritual experience. "For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God. Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind. Ye are not able to abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind. Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now"—he is speaking to some of the early elders of this dispensation, and conditions have not materially changed since then—"neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected." [^1] For most of us a cloud has received him out of our sight, a cloud that can only be pierced by the eye of faith.

"Between us and His visible presence—between us and that glorified Redeemer who now sitteth at the right hand of God—that cloud still rolls. But the eye of Faith can pierce it; the incense of true prayer can rise above it; through it the dew of blessing can descend. And if He is gone away, yet He has given us in His Holy Spirit a nearer sense of His presence, a closer infolding in the arms of His tenderness, than we could have enjoyed even if we had lived with Him of old in the home of Nazareth, or sailed with Him in the little boat over the crystal waters of Gennesareth. We may be as near to Him at all times—and more than all when we kneel down to play—as the beloved disciple was when he laid his head upon His breast. The word of God is very nigh us, even in our mouths and in our hearts. To ears that have been closed His voice may seem indeed to sound no longer. The loud noises of War may shake the world; the eager calls of Avarice and of Pleasure may drown the gentle utterance which bids us 'Follow Me.'. . .

"But the secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him, and He will show them His covenant. To all who will listen He still speaks. He promised to be with us always, even to the end of the world, and we have not found [that] His promise[s] fail. It was but for thirty-three years of a short lifetime that He lived on earth; it was but for three broken and troubled years that He preached the Gospel of the Kingdom; but for ever, even until all the Eons have been closed, and the earth itself, with the heavens that now are, have passed away, shall every one of His true and faithful children find peace and hope and forgiveness in His name, and that name shall be called Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'GOD WITH US.'" [^2]

Jesus Shall Come Again

(Acts 1:9-11)

There has been a First Coming of Christ, and there shall be a Second Coming of the Son of Man. He came once, born of Mary—to gain his own body, to minister among men, to work out the infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice. He shall come again in all the glory of his Father's kingdom—to live again on earth, to perfect the salvation of his fellows, to deliver the kingdom, in due course, spotless to his Father. After some thirty-three years of mortal life, while angels attended, he ascended up to sit on the right hand of Eternal Power. This same Jesus—living and being as he was, and is, and ever shall be—shall return, accompanied by ten thousands of his angelic saints, to live on earth a thousand years. Then, after a short season, cometh the end, and this earth will attain its celestial destiny.

Hear O Israel, thy King cometh unto thee; he is glorious in his attire and red in his apparel; he rideth upon the clouds and descendeth in his fury. He is just and having salvation; his word is law; and he shall reign forever and ever.

He shall come in a day when many shall say: "There is no Christ, and such a person shall not come. We have no need of another to save us from our sins; God alone has all power, and we have no need for an Advocate or an Intercessor." They will say: "There is no God but Allah and Mohammed is his prophet; Allah has but to speak and a thing is done; he hath no need of a Son." They will say: "Our Messiah will yet come; he will save us; he is our King and our Deliverer; we will wait for him."

But so said they of Jesus when he came of old: "Is not this the carpenter's son; is not his father called Joseph and his mother, Mary; and are not his brothers and sisters with us? Why say ye that he is the Son of God? Does he claim to preach a gospel? His sayings cannot be true; they run counter to our traditions; we will follow Moses instead. Does he pretend to work miracles? What are they but deeds done by Beelzebub the prince of devils. Away with him; crucify him; we have no king but Caesar; his blood be upon us and—God help us!—on our children."

But, no matter, he was God's Son then, and he is God's Son now. He ministered in power and glory then; he proved his divine Sonship by rising from the dead; and he shall come again in a power and glory ten thousand times greater than before. He carried a cross in that day, and he shall wear a crown in this. And they who fight against him and his gospel shall be banished from his presence forever.

He shall come in a day when even those who call themselves Christians shall say: "The Lord delayeth his coming; let us eat, drink, and be merry. If we act amiss, he shall beat us with a few stripes, but eventually we shall be saved in the kingdom of God."

And so said they of old who bought delicacies and jeweled garments at the bazaars of the sons of Annas; so said they who made His Father's house a den of thieves; so said they who sowed, and reaped, and laid up their harvests in great barns, and who said within themselves, "Soul take thine ease, for we are rich; we live sumptuously; we have an abundance of this world's goods."

But, no matter, he came then at the appointed time, and he shall come again when his hour arrives. He came then to destroy their kingdom and leave their house desolate; he said then to those who trusted in riches, "This night shall thy soul be required of thee; then whose shall all these things be?" And he shall say when he comes again, "All those who have laid up treasures on earth and who are not rich unto God, their treasures shall be tried so as by fire, and they only shall abide the day who have laid up treasures in heaven."

He shall come in a day when many professors of religion shall say: "He has come already; he dwells in the hearts of his people. The promised era of peace will come when men learn to love one another; then they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Men will create and usher in their own Millennium by their good works. All these things which the prophets have said about a kingdom of God on earth are spiritual; they cannot be taken literally."

But, no matter, such men are no different from the Sadducees of old, who believed neither in preexistence, nor in angels, nor in marriage in heaven, nor in the resurrection, nor in eternal glory, nor that He who walked among them was the Son of the living God. What carnal men may think about spiritual things—however much they profess to be religious—is of so little consequence that it scarcely bears repeating. Jesus was the Son of God then, and he is the Son of God now. And to the modern Sadducees, who spiritualize away the prophetic word, we need only say: "Judge ye, for in that fearsome and dread day when he descends, with the trump of God and the shout of the archangel, to take vengeance on all those who know not God and who obey not his gospel—judge ye, for in that great and dreadful day it will be everlastingly too late to prepare for a Second Coming that has passed." When "this same Jesus," who was "taken up . . . into heaven," returns "in like manner" as he went up, then the judgment will be set and the books be opened, and all men shall stand before his bar to be judged according to the deeds done in the flesh.

When first he came—and after he rose from the dead—he walked and talked and ate and drank with his disciples, and he shall do so again in that great day which lies ahead. When—as a symbol of his nation—Thomas doubted and would not believe, except he feel the nail prints in Jesus' hands and in his feet and the spear wound in his side, the troubled apostle was invited to see and feel and know and be not faithless but believing. And so shall it be in the latter days when a troubled people, long in doubt, shall see him again, when they shall look on him whom they have pierced. Then shall these be his words:

Behold the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet; look upon my riven side; stretch forth thine hands; feel and know; and be not faithless, but believing.

Lo, these are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends; I am he who was lifted up; I am he who was crucified; I am Jesus of Nazareth of Galilee; I am the Son of God. Come unto me; I died for thee and for all men.

But before the Lord Jesus comes again, all of the promised signs and wonders shall surely come to pass. Ours is the generation in which they are being poured forth. And our need is to learn to read the signs of the times, lest we fail to meet and accept our Promised Messiah as did so many when he came in the meridian of time. We must search the scriptures and heed the Messianic message. The children of light need not be deceived; that day need not come upon them unawares. "And whoso treasureth up my word," he says, "shall not be deceived." (JS-M 1:37.) That day will be one of vengeance for the wicked and of redemption and glory and salvation for the saints. And after he comes, all of the glorious things spoken concerning Israel and Zion and glory and eternal peace shall have their glorious fulfillment.

Arise, O Jerusalem; gather in, O ye dispersed of Judah; hear ye his voice, O scattered ones of Joseph. Let all Israel now rejoice in him who dwells between the cherubim.

Come forth, O Zion, upon the holy mount; let Israel now be gathered home. Come, all ye people; build the city of holiness; let the pure in heart assemble together.

Open thy gates, O Zion, for into thee shall come those of all nations; and the Gentiles shall come to thy light and kings to the brightness of thy rising; and unto thee shall be gathered all those who know the name of the Lord, and who worship the Father in spirit and in truth; and they shall dwell safely within thy walls.

And now what more need we say? We have spoken of him; our message is recorded; our witness is borne. [^3] Christ the Lord is God's Almighty Son. He came that man might live, and living, find a place with him where he and his Father dwell eternally. And he shall come again to receive us unto himself.

Ring out ye bells in every belfry of all Christendom. Cry out, ye souls awaiting your redemption. Sing together, ye cherubic hosts; let heaven's dome be filled with anthems of eternal praise.

Ye saints of God, ye holy ones—rejoice. Ye noble souls, ye faithful ones—rejoice. Come now, ye chosen ones—be lifted up: Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

When Will He Come Again?

As we testify of his First Coming and bear record that he dwelt among men in the meridian of time; as we study the deeds he did as a mortal and marvel at how wondrous they were; as our heart burns within us, letting us know of a surety of his divine Sonship—our thoughts turn to the day of his return. We long to be with him then, even as the prophets of old longed to see the day of his mortal ministry.

As we ponder upon these things, it seems clear to us that we are in an even better position to read the signs of our times than the Jews were to read the signs of their times. They had the prophetic word telling of his promised birth; of the words he would speak and the works he would do; of the atoning sacrifice he would make; of his coming forth from the grave; and of the consequent resurrection of all men. Many were the signs and portents then testifying that the day for all those wondrous works was near even at their doors. We in like manner have the holy scriptures, which tell us of the events and describe to us the conditions that shall precede and attend his triumphal return. We know he is going to come in the clouds of glory in the midst of that great era of restoration in which we now live. Many are the evidences—yea, the infallible proofs—that the hour of his coming is nigh, even at our doors. Though we do not know the very day and the very hour of his coming, we do know the generation; it is our generation, the generation (dispensation, if you will) of the fulness of times.

Thus saith the Lord; for I am God, and have sent mine Only Begotten Son into the world for the redemption of the world, and have decreed that he that receiveth him shall be saved, and he that receiveth him not shall be damned —

And they have done unto the Son of Man even as they listed; and he has taken his power on the right hand of his glory, and now reigneth in the heavens, and will reign till he descends on the earth to put all enemies under his feet, which time is nigh at hand—

I, the Lord God, have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes. . . .

And again, verily I say unto you, that the Son of Man cometh not in the form of a woman, neither of a man traveling on the earth.

Wherefore, be not deceived, but continue in steadfastness, looking forth for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be made low, and for the rough places to become smooth—and all this when the angel shall sound his trumpet. (D&C 49:5-7, 22-23.)

But—be it repeated—we are in a better position to read the signs of the times today than our Jewish brethren were in their day. The reason: We have seen the fulfillment of the prophetic word relative to the First Coming and know of a surety that he who then came was the Son of God. We know that he rose from the dead and ascended into heaven. Accordingly, we are bound to believe that he will come again and that the prophetic word relative thereto will come to pass "in like manner" as did the word relative to his ancient ministry.

And yet, no man can know that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost, and no man can read the signs of the times except by that same power. As we search the scriptures and seek to know what is destined to happen in our generation we must, above all else, be guided by the Holy Spirit of God. All those who have exercised the power to become, by faith, the sons of God have the right to the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead. Thus the Beloved Disciple said:

Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. (1 Jn. 3:1-3.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] We must believe what Jesus believed. JS-H 1:17.
[^2] We must preach and teach and testify as Jesus did. Mal. 3:1.
[^3] We must live as Jesus lived. Matt. 21:9.
