Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 122

"Prepare Ye the Way of the Lord"

The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain: And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. (Isa. 40:3-5.)

"This Is My Beloved Son: Hear Him!" [^1]

"Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Ne. 11:7.)

On this note we began, on this note we shall end, and the clarion sweetness of this eternal truth shall ring forth forever in all worlds, among all the children of the Eternal Father. The Beloved Son ministered among mortals on planet earth. Jesus our Lord, beloved and chosen from the beginning, came from the Father to do his will, to glorify his name, to save "all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him." (D&C 76:43.) Then he returned to the glorious Majesty on high. And through the holy accounts we have seen his deeds, learned his law, and felt his Spirit. How glorious is the Word who came down from heaven! What wonders he has shown us, and what spiritual refreshment he has given us!

We saw him make flesh his tabernacle in a stable at Bethlehem of Judea and heard the heavenly choirs acclaim his divine Sonship.

Planted, thus, as a root in dry ground, we saw him grow up as a tender plant in a Jewish home in Nazareth; marveled when he, as a youth, both taught and confounded the wise men in the temple; and rejoiced that he had no need to be taught of men, for God was his Father.

We went with him to Bethabara, where his stern forerunner immersed him in the murky waters of the mighty Jordan; and then, lo, the heavens opened, the Holy Ghost came down in bodily form, serene and calm as a dove, and the Father spoke: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him."

Then we saw him overcome the world when tempted in the wilderness; heard him go forth preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God; gloried as he cleansed his Father's House at the First Passover and again at the Fourth; and heard him say, repeatedly, that he was the Promised Messiah.

We heard him call the Twelve and the Seventy; marveled at the wisdom of his Sermon on the Mount, his discourse on the law of Moses, and then on gospel standards. How we were fed spiritually when he gave the sermon on the bread of life, and the discourse on cleanliness, and on meekness and humility, and on forgiveness and the sealing power, and on the good shepherd, and, then, the sermon on Olivet, and, finally, those in the upper room (the discourse on the two Comforters, and on the law of love, and on the Holy Ghost)! And as to his parables, we need only say, "Never man spake as this Man."

And O the miracles we have seen him work! Before our eyes the lame walked, the blind saw, the deaf heard, paralytics carried their couches, lepers were cleansed, devils were cast out, and the dead were raised. The calm command, "Lazarus, come forth," still echoes in our soul as we remember how he who had been dead four days stood, yet enshrouded in his burial clothes, at the door of his tomb! And all these miracles were as nothing compared to his healing of sin-sick souls; of saying to the sin-encumbered, "Son, thy sins be forgiven thee"; of calling forth the spiritually dead to spiritual life.

We saw him still storms, walk on the tumultuous waves of tempestuous Gennesaret, feed thousands with a few small fishes and a few barley loaves, and walk unharmed through mobs that sought to stone him.

And O the testimonies we have heard! His own: "I am the Son of God"; Peter's: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God"; Martha's: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world." Those of believing souls in all walks of life, uttered in unison, ascending as incense to the Father. Thou art the Promised Messiah, the king of Israel, our Deliverer, Savior, and Redeemer. Thou art our God!

And ought we not mention the Mount of Transfiguration, when his face shown with heavenly light and his clothes glistened with celestial brightness, when Moses and Elias came to him, and when Peter, James, and John saw the transfiguration of the earth and received the keys of the kingdom of God on earth?

And then there is Gethsemane, the garden of the olive press, where he sweat great drops of blood from every pore, so great was his suffering and so intense his anguish as he took upon himself the sins of all men on conditions of repentance.

But in nothing have we felt such shame and horror and revulsion as when he was led before Annas and Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin and Pilate and Herod and Pilate again; when the Innocent One was found guilty by the ecclesiastical and civil powers of the world; when he was mocked, derided, spit upon, cursed, smitten, scourged, and led away to be crucified.

There on Calvary we saw Gentile hands drive Roman nails into Jewish flesh; we saw him raised in agony upon the accursed tree; and we wept with his disciples as he drank the dregs of the bitter cup his Father had given him.

But glory be to the Father, he partook. The Beloved One finished his work, voluntarily laid down his life, and then, the third day, took it up again in glorious immortality.

We were with him at the tomb when Mary Magdalene worshipped before him, and when the other women held him by the feet. Then we wept with Peter as the Risen Lord stood gloriously before the Chief Apostle and commissioned him anew to head the earthly kingdom for that day.

And O how our hearts burned within us as we heard him expound the Messianic prophecies on the Emmaus road; as we saw and felt and handled (on two occasions) in the upper room; as we communed and ate on the shore of the Sea of Tiberias; and as we knelt and worshipped on the mountain in Galilee as part of the great congregation.

All these things we saw—and they are not a tithe of it all; nay, they are not a ten thousandth of all that we saw and felt and knew—as he ministered as a mortal among men. And we, therefore, do know and do testify that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of the living God and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. That the generality of the Jews were not prepared, mentally and spiritually, to receive this knowledge and all that came to the faithful is a matter of sorrow and sadness for them and for their children. And as it was with them, so shall it be with those in all nations in the latter days, unless they prepare themselves to receive this same Jesus at his Second Coming.

As to all these things—and thousands more—what we have written, we have written. For good or for ill, with stumbling words and in halting speech—professing (with Paul) to know nothing among men, save Jesus Christ and him crucified; and yet (we say it humbly) with some inspiration and occasional flights of fluent expression—we have taught and testified of this Jewish Jesus in his Jewish setting. Our work in this respect—meaning with reference to this opus—is ended. And there remaineth but one thing more. We must, for so we have been commanded—it is our divine commission, our sober and sacred duty—we must say to all to whom these words may come: True it is that Jesus ministered among men in the meridian of time, and true it is also that he shall soon come to rule and reign in millennial splendor. And unless our words pertaining to his mortal life prepare and inspire men to make ready for his Second Coming, we have failed indeed.

"My Messenger: . . . He Shall Prepare the Way Before Me" [^2]

Isaiah proclaims: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord." (Isa. 40:3.) Our revelations say: "Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord." (D&C 133:10.) To prepare the way before the Lord is to bring to pass those things which must be done before he comes. It is to gather Israel, to build Zion, to proclaim the gospel to every nation and people; it is to prepare a people for that dread and glorious day. To prepare ourselves for that great day is to join with the saints, to gather with Israel, to dwell in Zion, to so live that we shall abide the day of his coming. Those who prepare the way before the Lord, by that very process prepare themselves for that which lies ahead. And those who are prepared shall be saved; they shall abide the day; their seed shall inherit the earth from generation to generation. Those who are not prepared have no such promises.

When Jesus dwelt among men, he chose his friends with care. He preached to all, invited all to believe and obey, called upon all to forsake the world and to join the kingdom. But he chose his friends and close associates from among those who sought to do the things he said. Those who leaned on his bosom, who ate and traveled and lived with him—his friends—were a select and chosen group. In the spirit world he did not even so much as go among the wicked and ungodly; those only who were worthy heard the words of life as they fell from his lips. And so shall it be when he comes again. His voice will be raised among the faithful; his countenance will shine upon the obedient; his friends—those who abide the day—will be the Godfearing and the righteous. Our preparation for that day is fourfold:

Repent and believe the gospel. He that believeth shall be saved; he that believeth not shall be damned; signs shall follow those who believe. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. Believe in him; believe in his prophets; believe the words of his apostles and elders. Believe and be blessed; disbelieve and be cursed. The first great test of mortality is whether men will believe the everlasting word when it is preached to them. Those who believe the truth can be saved; those who believe a lie shall be damned. At our peril we must choose to believe as Jesus believed, and unless and until we do, we shall never begin the preparation that will qualify us to be his friends. When we believe as he believes; when we gain the mind of Christ; when we think as he thinks; when our desires are harmonious with his—then we will have so much in common that we can be friends. He believed he was the Son of God, and we must believe the same. He believed his Father sent him, and we must have no reservations relative thereto. He believed all the truths of the everlasting gospel, and we must do likewise. No one ever applies eternal truth in his life until he believes and knows it to be what it everlastingly is—eternal truth.

It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. Every friend of the Lord must tell others of his Eternal Friend. The gospel cause is to go forth from mouth to mouth and from heart to heart until the knowledge of God covers the earth as the waters cover the sea. All who join the Church are under covenant, made in the waters of baptism, to stand as witnesses of Christ at all times and in all places and to all people, even unto death. It does not suffice to believe and do nothing more; every believer is commanded to take every opportunity to give to others a reason for the hope which is his.

Thus, Jesus proclaimed the word of truth and salvation and we must do likewise, and in our day it is the glorious message of the restoration; of the gathering of Israel; of the redemption of Zion; of salvation for the dead; of the imminent return of "this same Jesus." We must proclaim—boldly and without fear—such things as these, for they are true as God is true:

There has been a famine in the land—not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. Now all those who hunger and thirst after righteousness can drink of the waters of life and feast on the good word of God.

There has been a long night of gloom and darkness and apostasy. Now the glory of a new day is dawning; darkness flees; the gospel light shines brightly as before; and the millennial day is upon us.

The Lord's people have been scattered, spurned, cursed; they have been a hiss and a byword in all the nations whither he hath driven them. Now they hear his voice and heed his cry; now they gather round his gospel standard in every place where it is raised.

During the long night of darkness—the night when darkness covered the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people—who has heard the voice of heaven, or seen an angelic face, or gloried in the gifts of the Spirit? But now the ancient powers are restored—the voice of God is heard again: angels minister among us mortals; and signs, gifts, and miracles abound as in olden times.

Once again apostles and prophets mingle among us; they preach and prophesy. Once again the elders of Israel go forth to seek their scattered kin; they preach and minister in power and great glory. Once again the kingdom has been set up on earth in all its glory, beauty, and perfection; its ministers, both male and female, carry forward as did their counterparts among their forebears.

What then say we?

Our voice is one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness of sin, of apostasy, of worldliness: Repent ye, repent ye, why will ye die O ye nations! Return unto the Lord, O ye people; forsake the world, flee from sin, turn unto the truth. Come unto Christ, and be ye saved.

Our voice is one calling out of the dark, dry deserts of death—out of the waterless waste places of the world: Come, drink of the waters of life; drink deep from the rivers that flow, direct from the great Fountain Head. Come unto him, and drink from the wells of salvation.

Our voice is a voice of joy and gladness—it is one of thanksgiving and the voice of melody: Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken in our day; he hath given again the fulness of his everlasting gospel; every truth, doctrine, power, priesthood, key gift and grace, all things, needed to save and exalt men are now on earth again.

Our voice proclaims—in words of truth and soberness—that the Great God has called his servant, Joseph Smith, Jr., and spoken unto him from heaven, and given him commandments, pursuant to which The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been set up among men, as the only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth.

Our voice testifies—by the power and influence of the Holy Spirit of God—that this Church administers the gospel, and that all who come to this ensign, raised anew on the mountains of Israel, can gain peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come.

Jesus kept the commandments of his Father and thereby worked out his own salvation, and also set an example as to the way and the means whereby all men may be saved. Salvation is available because of his atoning sacrifice and comes by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. As to how and why and in what manner we must live to gain salvation, we need only quote the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith as they are given in the Lectures on Faith.

"Where shall we find a prototype into whose likeness we may be assimilated, in order that we may be made partakers of life and salvation?" the Prophet asked, "or, in other words, where shall we find a saved being? for if we can find a saved being, we may ascertain without much difficulty what all others must be in order to be saved. We think that it will not be a matter of dispute, that two beings who are unlike each other cannot be saved; for whatever constitutes the salvation of one will constitute the salvation of every creature which will be saved; and if we find one saved being in all existence, we may see what others must be, or else not be saved.

"We ask, then, where is the prototype? or where is the saved being? We conclude, as to the answer of this question, there will be no dispute among those who believe the Bible, that it is Christ: all will agree in this, that he is the prototype or standard of salvation; or, in other words, that he is a saved being. And if we should continue our interrogation and ask how it is that he is saved? the answer would be—because he is a just and holy being; and if he were anything different from what he is, he would not be saved; for his salvation depends on his being precisely what he is and nothing else; for if it were possible for him to change, in the least degree, so sure he would fail of salvation and lose all his dominion, power, authority and glory, which constitute salvation; for salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him."

Then, after quoting various passages of scriptures, the Prophet continued: "These teachings of the Saviour most clearly show unto us the nature of salvation, and what he proposed unto the human family when he proposed to save them—that he proposed to make them like unto himself, and he was like the Father, the great prototype of all saved beings; and for any portion of the human family to be assimilated into their likeness is to be saved; and to be unlike them is to be destroyed; and on this hinge turns the door of salvation." (Lecture 7, cited in Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 257-58.)

He preached the gospel, performed the ordinances of salvation, wrought miracles, and kept the commandments. So must it be with us. He carried his cross and laid his all upon the altar. So, if called upon, must we do. His promise to us is: "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also." (John 14:12.) Also: "Ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:10.)

"Hosanna in the Highest" [^3]

And so we say: He came once and he shall come again. If we have learned well the lessons of his First Coming, we also shall read the signs of the times and be ready for his Second Coming.

Lo, the mighty God appearing; From on high Jehovah speaks! Eastern lands the summons hearing, O'er the west his thunder breaks. Earth behold him! Earth behold him! Universal nature shakes. Zion, all its light unfolding, God in glory shall display. Lo! he comes! nor silence holding, Fire and clouds prepare his way, Tempests round him! Tempests round him! Hasten on the dreadful day. To the heav'ns his voice ascending, To the earth beneath he cries; Souls immortal, now descending, Let their sleeping dust arise! Rise to judgment; Rise to judgment; Let thy throne adorn the skies. —Hymns, no. 264

And, now, one thing only remains—the recording of our witness of the divine Sonship of him of whom we have written. To all we have said we append this seal of testimony:

Of Mary's Son, we testify—as God is our witness—that he is the Holy One of Israel, the Promised Messiah, the Son of God.

As to Jesus of Nazareth we say: He is the God of Israel, the Eternal One, the Great Jehovah, who made flesh his tabernacle and lived as mortals do in a world of sin and sorrow.

As to the Crucified One, him whom they took and by evil hands hanged on a tree, our witness is: He is risen; he came forth from the Arimathean's tomb; he lives; he ascended to his Father; and he reigns on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Of him who is called Christ, we testify: He is the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of all who believe; he has abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel; he is the Resurrection and the Life; and in him shall all men have life and that eternally.

And this same Jewish Jesus, whom God hath made both Lord and Christ, shall soon return as the Second David, to rule and reign on the throne of his Father forever.

God grant that we may abide the day. And God grant, further, that our voice shall never cease to speak—in life and in death, in time and in eternity, now and forever—in bearing testimony of Him who has ransomed us from death, hell, the devil, and endless torment.

We write it here; let it also be inscribed in the eternal records; let it be written on earth and in heaven; and let all who read be enlightened by the power of the same Spirit which approves the written word—let all men know (and we so testify) that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God; that he worked out the infinite and eternal atonement; that he was crucified for the sins of the world; that he rose from death the third day; that he ascended to his Father; that he has restored the fulness of his everlasting gospel in our day; and that he will soon come to reign in power and great glory among those who abide the day and who are not consumed by the brightness of his coming.

He is our King, our Lord, and our God!

Blessed be his great and holy name both now and forever!

Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest!

The Formal Jewish Trial (Chapter 104) footnote: Edersheim argues—falsely, we are confident to assert—that Jesus was never formally tried by the Sanhedrin. In so doing he gives an instructive recitation of the illegalities that would have existed had the procedures of the night been a trial. That they were, in fact, a trial Talmage and many others assert with confidence, and so it seems to us. "Alike Jewish and Christian evidence establish the fact, that Jesus was not formally tried and condemned by the Sanhedrin," Edersheim contends. "It is admitted on all hands, that forty years before the destruction of the Temple the Sanhedrin ceased to pronounce capital sentences. This alone would be sufficient. But, besides, the trial and sentence of Jesus in the Palace of Caiaphas would (as already stated) have outraged every principle of Jewish criminal law and procedure," (And so it did!) "Such causes could only be tried, and capital sentence pronounced, in the regular meeting-place of the Sanhedrin, not, as here, in the High-Priest's Palace; no process, least of all such an one, might be begun in the night, not even in the afternoon, although if the discussion had gone on all day, sentence might be pronounced at night. Again, no process could take place on Sabbaths or Feastdays, or even on the eves of them, although this would not have nullified [the] proceedings, and it might be argued on the other side, that a process against one who had seduced the people should preferably be carried on, and sentence executed, at the great public Feasts, for the warning of all. Lastly, in capital causes there was a very elaborate system of warning and cautioning witnesses, while it may safely be affirmed, that at a regular trial Jewish judges, however prejudiced, would not have acted as the Sanhedrists and Caiaphas did on this occasion." (This, as we view it, is exactly what these prejudiced and hate-filled judicial officers did.)

"But as we examine it more closely, we perceive that the Gospel-narratives do not speak of a formal trial and sentence by the Sanhedrin. . . . The four Gospels equally indicate that the whole proceedings of that night were carried on in the Palace of Caiaphas, and that during that night no formal sentence of death was pronounced. . . . And when in the morning, in consequence of a fresh consultation, also in the Palace of Caiaphas, they led Jesus to the Praetorium, it was not as a prisoner condemned to death of whom they asked the execution, but as one against whom they laid certain accusations worthy of death, while, when Pilate bade them judge Jesus according to Jewish Law, they replied, not: that they had done so already, but, that they had no competence to try capital causes." (All of this ignores the condemnation of guilt imposed for blasphemy, the penalty for which, under Jewish law, was death by stoning. For Jesus to have died by stoning, as in the case of Stephen, would have nullified the Messianic word about the cross. Hence the divine providence that guided his foes to seek a Roman death sentence for a Roman offense, such as for sedition or treason. Jesus must die, not by Jewish stoning, but by Roman crucifixion. Thus it was written, and thus it must be.)

"But although Christ was not tried and sentenced in a formal meeting of the Sanhedrin, there can, alas! be no question that His Condemnation and Death were the work, if not of the Sanhedrin, yet of the Sanhedrists—of the whole body of them ('all the council'), in the sense of expressing what was the judgment and purpose of all the Supreme Council and Leaders of Israel, with only very few exceptions. We bear in mind, that the resolution to sacrifice Christ had for some time been taken. Terrible as the proceedings of that night were, they even seem a sort of concession—as if the Sanhedrists would fain have found some legal and moral justification for what they had determined to do." (Edersheim 2:556-58.)

On the Cross of Calvary (Chapter 108) footnote: Our friend Farrar gives us his summary of the sufferings of the Lord Jesus in these words:

"It is difficult adequately to realise the multitude and variety of the forms of spiritual distress and mental anguish, of scorn, and torture, to which the sinless Son of Man was continuously subjected from the time that He left the mount of Olives to enter Jerusalem for the Last Supper.

"1. At the Last Supper He had the heavy sorrow of reading the heart of the traitor, and of uttering His last farewells—mingled with prophecies of persecution as the path to final triumph—to those whom He loved best on earth.

"2. Then came the agony in the garden, which filled Him with speechless amazement and shuddering, until He had to fling Himself with His face to the earth in the tense absorption of prayer, and His sweat was like great gouts of blood streaming to the ground."

This was the hour of his greatest agony. It was here that he took upon himself, in a way incomprehensible to us, the sins of all men on conditions of repentance. It was here that he suffered in body and in spirit more than it is possible for other mortals to suffer. Those hours in the Garden of Gethsemane have no parallel among mortals in any age. Only a God could suffer or endure the lot that then and there was his.

"3. Then the horror of Judas's over-acted traitor-kiss, the seizure, the binding, the leading away, the desertion of Him by all His disciples in His hour of need.

"4. Then the long trials which, only broken by insult, lasted the whole night through; the sense of utter injustice; the proof that all those hierophants who should have been the very first to welcome Him with humble yet triumphant gladness, were fiercely bent on destroying Him by any means, however foul.

"5. Then the insolent blow in the face from one of the servants.

"6. Then the hearing His chief Apostle deny Him with oaths and curses.

"7. Then the night trial before Caiaphas and his most confidential adherents, with all its agitating incidents, its tumult of sneering voices, its dreadful adjuration, and the sentence on Him as 'a Man of Death' by the 'spiritual' court.

"8. Then the accumulations of brutal insult as the crowd of vile underlings mocked Him, and slapped and beat Him, and spat into His face, and, bandaging His eyes, bade Him name the wretches who had smitten Him.

"9. Then the early morning trial before the whole Sanhedrin, with its continuance of agitating appeals, and the final proof that 'He had come unto His own possessions, and His people received Him not.'

"10. Then, if we read the record rightly, another derision by the Priests and Sanhedrists.

"11. Then the long and thrilling scenes of the trial before Pilate, as He stood in the centre of a crowd thirsting for His blood, yelling for His crucifixion; heaping lies and insults upon Him; preferring to Him the robber and the murderer; defeating, by their ferocious pertinacity, the obvious desire of the Roman Governor to set Him free.

"12. Then the leading through the city to Herod, and the vain attempt of that despicable prince to wring some answer or some sign from Him.

"13. Then the coarse derision of Herod's myrmidons as, in mock homage, they stripped Him of His own garments and arrayed Him in a shining robe, with every accumulation of disdainful insolence and cruelty.

"14. Then the final sentence of crucifixion, pronounced by Pilate after vain appeals and efforts to overcome the furious animosity of His accusers.

"15. Then the brutal mockery by the whole band of Roman soldiers as He stood helpless among them. These coarse legionaries were only too much rejoiced to pour on Him the contempt and detestation which they felt for all Jews, and seized the opportunity to vent their callous savagery on One who, as they were taught to believe, had claimed to be a King. This King should have the insignia of royalty—a cast-off military sagum of scarlet; a crown—only twisted of torturing thorns; a sceptre—a reed which they could every now and then snatch out of His tied hands, and beat Him with it as well as with rods; the mock homage of bended knees varied by execrable spitting, and blows on the head, and slaps on the face with the open palm, and words of uttermost contempt.

"16. Then He was mangled and lacerated almost to death by the horrible and excruciating flagellum, inflicted by executioners who had no sense of pity, with scourges loaded with balls of lead and sharp-pointed bones.

"17. Then came the stripping bare of the robes, and the bending under the load of the cross—or, rather, of its patibulum—the transverse beam of the cross, which He was too much exhausted to carry, while the herald went before Him proclaiming the supposed crime for which He was condemned.

"18. Then the sight of the weeping and wailing daughters of Jerusalem.

"19. Then the driving of the lacerating, crushing nails through His feet, and through either hand, and the uplifting on the cross. . . .

"20. Then the sight of all the world's worst vileness flowing beneath His eyes in its noisy stream, as the Elders, in their heartlessness, wagged their heads at Him, and jeered, and blasphemed; and the soldiers mocked, and the crowd howled their insults, and the two wretched robbers who shared with Him that hour of shame—though they were guilty and He was innocent—joined in the continuous pitiless reviling.

"21. Then the sight of His mother in her unspeakable desolation.

"22. Then the darkening by anguish of His human soul, which wrung from Him the cry, 'My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?'

"Yet, amid all these accumulations of anguish, only one word of physical pain was wrung from Him—the cry, 'I thirst':—and so deep was the impression caused by His majestic patience, as well as by the portents which followed, that the whole crowd was overawed and hushed, and returned to Jerusalem beating their breasts, and saying, 'Truly, this was a righteous man;' and the penitent robber implored Him to receive him into His Kingdom; and even the Pagan Roman centurion spoke of Him as 'a Son of God.'

"The uttermost depth of superhuman woe seems to be revealed by His cry, 'My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?'" (F. W. Farrar, The Life of Lives, pp. 506-11.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] We must believe what Jesus believed. JS-H 1:17.
[^2] We must preach and teach and testify as Jesus did. Mal. 3:1.
[^3] We must live as Jesus lived. Matt. 21:9.
