Orson Spencer, Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1847)

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

THE AUTHOR has, for some time, felt desirous to see the most prominent subjects of the faith of the Latter-day Saints brought before the public in continuous order, in one volume.

This series of Letters was called forth by the letter of inquiry prefixed, from the pen of the Rev. William Crowel. This gentleman was at the time, and still is (for aught I know), Editor of "The Christian Watchman," Boston, Massachusetts, U. S. A.—a leading paper of the Baptist denomination in the United States.

The Editor was also a clergyman of high repute for learning and piety in that denomination of people, and missionary elect to a foreign land. From the elevated standing of this gentleman, and the nature of his inquiries, being such as have come from many other distinguished acquaintance, relative to the author's change of views, it seemed wisdom, after consultation with the Prophet and Patriarch (since martyred), to publish a brief reply to his minute and interesting inquiries.

The Author was extensively known in the New England and Middle States, as a Preacher of the Baptist denomination. Reference for his character is given to his Excellency George N. Briggs, Governor of the State of Massachusetts, by whom he was once invited to take the pastoral charge of the church where his Excellency resided, and of which he was a member; also to G. Reade, Esq., Connecticut; and Eliphalet Nott, D.D., LL.D., President of Union College, New York, under whose Presidency he graduated in 1824; and also to N. Kendrick, D.D., President of Hamilton Literary and Theological College, from whence the Author graduated in 1829. The records of both these institutions will show that the Author held the FIRST grade of honorable distinction at the time he left them.

These references are not given from vanity, but from the fact that almost every man's character is traduced and vilified, the moment he embraces the FAITH once delivered to the Saints.

The present volume constitutes the third reprint. Several thousand copies having been exhausted in a tract form, the present edition, in book form, was repeatedly inquired after.

The edition has been got out in the midst of multiplied engagements. Truth in studied brevity has been aimed at, without seeking the least embellishment of diction.

If there has, in part of the volume, been the appearance of severity towards the religions of modern Christianity, it has been prompted solely by the impulse of truth, in order to demolish error, before the Destroyer of the Gentiles should expose iniquity with irretrievable loss to its victims.

Scripture references have been studiously omitted, believing that honest minds would readily find ample support from the Scriptures for all that is contained in this little volume. It is, therefore, commended to the faith and cordial reception of all who desire the salvation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in sincerity and truth.

ORSON SPENCER.

LIVERPOOL, January 1st, 1848.
