Orson Spencer, Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1847)

LETTER FROM THE REV. WILLIAM CROWEL, A.M., TO ORSON SPENCER, A.B.

BOSTON, October 21, 1842.

MY DEAR SIR,—On the confidence of an old acquaintance and kindly intercourse, I have long wished to address a friendly line to you; for, I am sure, you have not forgotten the pleasant, though brief, interviews, which we enjoyed at Middlefield. Since I saw you there, a great change has taken place, as I have been led to believe, in your religious views, and a corresponding one in your relations and circumstances; still, I trust, that you have not forgotton the claims of friendship and acquaintance.

I need not tell you how much I became interested in your family, so young and so full of promise, nor of the strong confidence which I repose in your piety and conscientious regard for the will of God. I would not allow myself to believe that you would profess what you did not sincerely believe, nor that you would believe without good reason; still the change in your views excited in me no little surprise. I have, therefore, been desirous to receive from yourself an account of your views, and the reasons of your change. I am also desirous to obtain from one in whom I can confide—one who is acquainted with the facts—and one who is not prejudiced against it at the outset, some account of the faith which you have embraced; of the personal character, doctrines, claims, and influence of him who is called the leader—I mean Joseph Smith.

Does he claim to be inspired? Is he a man of prayer? a man of pure life? a man of peace? Where is he now? Does he appear at the head of his troops as a military commander? What is the nature of the worship among you, and wherein does it differ from that of religious people with whom you have been acquainted elsewhere?

How many inhabitants has the city of Nauvoo? What is their condition, occupations, and general character? What are the dimensions of the Temple, now in course of erection? Do the Mormons suffer much persecution? if so, from whom? Are the children instructed in learning and religion? It would give me great pleasure to learn, also, how you are employed? whether your family are with you? and also your present views of truth and duty, and in what respects they differ from the views which you formerly entertained?

Excuse the number and minuteness of these inquiries. I take an interest in all that affects the welfare of my fellow-men, and especially in what is so important as their religious views and hopes. I am aware that the people, and the views which you have adopted as your own, are peculiarly liable to misrepresentation; but from you I may expect something more impartial. Now, if you do not find the task too great a tax upon your time, I should be much gratified in receiving as full and as speedy an answer to the queries above proposed, with any other information in your possession, as may be convenient to yourself.

It may be gratifying to you, to learn that a powerful revival of religion has been enjoyed in Middlefield, within a few weeks past, an account of which, Mr. Bestor, the present pastor, has sent to me for publication in The Christian Watchman, a copy of which I send you. I visited the town in the summer, and found your old friends well. I also attended a ministers' meeting at Brother Bestor's, and enjoyed a very pleasant interview. Several of the brethren spoke of you in terms of kindness.

My best wishes attend you. Present my regards to Mrs. Spencer, and

Believe me, Very truly yours,

WILLIAM CROWEL.

P. S.—You will understand that I ask for information for my private benefit and satisfaction. I do not ask for anything to be published, unless you see fit to give it for that purpose. I wish you to write as an old friend. W. C.
