How do you know what Heavenly Father would say to you if He were here? God speaks through a prophet today just as He did in the past. The prophet—President Thomas S. Monson—teaches you what Heavenly Father wants you to know and do and become. You are blessed when you listen to and follow the prophet. President Monson’s directions help us become more like Jesus Christ.

Here are some things you can know from what President Monson has said. You can know that Heavenly Father loves you. President Monson said: “I assure you that our Heavenly Father is mindful of the challenges we face in the world today. He loves each of us and will bless us as we strive to keep His commandments and seek Him through prayer.”

You can know that Jesus Christ is our Savior. President Monson said: “God does live. Jesus is His Son. … He is our Redeemer. … He loves us. … He gave His life for us.”

You can know how to help your family. President Monson said: “May we … demonstrate kindness and love within our own families.”

You can know how to help the world you live in. President Monson said: “May we be good citizens of the nations in which we live and good neighbors in our communities, reaching out to those of other faiths, as well as to our own.”

Read Luke 1:70 in the New Testament.

Pray to ask Heavenly Father to help you understand this scripture and know that it is true. Pray to know that President Thomas S. Monson is the prophet today.

Memorize this scripture.

Do one of these activities, or create your own:

- Do the activity on page 69. Cut slits on the dotted lines; then cut out the strips, and weave them beneath the prophets’ pictures so the scriptures line up with the pictures. Look up the scriptures to find the prophets’ names. Write the names on the blank lines.

- Look at the pictures of the prophets on page 69. Discuss with your family the teachings of these prophets.

- Read the following quotes or something else the prophets have taught us:

  “Find someone who is having a hard time, … and do something for them.”—President Thomas S. Monson

  “Don’t ever forget to pray. Kneel down ev’ry night and morning.”—President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–2008)

  “May we all read the Book of Mormon prayerfully, study it carefully, and receive a testimony of its divinity.”—President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985)

How does what you have done help you understand Luke 1:70?

Write in your journal or draw a picture about what you have done.
