Heavenly Father has given us many temple blessings for which we should be grateful. Several Primary children have told about the temple blessings they feel especially thankful for:

“I am thankful for the temple because when a mommy and daddy get married in the temple, they’re still married after they die” (Stephanie, age 6).

“I’m thankful we can go to the temple and learn more about Heavenly Father, like how we came to earth and got our bodies and how the earth became the earth. We can learn what is right and how to obey Heavenly Father better” (Anson, age 11).

“You go to the temple to get power to do things that are right” (Jean, age 9).

“I think it’s a blessing to go to a holy place. You are happy when you are in the temple” (David, age 9).

“We go to the temple to do baptisms for the dead. I am thankful for that because if some of our ancestors are not members of the Church, we can baptize them so that they can become members if they want to” (Martha, age 11).

“I am thankful we can go to the temple and bless the people who died” (Glendon, age 9).

“I’m thankful families can all be together—like grandmas and grandpas, moms and dads, and us” (Susan, age 6).

What blessings of the temple are you especially thankful for?

In each empty square write or draw a picture about a temple blessing that is important to you, then color all the pictures.

1.  Give a scripture, song, or one of the children’s quotes as listed above to each class and have them identify the temple blessing(s) described. (Note that the comment by Jean, age 9, is a description of the endowment.)

    Scriptures—4 Ne. 1:11; D&C 95:8; D&C 97:12–14; D&C 105:12; D&C 110:9; D&C 124:40; D&C 124:55; D&C 128:13; D&C 138:48.

    Songs—“I Love to See the Temple” (Children’s Songbook, page 95; see also Tambulilit, June 1992, page 5), “Families Can Be Together Forever” (Children’s Songbook, page 188; see also Tambulilit, March 1993, page 8).

2.  Discuss the following list of temple blessings as stated by President Benson; then compare and contrast them with the children’s list of temple blessings:

    • “You will receive the spirit of Elijah, which will turn your hearts to your spouse, to your children, and to your forebears. • You will love your family with a deeper love than you have loved before. • Your heart will be turned to your fathers, and theirs to you. • You will be endowed with power from on high as the Lord has promised. • You will receive the key of the knowledge of God. You will learn how you can be like Him. Even the power of godliness will be manifest to you. (See D&C 84:19–20.) • You will be doing a great service to those who have passed to the other side of the veil. Your work will enable them to be ‘judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit’ (D&C 138:34)” (Tambuli, June 1992, page 1).

3.  Invite each class to sing their favorite Primary song about the temple.
