Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Introduction

The experience of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a unique one in the annals of American history and geography. Organized in upstate New York on April 6, 1830, with only six charter members, the Church--known popularly as the Mormon Church--had grown to over 8 million members by the beginning of 1994. The 164 years of its existence have been characterized by persecution, migration, expansion, and growth.

viiThe Church itself is a uniquely American institution, emphasizing puritanical virtues of industry, thrift, community cooperation, grassroots democracy, patriotism, and abstinence and moderation in a context of striving for individual spiritual perfection. Founded under the direction of Joseph Smith, Jr., who recorded in his history of the Church that he had seen God in a vision, the Mormon Church alienated other religions by its claim to be the only true Christian church. Its earliest converts were from the northeastern United States, but the American penchant for westward movement was paralleled by the Mormon movement to Ohio in 1831. Locating at Kirtland, Ohio, the nascent movement sent out missionaries to other parts of the United States and Canada. The frontier spirit of America was manifested as Joseph Smith proclaimed that Jackson County, Missouri, was the new promised land for the Latter-day Saints. By the mid 1830s the Church was concentrated in and around Kirtland and in Missouri.

viiThe population of the new faith soared in the latter half of the 1830s as missionaries went to Europe and found fertile ground for the Latter-day Saints' message of hope. As new converts gathered to join the main body of the Saints, growing conflict with other frontier settlers repeatedly interrupted the Mormons' community-building efforts. Persecutions forced Mormons to move from Missouri to Illinois, where the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., was martyred in 1844. Leaving behind their city of Nauvoo, which had been one of the largest settlements in Illinois, the Mormons, beginning in 1846, fled to the arid Great Basin of the American West.

viiThat the Mormons colonized the West is well known, but less known is the fact that as with their eastern experience, the western settlement was marked by hardship and persecution. Arriving in the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, Mormons established hundreds of communities from Canada to Mexico. Under the direction of Brigham Young they created a far-flung empire whose impact on the geography of the West persists today. Mormon exploration and colonization helped lay the framework for the 20th-century growth of the West, a framework reinforced by continued immigration of converts from the East and from Europe.

viiThe 20th century brought ever increasing growth to the Mormon Church, which has begun the transition from an American institution to a worldwide one. The flow of immigrants that characterized the Great Basin Mormon communities for a century has been diverted as new converts have been encouraged to gather in their own homelands. The growth of the Church has transformed it into a worldwide multicultural organization whose membership remains committed to the doctrines and beliefs espoused by the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr.

viiThe Mormon experience has been unevenly associated with local and national geographies. In some places, such as Kirtland, Ohio; Nauvoo, Illinois; or the communities of the Intermountain West, the Mormon experience was central to both the local history and geography. Some places have the impact of the Mormon experience deeply imprinted upon their geography today, while in others only a few relics remain to speak mutely of the past role of the Mormons. The Mormon role in some local and national geographies is recent, and the evidence of the Mormon presence is but a small piece of the larger geographic mosaic of such places. Regardless of the evidence of the Mormon experience in a specific place, the growth and spread of the Church is tied to the history and geography of that locale.

viiThe maps in this volume introduce the reader to the geographic relationships associated with the history of the Mormons. Each map attempts to answer geographic questions concerning the who, where, when, and how of events important in Mormon history. The essay associated with each map provides the detail necessary to move beyond the map to understanding the people and events whose actions shaped the Mormon experience. Bibliographies direct readers to sources of more information. We hope that the combination of map and written explanation will be useful to all who have any level of interest in the rise and spread of this American religious institution.

viiAs editors, we accept responsibility for any errors herein. We also acknowledge that the authors of each essay and map are largely responsible for whatever merit the volume may contain. Suggestions for corrections or improvements will be graciously accepted.

S. Kent Brown

Donald Q. Cannon

Richard H. Jackson

Provo, Utah

May 1994
