Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Preface

Undertaking the task of mapping the local, regional, and global aspects of any group is demanding. When that group's growth over a century and a half corresponds with diffusion across America and into numerous foreign countries, it creates an even greater challenge in simply defining what is important enough to map. This volume was undertaken to help users understand where and how the events of Mormon history relate to specific places or regions. This atlas is not intended to be exhaustive, but it is hoped that the maps and subjects included will enlighten readers about the places affected by the unique American religion commonly referred to as Mormon.

ixThe actual maps and topics included are the result of discussion by the editors with numerous scholars of the Mormon experience over the last three decades. Some maps reflect the editors' personal interest in Mormon history; others were suggested by colleagues. We are particularly indebted to the numerous contributors who freely devoted their time to prepare each essay and provide the data necessary to design each map. They shared years of research willingly, and without complaint condensed hundreds of pages of scholarship into the one page we allotted for each essay.

ixThe maps reflect the diligent work of the contributors and the cartography laboratory of the Geography Department of Brigham Young University. Jeffry S. Bird, cartographic technician for the Geography Department, and his assistants Gaiping Li, Kim Young-Sook, and Jeffery N. Jarvis provided yeoman service in data entry and cartographic design through many phases of development. Jeff Bird was particularly instrumental in helping design the maps and in making all the final cartographic changes.

ixThe idea for this work was suggested to us by Charles E. Smith, President of the Academic Reference Division of Simon & Schuster, when he visited Brigham Young University in June 1992. His enthusiasm helped the

ixeditors persist in their task. Paul Bernabeo, Editorial Director of the Academic Reference Division, brought the project to fruition. Paul shepherded the editors through the numerous details associated with editing a multiauthor volume and encouraged the prompting of dilatory contributors to complete their tasks.

ixMary V. Dearborn served as manuscript editor. Her careful editing of each essay clarified ambiguities, reduced redundancy, and focused the authors' prose. Debra H. Alpern and Sara E. Simon have been responsible for map review and day-to-day management of the project. Their work has ensured that logistics of the project did not overwhelm the editors and provided a professional overview of the maps To each of these individuals and to all others of Simon & Schuster who made this volume possible, we extend our heartfelt thanks.

ixWe would also like to thank the Dean of Religious Education and the Chair of the Department of Geography at Brigham Young University for their encouragement and support. Deans and department chairs assisted graciously when requested, and their willingness to allow us to devote time to this project made it possible for us to complete it.

ixFinally, we want to recognize the unstinting efforts of Barbara Newell Crawley, secretary of the Religious Studies Center of Brigham Young University. She willingly added service as secretary and general factotum for the editors to her already heavy load. Moreover, she provided keen insight as we reviewed each essay and map, catching errors we otherwise would have missed. For her assistance and enthusiasm we dedicate this volume to her.
