Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Joseph Smith's Ancestors

Richard Lloyd Anderson

4 Joseph Smith's family lines all run through New England, where ancestors were typically community leaders in various locations. Progenitors several steps from Joseph Smith closely fit Christine Leigh Heyrman's profile of the New England norm: "their lives [were] defined by the seasonal rhythms of agriculture, the bonds of family, church, and local community, and a fundamentally religious outlook" (in Eric Foner and John A. Garraty, editors, Reader's Companion to American History, 789). The family predecessors of the Prophet were generally active in church and in the New England towns, the self-governing area units that do not appear on ordinary maps unless a municipality of the same name developed.

4 The roots of Joseph Smith's father were north of Boston. His grandfather was Samuel Smith, Jr., born in Topsfield, Massachusetts, to a family living there since ancestor Robert Smith came from England during the Puritan "great migration." The younger Samuel Smith was a revolutionary patriot and active Congregationalist who regularly represented Topsfield in the state legislature and in local positions as selectman or town clerk. He married Priscilla Gould, of a family going back to the town's founding which produced many prominent public servants.

4 The second son of this couple was the Prophet's grandfather, Asael Smith. He married Mary Duty, born in the nearby town of Rowley, Massachusetts. Her parents, Moses Duty and Mary Palmer, had generational roots there--records show religious involvement and revolutionary patriotism. Mary and Asael Smith lived for a time at Topsfield, but the second son did not normally inherit, so the couple settled for years in southern New Hampshire, mainly in the towns of Windham and Derryfield, now the town of Manchester. After service in the Revolutionary War, Asael was elected seven times as town clerk at Derryfield, but he returned to Topsfield to salvage his father's honor by settling a complicated estate in difficult economic times. Two main residences followed. Asael first pioneered uncleared land and developed family farms at Tunbridge, Vermont, continuing his pattern of prominence in town and church affairs, though he was a dissenter. He served three terms as selectman, one of the three town managers.

4 Asael and Mary Smith moved once again in their older age, leaving Vermont for the New York lands that beckoned their children. They were at the town of Stockholm, in upper New York, during the censuses of 1820 and 1830. In 1830, Asael Smith died after receiving a visit from his son Joseph Smith, Sr., and believing the Book of Mormon. Widow Mary Duty Smith also believed, and applied for baptism after migrating to Kirtland, Ohio, before her death in 1836.

4 The Prophet's maternal ancestors also have familiar New England origins. His mother's mother was Lydia Gates Mack, a teacher with profound Christian faith, born and raised in East Haddam, Connecticut. Her father was Daniel Gates, sometime selectman of the town and also deacon. He married Lydia Fuller, born at East Haddam to a family prominent in the area.

4 Lydia Gates married Joseph Smith's grandfather, Solomon Mack, whose venturesome life included placement in youth with another family because of the financial misfortune of his parents. Solomon's father was Ebenezer Mack, born in Lyme, Connecticut, and named by his father's will to inherit the family property. Ebenezer married Hannah Huntley, a lifetime schoolteacher who was also from Lyme.

4 Solomon Mack's quest for success encompassed New England and the Maritime Provinces. He was a colonial and revolutionary soldier, farmer, merchant, shipmaster, millwright, and builder. His main residences later in life were in Marlow and Gilsum in New Hampshire, and then Montague, Massachusetts, and Sharon, Vermont. He published a pamphlet about his legendary life, crediting his wife with educating their family and leading him to Christ late in life.

4 Lucy Mack, one of the vigorous children of this couple, was the Prophet's mother. She met Joseph Smith, Sr., on a visit to Tunbridge, Vermont, where the couple were married in 1796. Through the father's farming and schoolteaching, and Lucy's crafts, they built assets in the adjoining White River towns of Tunbridge, Randolph, Royalton, and Sharon, the birthplace of the Prophet in 1805. Then they moved down the Connecticut River to the village of West Lebanon, New Hampshire, where in semiretirement they began to give their children formal education.

4 But sickness depleted their savings, and the Smiths started over, first farming in the nearby town of Norwich, New Hampshire. After three crop failures, in 1816 the family struck out for the village of Palmyra, in western New York. The Smiths' Exodus ended two miles south, in the town of Manchester, New York. Here they contracted for land near the Hill Cumorah, where the buried plates were about to be revealed.

Mary Audentia Smith Anderson, Ancestry and Posterity of Joseph Smith and Emma Hale (1929); A. Gary Anderson, "Smith Family Ancestors," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 3:1361-1363; Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage (1971); Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (1853) [an accessible reprint, lightly edited by Preston Nibley, is available under the following title: History of Joseph Smith by His Mother (1979)].
