Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Hill Cumorah

Richard H. Jackson

8The Hill Cumorah is an important feature in Mormon geography and history. Located in Manchester Township, New York, it is four miles southeast of the town of Palmyra and three miles south of the farm of the Prophet Joseph Smith's father. On the night of September 21, 1823, the young Joseph was visited by the Angel Moroni, who showed him in a vision a place on the west side of the hill where were hidden the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was to be translated. For four years Smith returned each September to that site to be instructed by the Angel Moroni. The combination of historical and sacred events associated with the Hill Cumorah makes it one of the most important places for Mormons.

8The Hill Cumorah was created by the great ice age in North America. Technically it is a drumlin, a natural feature created by the deposition of clay, gravel, and rocks as the slowly advancing ice passed over some small obstruction. This process created landforms that are linear in form, with their axes paralleling the direction of movement of the ice. The Hill Cumorah drumlin is one of a number of north-south oriented drumlins south of Lake Ontario. The Hill Cumorah rises approximately 110 feet above the surrounding land, with relatively gentle slopes.

8The writings of the prophet Joseph Smith generally refer to the Hill Cumorah as simply "the hill." An 1842 Revelation (D&C 128:20), referring to "glad tidings from Cumorah," is his only reference to it by name. Other early leaders, however, used the term, apparently beginning with Oliver Cowdery in 1829 and 1830. Other early members also used this name, but it was referred to as Mormon Hill on U.S. topographic maps from 1898 to 1952, when it was changed to Hill Cumorah.

8The westward movement of the Mormons in the 1830s and 1840s did not lessen their interest in the Hill Cumorah area, but settlement of the Great Basin and related persecution and poverty occupied the Church until the 20th century. In the early part of 1907, the Apostle George Albert Smith purchased the Joseph Smith, Sr., farm, and in 1914 a caretaker was sent to live on the farm. The caretaker soon purchased a 98-acre farm on the western side of the Hill Cumorah, and in 1928 the Church purchased the 283 acres comprising the rest of the hill.

8At the time of its purchase the Hill Cumorah had been part of a farming system that included grazing sheep, cattle, and horses. Most of the hill was, therefore, covered with grass, and trees occupied only the rougher areas. Beginning with the first farm purchase, Mormons began a process of landscaping the hill that continues to the present. The first improvement was limited, consisting of a parking place by the road for visitors on the first 98 acres purchased by the Church. After the rest of the hill was acquired in 1928, two paths and a gravel road leading to the top of the hill were provided. In 1935, a 40-foot shaft of Vermont granite crowned by a nine-foot bronze statue of the Angel Moroni was placed on the highest point of the hill. In 1936 a bureau of information and floodlights to illuminate the monument were placed at the base of the hill. The most important changes to the landscape of the Hill Cumorah are related to the development of the Hill Cumorah Pageant held each July. Attracting some 100,000 visitors annually, the pageant owes its origins to missionaries who began celebrating July 24--the date of the Mormon entry into Salt Lake Valley in 1847--at the site in 1917. In 1936, plans were announced to hold an annual pageant. Entitled "America's Witness for Christ," it was performed with only occasional revisions until 1988, when an entirely new pageant with the same title was commissioned.

8Performance of the pageant has been associated with additional changes in the Hill Cumorah. Twenty-five stages, an expanded visitors' center, and a two-story administrative building were constructed by 1988. Additional changes included recontouring to provide lighting, walkways, trees, and shrubs. In 1988, the Church completely overhauled the landscape of the Hill Cumorah, providing new stages, seating, and special effects for the pageant.

8The recontoured and landscaped Hill Cumorah remains one of the most important attractions in the Mormon Church. For members and nonmembers, the pageant--with its volunteer performers--is a singular experience emphasizing the divinity of Jesus Christ and his mission. The rest of the year the Hill Cumorah presents an opportunity to visitors to reflect on the significance of the events that occurred here in September 1823 and the subsequent establishment and growth of the Mormon Church.

Gerald S. Argetsinger, "Cumorah Pageant," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992), 1:347; David A. Palmer, "Cumorah," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992)1:346-347; Rex C. Reeve, Jr., and Richard O. Cowan, "The Hill Called Cumorah," in Regional Studies in Latter-day Saint Church History, Larry C. Porter et al., editors (1992), pp. 70-91.
