Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Palmyra, New York

Donald L. Enders

10In 1816 the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., moved from Vermont to western New York and settled at Palmyra, a promising village located on the proposed route of the Erie Canal.

10The Smith Farm. About 1818 the Smiths moved into a log home two miles south of Palmyra Village down Stafford Road toward Manchester. Two years later they purchased 100 acres of heavily forested land just over the line in Manchester Township. During the next decade they fenced the land, cleared 60 acres, built a barn, a cooper's shop, and animal shelters, planted a garden, started a large apple orchard, and developed meadows and fields. They also built a one-and-one-half-story frame home, which was sufficiently finished to occupy during the spring of 1825.

10Unable to make the last payment on the farm, the Smiths lost title to the land in late 1825, but remained on it as renters until spring 1829, when they returned to their log home. The Smiths moved from the Palmyra-Manchester area in late 1830, leaving a farm known for its "good order and industry" and assessed in tax records one of the better farms in Manchester Township.

10The Sacred Grove and the First Vision. This farm was the setting for the experiences of Joseph Smith, Jr., that Latter-day Saints accept as the divine manifestations that inaugurated the restoration of the gospel. In early spring 1820, while prayerfully seeking forgiveness and divine direction, fourteen-year-old Joseph received a visitation from God the Father and Jesus Christ wherein he was told to join no existing church. This vision occurred in a wood near the Smiths' log home. A beautiful woodland of substantial age at the west end of the farm is reverenced as this site. For almost a century, it has been known among Latter-day Saints as the Sacred Grove.

10The Smith Log Home and the Angel Moroni Visitations. On the evening of September 21-22, 1823, seventeen-year-old Joseph received an angelic visitation in the garret of his family's log home. The messenger, named Moroni, first described a record of ancient America that contained "the fulness of Christ's gospel," instructed him to obtain it, and then promised that he would translate the record. In published form this record is the Book of Mormon. It was also in this house that the printer's copy of the Book of Mormon was copied, in 1829 and 1830, and where early preaching and worship services were held before the formal organization of the Church in 1830.

10Hill Cumorah. The ancient record lay buried on the west slope of a wooded hill three miles southeast of the Smith farm, along the main road leading from Palmyra to Manchester. Called Cumorah by early Mormons, this hill, or drumlin, formed during the retreat of the Ice Age glaciers, rises 110 feet above the valley floor. Joseph visited this site and conferred with the messenger annually until September 22, 1827, when he was permitted to take the record.

10Martin Harris Farm. Martin Harris, a prosperous farmer, religious man, and respected citizen of Palmyra, lived with his wife, Lucy, and their children on a productive and well-developed 300-acre farm a mile and a half north of the town. Their residence was a one-and-one-half-story white frame home surrounded by farm buildings, an orchard, and fields.

10Harris, who became acquainted with the Smiths about 1824, assisted Joseph Smith, Jr., as scribe in the early days of the translation of the Book of Mormon, but lost the first 116 pages of dictated manuscript. He no longer acted as scribe but became one of the Three Witnesses to see the ancient record and thereafter mortgaged 150 acres of his farm to pay for printing the first edition of the Book of Mormon.

10E. B. Grandin Printing Office. In June 1829, Joseph Smith, Jr., and Martin Harris contracted with Egbert Grandin, a youthful newspaper editor in Palmyra, to print 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon for $3,000. Grandin used a hand-lever press and worked on the project from early August 1829 to March 1830. One of few printers in western New York with the capability of producing such a large volume of work, he employed a staff of at least 16 people during this period to print his weekly newspaper, his job-work, and the Book of Mormon. The printing office was located at the west end of the upper level of the recently constructed three-story brick building called Exchange Row on Palmyra's Main Street.

Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision (1980); Richard L. Bushman, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (1984).
