Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Early Missionary Journeys

Susan Easton Black

14Before the Book of Mormon was fully printed and bound, missionaries carried excerpts hundreds of miles and shared them with relatives and friends. Thomas B. Marsh carried 16 of these loose pages to Charlestown, Massachusetts, to read with his family. Solomon Chamberlain took 64 pages to Canada. After traveling 800 miles through the Canadian wilderness, he stated, "I exhorted all people to prepare for the great work of God that was now about to come forth" (Chamberlain, 362). Such enthusiasm for the Book of Mormon led one historian to pen, "It was not uncommon, in the earliest days of the movement, for a man to hear Mormonism preached one day, be baptized the next, be ordained an elder on the following day and the day after that to be out preaching Mormonism" (Williams, 10).

14 Samuel Harrison Smith was the first missionary set apart by the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother. On June 30, 1830, he left on his mission with copies of the Book of Mormon filling his knapsack. After traveling 30 miles the first day he slept under an apple tree, having "been turned out of doors that day" for the fifth time (Smith, 169). The next day he journeyed eight miles to Bloomington, New York, where he met John P. Greene, a Methodist preacher. Although Greene did not initially accept the Book of Mormon, he consented to take a book on his next preaching tour. Later Smith returned to the home of Reverend Greene. His persistence eventually led to the baptisms of John P. Greene, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball.

14During the following 15 months Smith traveled over 4,000 miles, preaching from Maine to Missouri. He journeyed with Orson Pratt from New York to Kirtland, Ohio, a distance of 250 miles. By spring of 1831 he was preaching 50 miles west of Kirtland in Amherst. From June 1831 through August he preached with Reynolds Cahoon from Ohio to Missouri. The remainder of 1831 he served missions in eastern Ohio. He and Orson Hyde were called to the northern states on January 25, 1832. They journeyed from Salem, Ohio, to Springfield, Pennsylvania. They then walked to Erie, Pennsylvania, and continued north until they reached western New York. The missionaries also traveled to Boston and Providence, Rhode Island. Continuing north, they journeyed through New Hampshire to York County, Maine. During this 11-month mission Samuel Smith helped organize four branches of the Church.

14While Samuel was the first and foremost missionary in the Smith family, other family members also served missions. Joseph Smith, Sr., and Joseph Jr.'s brother Don Carlos Smith traveled to St. Lawrence County, New York, in August 1830 to share the Book of Mormon with relatives. Another of Joseph Jr.'s brothers, Hyrum Smith, strengthened and exhorted the Saints in Palmyra, Colesville, and Fayette, New York.

14The most arduous early mission was served by Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Ziba Peterson, and Parley P. Pratt. In October 1830 they began their journey to the edge of the frontier to share the Book of Mormon with Indian tribes, known among Mormons as Lamanites. Near Buffalo, New York, they preached to the Cattaraugus Indians. From Buffalo they traveled to Mentor, Ohio, where they converted the Reverend Sidney Rigdon and many of his congregation. They then journeyed to Sandusky, Ohio, to preach to the Wyandot Indians. From Sandusky they traveled to Cincinnati and then 300 miles to St. Louis. For the last 200 miles they trudged through trackless wastes of snow to Independence, Missouri, about 1,500 miles from where they had started.

14Parley P. Pratt claimed that they had "preached the gospel to tens of thousands of Gentiles and two nations of Indians; baptizing, confirming, and organizing many hundreds of people into churches" (Pratt, 52). Near Independence, Oliver Cowdery explained to the Delaware Indian chief, "We have traveled a long distance from towards the rising sun to bring you glad news [of] great knowledge which has lately come to our ears and hearts" (Pratt, 54). After listening to Cowdery's discourse the chief replied, "We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have come so far, and been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this new news concerning the Book of our forefathers" (Pratt, 56).

14While these missionaries were traveling to the Indians, other missionaries also accepted calls to serve. Jared Carter preached from Ohio to Chenango, New York, and then to Benson, Vermont. From Vermont he traveled to Galien, New York, to share the Book of Mormon with his family. He then journeyed to Springfield, Pennsylvania, before returning to Ohio. Ebenezer Page also journeyed to Chenango, New York, and shared the truths of the gospel. It was their conviction about the tRuth of the Book of Mormon that led these missionaries to testify equally to friends, relatives, and strangers.

Solomon Chamberlain, "A Short Sketch of the Life of Solomon Chamberlain," cited by Larry C. Porter in "A Study of the Origins of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the States of New York and Pennsylvania, 1816-1831" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1971); Samuel George Ellsworth, "A History of Mormon Missions in the United States and Canada, 1830-1860" (Ph.D. diss., University of California, 1952); Dean Jarman, "The Life and Contributions of Samuel Harrison Smith" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1961); Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt (1980); Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith by his Mother (1956); Richard Shelton Williams, "The Missionary Movements of the LDS Church in New England, 1830-1850" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1969).
