Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Pennsylvania

Richard Neitzel Holzapfel

16Joseph Smith arrived in Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, for the first time in November 1825. He boarded with Isaac Hale in Harmony Township while employed by Josiah Stowell, who was at that time attempting to find a lost Spanish gold mine. Smith's brief stay had considerable influence on him and on the beginnings of Mormonism.

16Four important events occurred in or near Harmony. Smith met his future wife, Emma Hale (Isaac's daughter); he completed much of the Book of Mormon translation; he received several divine Revelation and visitations; and he had early associations with individuals in the area that would prove important for the infant Church.

16After Joseph Smith and Emma Hale were married in January 1827, they moved to his father's farm in Manchester, New York. Smith obtained the gold plates from a hill nearby in September 1827. Joseph and Emma Smith were forced to find safe refuge from the storm of opposition mounting against his effort to translate the plates. Though not entirely happy about the reason for their return, Isaac Hale welcomed the young couple back to Harmony.

16The translation process then commenced in earnest, but with several major interruptions. Eventually, in May 1829, Smith and his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, reached a section in the Book of Mormon that discussed baptism. As they prayed for guidance on the subject, an angel (John the Baptist) appeared and gave them the authority to baptize.

16Prejudice in the area increased, and Smith sought another place to finish translating. With Cowdery, the Smiths moved to the Peter Whitmer farm in Fayette, New York, in June 1829 to complete the work. The Smiths returned temporarily to Harmony in October 1829, but in the early spring of 1830 returned to New York. Soon thereafter they gathered at the Whitmer farm and organized the Church of Christ on April 6. In 1831, they and the other faithful Saints removed themselves entirely from the region to the Western Reserve and established a Church center in Kirtland, Ohio, and another in Jackson County, Missouri.

16As the message of the Restoration spread from the new Church center in Ohio, it was inevitable that missionaries would arrive in Pennsylvania. Within a year of the organization of the Church, its membership numbered nearly 2,000, with 125 members living in Pennsylvania, more than in any other states except Ohio and Missouri.

16Church branches were first established in the northern counties of the state. Most of the membership lived in Bradford and Tioga counties, which bordered New York State. Recent converts often were sent back to their homes to proselyte family and friends. During the summer of 1831 branches of the infant Church were organized in Columbia and Rutland townships, respectively located in Bradford and Tioga counties. Later, missionaries from Columbia set out to proselyte in the Mendon, New York, area. Among those eventually converted from this missionary activity were Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. Young, along with family and friends, traveled the 120 miles to the Columbia branch to investigate news about the Church more thoroughly. Over the next several months other family members visited the small branch and were baptized. Erie County, in the northwestern corner of the state, was another early field of missionary labor because of its geographic proximity to Kirtland (40 miles away) and its location as a bridge for Kirtland missionaries' efforts to the east. Two branches were organized in the county (Springfield and Elk Creek). Among those converts who would become prominent in the Church was Jedediah M. Grant, baptized at Elk Creek in 1833.

16In the latter half of the 1830s, missionary efforts shifted from the northern counties to western and southern counties. In 1839, missionary labors resulted in the establishment of branches in southeastern Chester and Philadelphia counties. Three Pennsylvania converts, Jedediah M. Grant, Joshua Grant, Jr., and Benjamin Winchester, may have been the first missionaries to visit Philadelphia. By 1839, there were approximately 40 members within 60 miles of the city. A branch was organized there by Joseph Smith on December 23, 1839.

16During the 1830s as many as 14 branches were organized, mostly in sparsely settled counties. Missionary successes were tempered by the doctrine of gathering as local Saints moved to Church headquarters farther west. Most branches followed a fluctuating pattern: first, missionary activity; second, branch organization; third, a growth period; fourth, loss of membership due primarily to the gathering to Ohio; and finally, the stabilization of a branch or its disorganization. As a result only three units, Brandywine, Philadelphia, and Leechburg, continued to function from 1830 until 1840.

Richard L. Bushman, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (1984), pp. 79-113; Richard Neitzel Holzapfel and T. Jeffery Cottle, "Pennsylvania," in Old Mormon Palmyra and New England: Historic Photographs and Guide (1991), pp. 140-163; Larry C. Porter, "A Study of the Origins of The Church of Jesus Christ in the States of New York and Pennsylvania, 1816-1831" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1971); Zilch Rosenbaum, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Pennsylvania (1830-1854)" (Master's thesis, East Stroudsburg State College, 1982).>
