Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Earliest Congregations (1828-1831)

Susan Easton Black

18Announcements in the early 1800s of land "well-timbered, well-watered, easily accessible, and undeniably fertile--all to be had on long term payments for only two or three dollars an acre," piqued interest and propelled the American populace to press against the frontier from Maine to Kentucky (Stilwell, 135). The lure of superior soil and the promise of the Erie Canal extending water transport to the Great Lakes led many of the adventurous and the hopeful to western New York. Among those

18joining the pioneering quest for a better life were future prominent Latter-day Saints, including Joseph Smith, Sr., Hiram Page, Hezekiah Peck, Benjamin Slade, and Oliver Cowdery, all former residents of Vermont. They ventured west with many contemporaries seeking a new beginning in the New York wilderness.

18The explosive growth of small villages and townships in western New York was paralleled by the religious fervor among the new inhabitants. Itinerant preachers from the East moved west with the hope of instilling religion in the pioneers. Early revivals, dating from 1799, ignited townsfolk from one village to another in a spiritual awakening. Congregations often doubled as enthusiasm for old-time religion rekindled. Lucy Mack Smith penned, "There was a great revival in religion, which extended to all the denominations of Christendom in the surrounding country in which we resided. Many of the world's people concerned about the salvation of their souls came forward and presented themselves as seekers after religion" (Smith, 74).

18During this revival era, young Joseph Smith labored "under the extreme difficulties" occasioned by contesting religionists (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith--[H]istory 1:11). Seeking to unravel the prevailing religious confusion, he sought the Lord in prayer in the spring of 1820. His heavenly answer included "a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto [him]" (The Wentworth Letter, cited in Backman, 169).

18As this promise was fulfilled, the young Prophet shared his Revelation with early believers in the small New York communities of Palmyra, Colesville, and Fayette. These three towns became the destination for some of the earliest converts. Learning of the gospel at the Smith home in Manchester were Oliver Cowdery, a native of Rutland County, Vermont; Solomon Humphrey, originally from Hartford County, Connecticut; Thomas B. Marsh, from Middlesex County, Massachusetts; Solomon Chamberlain, from Litchfield County, Connecticut; and Martin Harris, from Saratoga County, New York. From the Prophet and his family they learned of angelic visitations and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. This small but faithful congregation produced the earliest stalwarts of Mormonism.

18Those who anchored the first branch of the Church in Fayette traced their awareness of the Prophet to David Whitmer, who had heard of young Joseph Smith in Palmyra. He shared his insights with Oliver Cowdery, who later promised Whitmer that he would write to him about Smith. It was Cowdery's letter to Whitmer in May 1829 that precipitated Smith's important move--while translating the Book of Mormon--from his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, to the Whitmer farm, 4.7 miles northeast of Fayette. The Whitmers embraced the gospel and four family members testified, "We have seen and hefted, and we know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates" (The Testimony of the Eight Witnesses). Forming the nucleus of the branch in Fayette were the families of Peter Whitmer, formerly from Dauphin County, Pennsylvania; Hiram Page, a native of Vermont; Phillip Burroughs, originating from New Hampshire; and William Jolly, a lifelong resident of Seneca County, New York.

18The Colesville branch traced their awareness of Joseph Smith's religious experiences to Joseph Knight, a native of Worcester County, Massachusetts. He, like Whitmer, became acquainted with the Smiths in Palmyra. Knight lent encouragement to young Smith by employing him in his carding mill and on his farm. He was privileged to be in the Smith home the morning that Joseph entered with the original gold plates of the Book of Mormon in his possession. Joining the Knight family in the Colesville branch were Freeborn DeMill, originally from Ulster County, New York; Ira Willes, formerly from Albany County, New York; Hezekiah Peck, from Windham County, Vermont; William Stringham, from Queens County, New York; and Benjamin Slade, from Windham County, Vermont.

18The Saints in these small communities strengthened and encouraged each other as they met in worship. It was these early meetings in western New York that became the basis of the first branches of the Church, whose membership knew and professed Joseph Smith to be a prophet of God.

Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision: The First Vision in Its Historical Context (1971); Larry C. Porter, "A Study of the Origins of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the States of New York and Pennsylvania, 1816-1831" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1971); Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and His Progenitors for Many Generations (1853); Lewis D. Stilwell, Migration from Vermont (1948).>
