Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Northern Ohio Settlements

Karl Ricks Anderson

20Latter-day Saints populated northern Ohio in the 1830s barely 30 years after the first surveyors and pioneer settlers arrived, primarily from Connecticut. Populated by the Indians prior to 1800, northeastern Ohio, known as the Western Reserve, consisted of land owned by the state of Connecticut for western expansion. This accounts for the dominance of New England culture and heritage in the area.

20The Latter-day Saint population resulted from missionary conversions in the area and from Saints gathering from other areas of the United States and Canada. Most sailed across Lake Erie, arriving at Fairport Harbor. They then walked the 12 miles to Kirtland, Church headquarters from 1831 to 1838, and settled either in or near Kirtland. Missionary conversions in northern Ohio were augmented significantly by Sidney Rigdon, a Reformed Baptist minister who had much to do with Church settlement and growth in northern Ohio. Rigdon, of whom the Lord said, "thou wast sent . . . to prepare the way before me . . . and thou knewest it not" (D&C 35:4), preached throughout northern Ohio from 1826 to 1830, establishing congregations in Mentor, Mantua, Kirtland, Florence, Elyria, and Mayfield. Following his November 1830 conversion in Mentor, hundreds were baptized from his contacts in these areas.

20Centers of Church population and activity included the following:

20Kirtland was the primary settlement in Ohio; however, Latter-day Saint population and activity spilled over into surrounding towns such as Mentor, Willoughby (known as Chagrin prior to 1834), Chesterland (known as Chester), and Mayfield.

20Hiram served essentially as Church headquarters for the year that Joseph Smith and his family lived with John Johnson's family. Sixteen sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were received here. It was the site of many Church conferences. Intense missionary activity surrounded Hiram, and many converts came from Parkman, Nelson, and Shalersville, which all became Church branches. Others were converted in Ravenna, Streetsboro, Shalersville, and Mantua; in Mantua, Lorenzo Snow was born, and there Eliza Snow and other members of their family first heard the gospel. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were called on a local preaching mission in December 1831 (D&C 71) to counter the effects of nine anti Mormon newspaper articles published in the Ravenna newspaper by Ezra Booth. (Booth was apparently the first apostate publicly to attack the Church in writing.)

20Painesville was the home of Edward Partridge, first bishop of the Church, who operated a hatter's shop near the town square. Joseph Smith made many trips to Painesville. He was often arrested on what he called "malicious and vexatious lawsuits" and put on trial here. A hotbed of anti Mormon sentiment, Painesville produced the first anti Mormon publication, Mormonism Unvailed. The Church was built up in surrounding towns such as Perry, Madison, and Thompson. It was in Thompson that the Colesville Saints first settled, the Law of Consecration was first attempted, and D&C 51 of the Doctrine and Covenants was revealed.

20Chardon was the county seat for Kirtland prior to 1840. Leaders, including Joseph Smith, traveled frequently to Chardon for preaching, visiting members, and attending to legal and court business. Joseph Smith's sisters, Sophronia and Katherine, lived here.

20Amherst, site of a Church conference and the reception of Doctrine and Covenants section 66, was one of the first areas of significance to the Church. Parley P. Pratt settled here in 1826, four years before his conversion in New York. Sidney Rigdon recruited Pratt to preach the Campbellite faith here and later appointed Orson Hyde as a minister in this same area. After their conversion to Mormonism, working with others, they built up branches of the Church in and surrounding Amherst in Brownhelm, Florence, Elyria, New London, and Ridgeville.

20Orange and Warrensville were adjoining townships and sites of successful missionary activity and Church branches. An 1831 Church conference was held in Orange. Joseph and Emma Smith's twins, adopted from John and Julia Murdock, were born here.

20Barberton (known as New Portage prior to 1890), at the headwaters of the Tuscarawas River, was the site of one of the largest branches of the Church in Ohio. A plague, thought to have been typhus, almost wiped out the town in 1828. Barberton served as a rendezvous point for Zion's Camp and also for members of the Smith family as they left Ohio for Missouri in 1838. It was a Church center for missionaries and members surrounding Akron. Such members of the Church as Pratt, Don Carlos Smith, and Hyrum Smith lived here for a short time.

Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland (1989); Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (1983).
