Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Kirtland and Vicinity

Keith W. Perkins

22The first white settlers of northeastern Ohio were the French, followed by the English. After the Revolutionary War, a group of land speculators known as the Connecticut Land Company gained possession of this portion of Ohio and sold sections of it to settlers. One of these speculators, Judge Turhand Kirtland, left his name with Kirtland town. When four LDS missionaries arrived from New York and converted many local citizens, the town began to be a Latter-day Saint community.

22There are many spots significant to the LDS Church that can be visited in northeastern Ohio, but three are most prominent.

22Newel K. Whitney and Company Store. The Newel K. Whitney store opened in a log cabin in 1823. The present frame structure was built in Kirtland, Ohio, by 1827. Operating as a mercantile establishment and as a post office, this building played a major role in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland, Ohio, during the years 1831-1838. The Prophet Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland on February 1, 1831.

22The Prophet later worked on the Joseph Smith translation of the Bible in an upstairs room. He also received a number of significant Revelation in the Whitney store, including the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89) and two important Revelation on priesthood (D&C 84, 88).

22In the winter of 1833, in accord with Revelation (D&C 88:127-141), the School of the Prophets, whose purpose was to prepare missionaries to take the gospel to the world, was begun in the store. The United Order, the predecessor of the current welfare system of the Church, also had its beginning in the store, which was used as the bishop's storehouse (D&C 72:8-10; 78:3). Today the building has been restored to its 1830s state and is operated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as a historic site open to visitors.

22Kirtland Temple. The most prominent Kirtland structure is the stately House of the Lord, the first Latter-day Saint temple. It overlooks the city from the top of the hill. The design, measurements, and functions of the Kirtland Temple were given in Revelation by the Lord. Its interior was to be 55 feet wide and 65 feet long and to have a lower and a higher court. The lower part of the inner court was to be dedicated "for your Sacrament offering, and for your preaching, and your fasting, and your praying, and the offering up of your most holy desires unto me, saith your Lord." The higher part of the inner court was to be "dedicated unto me for the school of mine apostles" (D&C 95:13-17).

22The external design of the Kirtland Temple is typical of other contemporary houses of worship at that time, but the arrangement of the interior is unique. On each of the two main floors are two series of four-tiered pulpits, one on the west side, the other on the east. These are symbolic of the offices of the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods and accommodated their presidencies.

22The Saints completed the temple in less than three years. The cornerstone was laid at the southeast corner on July 23, 1833, and it was dedicated on March 17, 1836. The temple became the center of life for the Saints, housing the School of the Prophets and Elders. The temple is now owned and operated by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.

22The John Johnson Home, Hiram, Ohio. A prominent church family, the John Johnsons, lived about 30 miles southeast of Kirtland. Two of their sons, Luke and Lyman, became members of the original Quorum of the Twelve. A daughter, Marinda, married Orson Hyde, another member of the Twelve. Because their home served not only to house Joseph Smith and his family, but also as Church headquarters and site of a large branch of the Church in 1831 and 1832, many significant events occurred in and around this home (History of the Church 1:215). For instance, Joseph Smith worked on his translation of the Bible while he resided in the Johnson home and received the Revelation known as the degrees of glory (D&C 76). Moreover, one of the adopted twin babies of Joseph and Emma Smith died in Hiram and was perhaps buried in the cemetery there in 1832 (HC 1:265).

22Approximately eight Church conferences were conducted in Hiram. The decision to print some of the Revelation of Joseph Smith (HC 1:222) was made in the Johnson home. This work was known as the Book of Commandments, but today is called the Doctrine and Covenants. Currently the farm is part of the Latter-day Saint Church welfare services system and has been restored as a home and visitors' center.

Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts (1989); Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (1983); Keith W. Perkins, "Kirtland Temple," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 2:798-799; Keith W. Perkins, "Whitney Store," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 4:1566-1567.>
