Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

From Kirtland to Missouri

Bruce A. Van Orden

26Between 1830 and 1838, thousands of Latter-day Saints made the 900-mile trek from northeastern Ohio to Missouri. They utilized the common modes of travel of that day: wagons, canal boats, stages, and steamboats. Or they simply walked on the National Road or on other trails. Some journeyed as missionaries; others joined with Joseph Smith because they were specifically commanded to do so; 200 or so served as paramilitary personnel because they intended to escort fellow members back to their homes in Jackson County, Missouri; hundreds went because they simply wanted to "gather to Zion"; and still others were fleeing difficulties in Kirtland in 1838 to join the body of the Church in northern Missouri.

26The so-called Lamanite missionaries were the first group to journey in this direction. In the fall of 1830, Joseph Smith received a Revelation in New York designating Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, and two others to preach to the Lamanites--a Book of Mormon term for Native Americans--on the border with Missouri (D&C 28, 30, 32). En route to Missouri these missionaries tarried near Kirtland, Ohio, while Pratt introduced the gospel to his friend, the noted Reformed Baptist minister Sidney Rigdon. The missionaries converted not only Rigdon, but also approximately 130 others in the Kirtland area. The missionaries then took passage down the Ohio River toward St. Louis until they encountered ice near Cairo, Illinois, which forced them to trudge through deep snow the rest of the way. From St. Louis they followed the Boonslick and Santa Fe trails to Independence, seat of Jackson County. Independence lay only 12 miles from the western Missouri border. A number of Native American tribes had settled on the other side of the border, having been relocated there under direction of the U.S. government.

26These missionaries did not convert many Native Americans, but their mission led to the coming of Joseph Smith to Jackson County. He had received a series of Revelation indicating that the New Jerusalem would be located in Missouri "on the borders by the Lamanites" (D&C 28:9; 42:35; 45:64; 52:2, 42; 54:8; 55:5; 56:9). In company with his closest advisers, who were called by Revelation to assist him, Joseph Smith traveled to Independence in June and July of 1831. They went by wagon to the Ohio Canal, by boat and then by stage to Cincinnati, then down the Ohio River, thence to the Mississippi River, and on to St. Louis. Joseph used the Boonslick and Santa Fe trails as he walked the rest of the way. Some of his party went by steamer up the Missouri River. At the same time a whole congregation, the Colesville Branch of the Church from Colesville, Ohio, traveled to Independence using the same combination of water and land routes. Another 30 missionaries or so traveled in pairs toward Missouri, preaching and establishing branches along the way.

26As some of these Saints established various small settlements in Jackson County in 1831 and 1832, the call went out to other members of the Church to "gather to Zion." By October 1833, when original settlers drove the Mormons out of the county, approximately 1,500 Mormons had come from the East to Missouri. From May 5 to July 3, 1834, Joseph Smith led the paramilitary group, Zion's Camp, to Missouri to "redeem Zion." But when they arrived, a Revelation instructed them to disband. Instead, the Saints established more permanent Mormon settlements in Liberty and in the surrounding Clay County countryside.

26From mid-1834 to mid-1836, approximately 500 more Saints gathered to Missouri, all the while hoping, with their Church leaders, that Zion might still be redeemed. Instead, Clay County citizens became increasingly nervous about the burgeoning LDS presence in their midst and ordered the Mormons out. Missouri Church leaders explored new gathering spots and found relatively uninhabited territory in northern Missouri. By early 1837 most Missouri members resided in the newly created Mormon county of Caldwell.

26Waves of Latter-day Saints traveled from the Kirtland area to Missouri in 1838. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon fled for their lives from their Kirtland enemies in January 1838 and arrived in Far West, Caldwell County, in March. Wanting to be near their Prophet, numerous others followed. Finally, in the summer of 1838, about 550 Saints who banded together in covenant as the Kirtland Camp traversed the same general route to Missouri that Zion's Camp had used four years earlier. The Kirtland Camp arrived in Missouri just as hostilities were breaking out between Missouri militia units and the Mormons in the so-called Mormon War. This war resulted in the mass migration of virtually all Latter-day Saints to Illinois the following year.

Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (1983); Stanley B. Kimball, Historic Sites and Markers along the Mormon and Other Great Western Trails (1988).
