Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Expeditions from Kirtland

Bruce A. Van Orden

28Latter-day Saints made two major expeditions from Kirtland to Missouri during the 1830s: the march of Zion's Camp in 1834, and the Kirtland Camp trek of 1838. The former included about 205 men, plus a few women and children, and the latter consisted of approximately 550 persons. They followed an almost identical route. In both cases nearly everybody walked the entire 900 miles.

28Zion's Camp was a combined relief force and military body sent to escort fellow Mormons back to their homes in Jackson County, Missouri. The previous November, original Jackson County settlers, angry over the Mormons' distinctive beliefs and rapidly increasing Numbers, had driven Missouri Saints north across the Missouri River into Clay County. Missouri governor Daniel Dunklin had promised to send a militia to provide necessary protection.

28A Revelation on February 24, 1834 (D&C 103), commanded Church leaders to recruit participants for a march. Joseph Smith was not pleased with the response, with just over a hundred men joining the march. But as the march proceeded, other recruits joined en route.

28A party of 20 left Kirtland on May 1, 1834, to prepare the first camp at New Portage, Ohio, near present-day Akron. The march was officially inaugurated on May 9, near the Kirtland town square. Through Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, Zion's Camp largely followed existing roads. In Indiana they picked up the famous National Road, later U.S. Route 40.

28The marchers were well armed, carrying muskets, pistols, swords, and knives. Joseph Smith, their commander, organized them into groups of 10 and 50, with a captain over each. Lacking military training, participants conducted military exercises along the route. Days began with prayer at 5 A.M. Animals were rested every two hours. Marchers camped before dark, averaging about 25 miles per day.

28Physical hardships became a major challenge. Marchers suffered from blistered feet, insufficient clothing, oppressive heat, heavy rains, humidity, hunger, and thirst. Members often had to eat limited portions of coarse bread, rancid butter, cornmeal mush, strong honey, raw pork, rotten ham, and maggot-infested bacon and cheese.

28Despite these hardships and its military orientation, Zion's Camp emphasized spirituality. In addition to company prayers, leaders enjoined associates to pray privately morning and evening. The camp rested on Sundays and held worship services. One of the most prized memories was hearing Joseph Smith's teachings.

28On June 6 the marchers were joined at the Salt River near Paris, Missouri, by men recruited from Pontiac, Michigan. When the expanded camp reached Richmond on June 18, they learned that armed men from Jackson and surrounding counties planned to engage them in battle. Church leaders also discovered that Governor Dunklin had withdrawn his promise, realizing that it could lead to civil war.

28A terrible thunderstorm halted the Missourians near Liberty. An ensuing Revelation (D&C 105) commended participants for their sacrifice and directed them not to fight but to wait for the Lord to redeem Zion in his own way and time. Zion's Camp disbanded shortly thereafter, and supplies were distributed to refugees. Most marchers returned to Ohio. Zion's Camp proved to be a valuable training exercise for future Church leaders and an essential experience for future overland treks.

28In 1837, the Church's bank, the Kirtland Safety Society, failed in Ohio. Mass apostasy followed. Faithful members in the Kirtland area suffered intense persecution. Starting in December 1837, approximately 1,600 Church members departed Ohio for Missouri, usually in groups of no more than 50 persons. Few enjoyed the luxury of water transportation. Since most were poor, they went on foot, suffering illness, fatigue, muddy conditions, biting cold, blistered feet, and thirst.

28Members of the Three Quorums of Seventy--the Church's missionary cadre--made plans in the spring of 1838 for their families to travel together. As plans matured, other destitute families asked to join the company. Intending to leave in May, the group--by then known as Kirtland Camp--did not depart until July 6 due to lack of funds and provisions. The initial company consisted of 515 (249 men and 266 women).

28Camp members sought employment along the way to obtain needed funds. Because of the camp's size and because of young children, the group walked only 15 miles per day. Because 10 of the group had participated in Zion's Camp, Kirtland Camp essentially followed the earlier route. Accidents and illness constantly afflicted these pioneers. Death periodically struck the camp, especially the young. The non Mormon response to this large movement varied from curiosity to threats. In early September in Indiana, leaders directed the camp to speed up to 20 miles per day.

28After the camp reached Missouri in late September, members heard of war threats against fellow Saints. Upon arrival, camp members scattered among various Mormon settlements. Some later became victims of the Haun's Mill Massacre, the attacks in Adam-ondi-Ahman, and the siege of Far West.

Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio 1830-1838 (1983); Stanley B. Kimball, Historic Sites and Markers along the Mormon and Other Great Western Trails (1988); Roger D. Launius, Zion's Camp (1984); Bruce A. Van Orden, "Zion's Camp: A Refiner's Fire," in Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, editors, The Prophet Joseph: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith (1988).>
