Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Early Missionary Journeys in North America

Arnold K. Garr

30One of the most important aspects of early Mormon missionary work was that the majority of proselyting was carried out in the United States and Canada, then known as British North America. From 1830 to 1837, the year the British Mission was established, all of the Church's missionary activity took place in North America. Even though the British Mission experienced phenomenal success in its early years, the primary emphasis on missionary work throughout Joseph Smith's entire ministry remained centered in the United States and Canada. Of all missionaries who received calls between 1830 and 1844, 96 percent labored in North America.

30The center for Mormon missionary work during most of the 1830s was Kirtland, Ohio. In June 1831, during a conference in Kirtland, Smith received a Revelation calling 14 pairs of elders to go on missions to Missouri. They were instructed to travel by different routes and preach the gospel along the way. Two of these elders were Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel Smith, brother of Joseph Smith. En route to Missouri they were the first Mormon missionaries to enter the states of Kentucky and Indiana. Little is known of their proselyting activities in Kentucky, but we do know that they preached in the Indiana cities of Unionville, Madison, and Vienna.

30In January 1832, Joseph Smith received another Revelation that led to further pioneer proselyting. Samuel Smith and Orson Hyde were called to preach in the eastern states. Obedient to their call, they became the first known missionaries in four New England states: Connecticut, Rhode Island, Maine, and Massachusetts. There is no record of them converting anyone in Connecticut, but in Rhode Island they baptized at least two persons before persecution drove them from the state. In Maine they converted enough people to start a branch in Saco, York County; and in Massachusetts they baptized enough people to organize two small branches.

30In the 1832 Revelation, Orson Pratt and Lyman Johnson were also called to the eastern states. These two pioneered missionary work in New Jersey and New Hampshire. Little is known of their activities in New Jersey. But during their four-week stay in New Hampshire they baptized at least 20 people in the town of Bath, including Amasa M. Lyman, a future Apostle.

30At this same time, Luke Johnson and William E. McLellin were called to labor in the southern states. They began as companions, but soon thereafter, Elder McLellin found employment and ended his mission. He was replaced by Seymour Brunson. Johnson and Brunson traveled through Ohio, Virginia, and Kentucky. They baptized more than 100 people and organized branches in Lawrence County, Ohio, and Cabell County, Virginia (now West Virginia). The new branch in Virginia became the first branch of the Church in the southern states.

30Another pioneer missionary was Jedediah M. Grant. In 1837, he initiated missionary work in Delaware and Maryland. Then, in 1838, he became the first elder to enter the state of North Carolina. There he preached for about six months in Rockingham, Stokes, and Surry counties, baptizing at least four people. In 1840 he was joined by other missionaries and they soon brought six or eight more converts into the Church.

30Probably the first missionaries to enter British North America (Canada) after the Church was organized were Joseph Smith, Sr., and his son Don Carlos. They visited a few villages north of the St. Lawrence River in September 1830, but probably baptized no one. Two of the most successful early missionaries in Canada were John E. Page and Parley P. Pratt. Elder Page baptized more than 600 people and Elder Pratt converted John Taylor, a future president of the Church.

30In 1835 a major reorganization in Church government took place in Kirtland that had a profound effect on missionary work: the Quorum of Twelve Apostles and the first Quorum of Seventy were organized. For a time, the precise responsibilities of these two quorums were not completely clear, but in March 1835, they were given the responsibility to preach the gospel "in all the world." Soon thereafter the Twelve left on a mission to the eastern states. From May to October, they conducted a series of conferences throughout the Northeast in New York, Maine, Vermont, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Canada.

30During the 1830s and early 1840s, the Church had taken the message of the gospel into every state of the Union and parts of eastern Canada. It had thus laid the foundation for taking the message of the Restoration to "all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people."

LaMar C. Berrett, "History of the Southern States Mission, 1831-1861" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1960); Davis Bitton, "Kirtland as a Center of Missionary Activity, 1830-1838," BYU Studies 2 (Summer 1971):497-516; Deseret News 1993-1994 Church Almanac (1992); Gordon Irving, "Numeric Strength and Geographic Distribution of the LDS Missionary Force, 1830-1974," Task Papers in LDS History 1 (1975).
