Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Missionary Journeys to Foreign Countries

David J. Whittaker

32Missionary work has been a central concern of the Mormons since their beginnings in 1830. In their study of the Bible, particularly the New Testament, Mormon leaders identified with early Christian missionaries who were commissioned by Jesus to "go ye therefore, and teach all nations" (Matt. 28:19). Further, their own scriptures both reemphasized and reinforced this international missionary outlook. Many passages in the Book of Mormon and the D&C described the world as a field, which was white and ready to harvest; and the faithful were assured that no joy would be greater than what came as a result of successful missionary work.

32Historically, missionary work has served to revitalize membership at critical periods of stress and strain. New converts also brought badly needed skills and talents during the hectic pioneer period of the Church's history. The history and development of the various missions of the Church were often the testing ground for Church leaders as well as for Church programs and publications. Problems of government and administration--internal and external to the Church--that arose in the various mission fields forced Church leaders very early to deal more comprehensively with matters of organization, licensing, discipline, publishing, immigration, and management of finances.

32Church membership grew from six original members in 1830 to 268,331 in 1900, by which time missionaries had preached in nearly all the countries of the world. The first foreign mission attempted was to Canada. From 1832 on, individuals or groups of missionaries hazarded trips there, and notwithstanding the few converts in these early years, those who were baptized became instrumental in opening the British Mission, the next foreign mission attempted by the Church. From its first beginnings in 1837, the British Mission became the most successful foreign mission of the Church in the 19th century.

32Much of the early missionary work in England was performed by members of the Quorum of the Twelve. Apostle-missionaries such as Wilford Woodruff achieved phenomenal success in bringing new converts into the Church. From 1840 to about 1900 it is estimated that over 50,000 converts emigrated to the United States from Britain.

32Very early in their history Mormons also sent missionaries into other countries besides Canada and Britain. Even before the death of Joseph Smith, elders were sent to Australia, India, South America, Germany, and Jamaica. Although he failed to go, one man was even called to go to Russia. Apostle Orson Hyde visited and dedicated Palestine in 1841.

32In 1843, Noah Rogers and Addison Pratt opened missionary work in the Society Islands (Tahiti), establishing a foothold for the Church on the Tubuai Islands and Tahiti. This was the first missionary foray among the Polynesians. Thus a substantial effort had been expended in international missionary work by 1844, when Joseph Smith died.

32From England early missionaries first made proselyting thrusts into Ireland, Wales, Scotland, and eventually continental Europe, and then gradually extended themselves in more organized ventures. John Taylor of the Quorum of the Twelve started missionary work in Ireland and on the Isle of Man while Alexander Wright and Samuel Mulliner carried the gospel for the first time to Scotland. In 1849, the Italian, French, and Scandinavian missions were organized. A mission to Hawaii came in 1850, another to South America in 1851. Although some missionaries had visited Germany as early as 1841, the first formal work in that European country took place in 1851, when Daniel Garn arrived from America. In 1852, missionaries were dispatched to Gibraltar, India, Hindustan (India), Siam (Thailand), China, South Africa, the West Indies (Caribbean), British Guiana, and again to Australia. Although few of these latter missions were successful during the 19th century, the very attempt suggests the international outlook and millennialism of the early Mormon Church. It is also clear that much of the early missionary work followed the paths and locations of the British Empire throughout the world.

32Despite a period of anti Mormon persecution and prosecution in the United States in the 1880s, foreign missionary efforts continued. Missionary work had begun in Mexico in 1875, but it ended about 1889. It was reopened again in 1901. In 1865, the first contacts were made in Austria and Hungary; in 1883, several missionaries preached there, but for many years little was accomplished there. In 1885, missionary work was begun in Turkey. In 1885 and 1891, respectively, missions were organized in Samoa and in Tonga.

32By the end of the 19th century, Latter-day Saint missionaries had begun to preach the gospel in the four corners of the earth. For them, the gospel message had been carried to almost every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, and David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission: The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles, 1837-1841 (1992); R. Lanier Britsch, Unto the Islands of the Sea: A History of the Latter-day Saints in the Pacific (1986); William Mulder, Homeward to Zion: The Mormon Migration from Scandinavia (1957); Spencer J. Palmer, The Expanding Church (1978); P. A. M. Taylor, Expectations Westward: The Mormons and the Emigration of Their British Converts in the Nineteenth Century (1965).>
