Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Jackson County and Vicinity

Max H Parkin

38Before Jackson County was opened for settlement, early promoters spoke of it as the "Garden of Missouri," and Mormons who were among its first settlers claimed it as their promised land. In February 1831, after Mormon missionaries to the Indians (Lamanites) found their mission cut short, they began proselyting settlers in Jackson County. One early convert was Joshua Lewis, a resident of Kaw Township. When Joseph Smith and other Church members arrived in the summer from Kirtland, Ohio, they congregated at the Lewis log house, where, on August 2, Sidney Rigdon dedicated Jackson County as a gathering place for the Mormons.

38While Joseph Smith made Independence the center of Zion, most Mormons settled west of the village in Kaw Township, a county district west of the Blue River. At Independence, the county seat, Bishop Edward Partridge purchased land and distributed it in stewardships to Church members in the county. In this manner, four Mormon communities were established in Kaw Township and one at Independence.

38Two settlements in Kaw Township were situated on the Westport road, which led from Independence to Indian lands. The closest community to Independence was the Blue River Settlement, five miles west of Independence at the point where the road crossed the Blue River. At the crossing, Orin Rockwell and his son Porter operated a ferry. Thomas B. Marsh, a future president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, presided over one congregation there. By the fall of 1833, this area boasted the largest Mormon settlement in the county, with over 300 members and three Church branches.

38The Timber Settlement, known also as the Whitmer Branch, was the home of David Whitmer, its presiding elder, and other Whitmer families from Fayette, New York, as well as others. Located four miles west of the Blue River on the Westport road, this settlement included the Lewis house, where Rigdon had dedicated Jackson County as the latter-day Zion, and a Mormon-built schoolhouse. The Colesville settlement was made up of the earliest group of Mormons to arrive in Jackson County; they originated in Colesville, New York. They settled two miles south of the Whitmers, near Brush Creek, where Newel Knight and his brother, Joseph, received their stewardships and constructed a gristmill. Parley P. Pratt, one of the early Lamanite missionaries, resided there; as the community grew, it added an additional presiding officer. In fact, in September 1833, the five Mormon Jackson County settlements were divided into 10 ecclesiastical branches with a presiding high priest over each.

38The Prairie Settlement, near the Indian border, was led by Lyman Wight. One mile north of this settlement was Calvin McCoy's trading post, around which soon grew the important trail town of Westport. Eventually, Kansas City, Missouri, which today encompasses most of Kaw Township, grew from Westport and its landing on the Missouri River.

38In the summer of 1833, mob violence against the Mormons commenced at Independence, but it was not until the last day of October that mobs attacked the Saints in Kaw Township. A mob first assaulted the Whitmer Settlement, tore off the roofs of several houses, whipped the men, and terrified the women and children; two days later a mob attacked Mormons at the Blue River Settlement and took over the Rockwell ferry. On November 4, when a mob again attacked the Whitmer Settlement, a skirmish--known as the Battle above the Blue--ensued, leaving one Mormon mortally wounded, two citizens dead, and several on both sides wounded.

38On November 5, Mormons from Kaw Township rallied to assist members at Independence; state militiamen disarmed them and left them to the mercy of the armed citizens, who for several days raided all the settlements and drove the Mormons from the county. Most of the 1,200 Saints who fled withdrew north to Clay County, but some traveled south to Van Buren or east to LaFayette and other counties.

38The frightful circumstances surrounding the departure of the Saints often left them without food or adequate clothing. After scattering into Clay County, they set up emergency shelters along the Missouri River bottom. Some suffering Mormons returned to Jackson County for provisions, but were beaten and sent away.

38In the spring, the residents of Clay County were hospitable, and Joseph Smith's relief party, Zion's Camp, brought some help from the East in June. Joseph Smith disbanded the camp at Lyman Wight's temporary residence south of Liberty. At Wight's, the Mormon Prophet organized an ecclesiastical stake of the Church for the Missouri Saints and appointed David Whitmer its president; then he returned to Ohio, leaving the exiled people to hope for a better day.

Richard L. Anderson, "Jackson County in Early Mormon Descriptions," Missouri Historical Review 65 (April 1971): 270-293; Warren A. Jennings, "Zion is Fled: The Expulsion of the Mormons from Jackson County, Missouri" (Ph.D. diss., University of Florida, 1962); Max H Parkin, "A History of the Latter-day Saints in Clay County, Missouri, from 1833 to 1837" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1976); Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt (1938).>
