Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Independence, Missouri

Max H Parkin

40When the first Mormon settlers arrived at Independence in the summer of 1831 from their headquarters at Kirtland, Ohio, the community was a ragged outpost on the edge of the Missouri frontier. But this seat of Jackson County was rapidly becoming the premier equipping station for merchants who plied their trade on the Santa Fe Trail and for explorers and trappers traveling elsewhere to the far West.

40The village, 12 miles east of the state line that marked the border of the Indian Territory, had attracted a vanguard of Mormon missionaries to it the previous winter. Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, and others had arrived there before crossing over to proselyte among the Indians, or Lamanites. Conflict soon arose with the Indian agent, who expelled them from the Indian reserve.

40Traveling to Missouri, Joseph Smith selected Independence as the center of Zion (D&C 57:3). He dedicated a site for a temple a half mile west of the courthouse and appointed the Church bishop, Edward Partridge, both to superintend the Mormon gathering to Jackson County and to distribute Church land there to the faithful. At Independence, William W. Phelps published not only the Revelation received by Joseph Smith but also a Church newspaper, The Evening and the Morning Star, the nation's westernmost press. Another officer managed the Church-owned store.

40The gathering to Jackson County was vigorously promoted by Church leaders. When Mormons arrived, chiefly from the technically more advanced Northeast, they found that cultural differences distinguished them from the older settlers who had come principally from the south; not surprisingly, the two groups were uneasy with one another. Differences in speech, life-style, and other customs immediately set them apart. The eastern Mormons were shocked by the rugged individualism, backward ways, and occasional lawlessness of some western settlers. Both groups soon also became aware of marked religious differences.

40As Mormons gathered, friction mounted. By the summer of 1833, two hundred Latter-day Saints resided at Independence and over 1,000 more had located in settlements west of the village. That summer, tensions intensified as community leaders drew up a manifesto against the Mormons, affirming their intent to drive them away. Citizens complained not only about the Mormons' gathering, but also about their published plans for the land, and the poverty of some of them. They further believed that Mormons aggravated the local slave situation. Moreover, they were uneasy with Mormon claims of certain spiritual gifts and powers. While citizens were ruefully vexed over the possibility of control of the county by the Saints, the Mormons claimed innocence of any abuses.

40On July 20, 1833, about 400 aroused citizens met at the courthouse square to demonstrate violently against the Mormons. The mob tarred and feathered Bishop Partridge, tore down Phelps's printing house, and attacked the Church store. The horrified victims agreed to leave the county by the following winter and spring. But they recanted when Lieutenent Governor Lilburn W. Boggs encouraged Church leaders to protect themselves in the courts. Consequently, during fall 1833, non-Mormons reacted defiantly by brutally whipping Mormon men and terrifying Mormon villages for days. Heedless of the Mormons' unprepared condition and the inclement season, the mobs drove the Mormons northward from the county. The Saints fled Independence during a chilling downpour on November 7, 1833, and crossed the turbulent Missouri River into Clay County.

40While struggling for survival that winter in a scattered and impoverished condition, the refugees turned to the courts at Independence for redress. But the state proved powerless to provide order, and efforts at promoting civil and criminal justice were ineffectual. The Mormons themselves attempted a venture in self-help from Kirtland in the form of military and humanitarian aid called Zion's Camp, but it failed to reclaim the lost Zion.

40In time, the Mormons fostered another plan for return. In 1834 and 1835, Joseph Smith promoted the immigration of hundreds of Church members into Clay County from the East, hoping that the presence of a large number of Mormons would allow the exiles to return. The governor promised to help if petitioned. But the immigration agitated local citizens, some of whom turned violent. In 1836 they forced the Mormons to look for another home. Moving north, the Latter-day Saints sought peace in newly established Caldwell County.

James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints (1976); Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt (1938); T. Edgar Lyon, "Independence, Missouri, and the Mormons, 1827-1833," BYU Studies 13 (Autumn 1972): 10-19. >
