Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

The City of Zion Plat

Richard H. Jackson

44One of the distinctive characteristics of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is its emphasis on community. At a time when American farmers were creating individual farmsteads across the midwest, Joseph Smith taught that farmers needed to live in organized towns where "the farmer and his family . . . will enjoy all the advantages of schools, public lectures, and other meetings. His home will no longer be isolated, and his family denied the benefits of society" (Jackson, 230). Only three years after the Church was organized, the Prophet proposed a plan, known as the City of Zion Plat, for a community that could be replicated anywhere the Saints settled.

44The City of Zion Plat, sent to Church leaders in Missouri on June 25, 1833, shows a town laid out in a regular grid pattern with north-south orientation. All of the blocks are square, with unusually wide (132-foot) streets. Such broad thoroughfares would minimize congestion, enhance safety, and allow even the largest wagons to turn easily. Blocks were divided into 20 large (one-half-acre) lots to allow for gardens in the back and shrubs and trees in front, with one house to a lot, set back 25 feet from the street. Their orientation was varied so that houses faced alternate streets on each block. Each lot was to have only one house constructed on it, and all houses were to be constructed of brick or stone. The plat required that all farms, barns, and livestock be located outside the city. The plat showed a central tier of larger blocks with 32 lots per block; the two central blocks in this tier were to be used for temples and public buildings.

44The marginal notes on the City of Zion Plat indicated that it was designed to accommodate 15,000 to 20,000 people. When this size was reached, a new town was to be established far enough away to allow for enough farmland to support the residents of the new town. It is unclear whether the Prophet expected that each Mormon community would follow the City of Zion Plat. The Plat was never referred to as a Revelation, which would have given it the status of a commandment to the Saints. No community founded by Mormons ever followed it precisely.

44Kirtland, Ohio, was most like the City of Zion Plat. It had square blocks with 20 lots per block and lots oriented differently on alternate blocks. But Kirtland did not have a central tier of larger blocks. Later communities, developed under the direction of Joseph Smith, differed radically from his proposed City of Zion Plat. Far West, Missouri, platted by Mormon settlers in 1836, had four large streets that were 132 feet wide bordering a central square. The balance of the streets were 82.5 feet wide, blocks were smaller than in the City of Zion Plat, and each block was divided into four equal lots. Nauvoo, the largest Mormon city in the Midwest, had streets only 49.5 feet wide, and lots were divided, as in Far West.

44The most famous Mormon city is Salt Lake City. Established under the direction of Brigham Young after the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith, it resembled the city described in the City of Zion Plat in some respects. The blocks were each 10 acres in size, as proposed by the Prophet, but instead of 20 one-half acre lots, there were only eight large lots (of one and one-quarter acres) on each block. The streets were all 132 feet wide. Instead of a central tier of larger blocks, Young proposed one superblock of 40 acres (later reduced to 10 acres) to be used for a temple. Young added an additional 20 feet to the street width for sidewalks, and required that all homes be set back 20 feet from the property line. As with the City of Zion Plat, Young's instructions for Salt Lake City required building on alternate sides of the blocks to prevent homes from lining all sides of the blocks, and encouraged the planting of trees and gardens on each lot. Because of the larger lots of Salt Lake City, however, barns, livestock, and related activities were located on the town lots, creating a landscape of mini-farms in the city.

44Other Mormon settlements in the Intermountain West followed the same general pattern as Salt Lake City, but the actual lot, block, and street width varies greatly from town to town. While differing in detail, the general design of regular grid survey pattern, large lots and blocks, wide streets, and use of brick and stone for construction are still distinguishing features for Mormon settlements in the Intermountain West.

Richard H. Jackson, "The Mormon Village: Genesis and Antecedents of the City of Zion Plan," BYU Studies 17 (Summer 1977): 223-240; Lowry Nelson, The Mormon Village: A Pattern and Technique of Land Settlement (1954); Joel Ricks, Forms and Methods of Early Mormon Settlements in Utah and Surrounding Regions, 1847-1877 (1964).>
