Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Conflict in Missouri

Alma R. Blair

46The causes of the so-called Mormon War of 1838 are complex and controversial. In December 1836 the Missouri legislature created Daviess and Caldwell counties from Ray County. Since only Caldwell was designated as Mormon, many Missourians assumed Daviess and surrounding counties were to be non Mormon. The small groups of Saints settling in Caldwell and adjoining counties through 1837 were generally welcomed. However, in 1838, as many as 8,000 Saints migrated to Missouri. Mormons soon outnumbered Daviess County Missourians by two to one, and the 40 to 50 Missourians in DeWitt were inundated by 150 to 200 Saints. This dramatic growth led some Missouri extremists to charge that the Mormons were bent on taking over all the western counties of Missouri.

46The Mormon immigrants, mostly Yankee and Canadian, were more communal, more sympathetic toward Indians, and more antislavery (though not abolitionist) than were the individualistic southern Missourians. Missourians were intrigued with the Saints' beliefs but were apprehensive of the political and economic implications of the Latter-day Saint migration, the Saints' cohesiveness, and Joseph Smith's power as prophet and leader. Moderates predominated in both groups, but their goodwill was mixed with a wary uncertainty that might be swayed by the prejudice and bigotry of radicals. Investigation and diplomacy did resolve problems between Mormons and Missourians on several occasions, but minor incidents, fed by rumor, had the potential to become major confrontations.

46State leaders did not know how to--or did not care to--stop the violence once it erupted. By October 1838 conditions had so deteriorated that Missouri militiamen could not be counted on to follow orders and truth was hardly to be found. On October 27, Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs, more politician than statesman, issued his infamous extermination order to drive the Saints from Missouri in a time of crisis--a crisis sown by his earlier neglect.

46Explanations of the Mormons' role have usually centered on the semisecret Danites, a group dedicated to unequivocal support of the Church leadership. Danites quickly expelled dissidents from Far West after Sidney Rigdon's "Salt Sermon" of June 17, 1838. Rigdon's July 4 speech appealed to constitutional rights but implied vigilantism as he condemned "vexatious lawsuits" and threatened "extermination" of persecutors. Few Saints seemed to notice the violation of apostates' constitutional rights or that non-Mormons could also appeal to vigilantism to protect their larger community from unwanted Latter-day Saints.

46The Missourians viewed the Danites as plunderers blindly following Smith's prophecy that God had given Missouri to the Saints for their "New Jerusalem." The Saints perceived the Missourians as bigots eager to drive out Mormons and obtain their improved lands. There was some basis for such exaggerations, but a deeper problem was the shared frontier ethos, which permitted, even encouraged, violence in certain situations. When legal appeals and diplomacy failed and conflict was joined, a war mentality melded militiaman with mobber, Saint with radical Danite. Examination of the conflicts of 1838 indicate both sides burned homes, threatened towns, and confiscated goods and animals. Each group justified such Acts as military necessity, self-defense, or proper revenge.

46The so-called Mormon War ended on November 1, 1838, but persecution of the Mormons actually intensified thereafter. Homeless and with few belongings, the Latter-day Saints straggled toward Quincy, Illinois, through the winter of 1838-1839. Joseph Smith escaped his captors on April 16, 1839--one of the last Saints to leave Missouri.

46Major Incidents of the Conflict

August 6-7 The "Election Day Fight" erupted at Gallatin when Saints were forbidden to vote. Joseph Smith led 150 men to protect Adam-ondi-Ahman from rumored attacks. They surrounded Justice Adam Black's home, insisting he sign a statement vowing he would administer justice fairly. Black filed a complaint of intimidation.

August 13- Saints were ordered from Carroll County.

September 24 Smith and Lyman Wight were arrested and freed on bail pending a grand jury trial. State militia were mustered several times.

October 1-11 DeWitt Mormons, besieged by 400 vigilantes from Carroll and five other counties, finally surrendered and fled to Far West.

October 14-24 Smith and Rigdon led 400 men to Daviess County to protect the Saints. Mormons burned Gallatin and Millport and expelled almost all non-Mormons from Daviess.

October 25-27 Three Mormons and one Missourian were killed in the Battle of Crooked River as a company of Saints tried to free two men held by the militia. Exaggerated reports of deaths and of a Mormon "rebellion" led Governor Boggs to issue his extermination order.

October 30 Two hundred militia from Livingston County massacred, 18 Saints at the small settlement of Haun's Mill.

October 31 The militia surrounded Far West. Joseph Smith and about 80 leaders gave themselves up as hostages and were soon put in jail in Richmond and Liberty.

John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (1839); The History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, Missouri (1886); Richard Neitzel Holzapfel and T. Jeffery Cottle, Old Mormon Kirtland and Missouri, Historic Photographs and Guide (1991); Stephen C. LeSueur, The 1838 Mormon War in Missouri (1987); Pearl Wilcox, The Latter Day Saints on the Missouri Frontier (1972).>
