Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Expulsion from Missouri

Sean J. Cannon

48Acting on reports of Mormon violence against citizens of Daviess and Caldwell counties, Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs issued an order in the autumn of 1838 to the state militia to drive the Mormon populace from the state or kill them in the process. This order was responded to with enthusiasm by the military and mobs alike.

48The massacre of families at Haun's Mill was followed by a hasty truce on October 31 at Far West that imposed four conditions on the Mormons. Within days of a subsequent capitulation of Mormon soldiers in Daviess County, two of the four conditions of the truce had been met: Joseph Smith and other leaders surrendered, and the citizens of Far West were disarmed. Despite continued mob violence against Mormons and their property throughout the winter of 1838, the third condition, payment of war damages, was also met. It remained only for the Saints to leave the state.

48With Joseph Smith in jail, it fell to Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Edward Partridge to protect Mormon interests in Missouri. Attempts to petition the Missouri legislature to permit the Saints to remain without further reprisals were unsuccessful. The only acknowledgment of wrongdoing by the state was an appropriation of $2,000 to aid the Mormons in Daviess and Caldwell counties. After consolidating in Far West, Church members began to leave Missouri in November. As petitions to remain failed, the rest followed, fearing reprisals by mobs if they remained after February.

48Some families strayed into Iowa. Most made the 200-mile journey northeast toward Quincy, Illinois, tending to follow established roads. From personal accounts of the trek, a northern route extending eastward from Far West through Chillicothe and Monroe City to Quincy, and a southern route connecting Far West with Tinney's Grove, Keytesville, Huntsville, and Quincy, appear to have been the prevalent routes. Fear of Indian attacks in the West probably kept the move directed eastward.

48Soon only the poorest, mainly refugees from Daviess County, remained in Far West. Lack of food, clothing, and suitable shelter added to the misery of the harsh winter. Beginning in late January of 1839, a series of public meetings was held in Far West to call attention to the plight of indigent Church members. A committee of seven was formed to supervise the work of assisting them. Charles Bird established deposits of corn along the Exodus route and contracted for a ferry at Marion City, Missouri. Theodore Turley procured teams and wagons. As many families as possible were transported by boat from the port of Richmond down the Missouri River to St. Louis, then north to Quincy. By mid-February, a steady stream of Saints was traveling along the rugged roads from Far West to Palmyra, Missouri. A ferry near Marion City carried members across the Mississippi River to Quincy. The final work of the committee was to sell Church lands in Jackson County. Teams and wagons were then purchased in Illinois. Following a hasty transfer of Church headquarters from Far West to neighboring Tinney's Grove to avoid mobs, the final stage of the Exodus was under way. By mid-April, the last Saints had left Far West.

48Tremendous sacrifices of land and personal property were made as Mormons evacuated Daviess and Caldwell counties. In one instance, 40 acres of farmland were sold for a blind mare and a clock. Some families made the entire trek barefoot, while others attempted to wrap their feet in rags to protect them from the frozen earth. Despite the hospitality of some Missourians who offered their homes to refugees, many Mormons were forced to eat and sleep on the frozen ground. During February and March, 130 families found themselves stranded on the west bank of the Mississippi, opposite Quincy, unable to cross the river because of ice floes.

48Upon reaching Quincy, the Saints were met with kindness and generosity by the residents of the town. The governors of Illinois and Iowa responded with similar humanity. With the purchase of lands north of Quincy, the Mormons began to settle in Iowa and Illinois, on opposite sides of the Mississippi River. The result was the establishment of the sister cities of Nauvoo, Illinois, and Montrose, Iowa. The Exodus from Missouri constituted the first organized move of the Church from one central location to another. It prepared the Saints for an Exodus on a much larger scale eight years later.

Leland H. Gentry, "A History of the Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri from 1836 to 1839" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1965), pp. 599-657; William G. Hartley, "Almost Too Intolerable A Burden: The Winter Exodus from Missouri," Journal of Mormon History 18 (Fall 1992): 7-40; Stephen C. LeSueur, The 1838 Mormon War in Missouri (1987), pp. 219-244; National Historical Company, History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, Missouri (1885), pp. 139-143.>
