Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Nauvoo (1842)

Donald Q. Cannon

54Less than five years after its founding in 1839, Nauvoo had become one of the largest cities in Illinois. By 1842 it had grown sufficiently to warrant the drafting of a detailed map.

54Driven out of the state of Missouri, Mormons took up refuge in Quincy, Illinois. As refugees they had struggled with the decision whether to gather in one place or disperse themselves among non-Mormons. Ultimately, they decided to settle in one place. After exploration, consultation with land brokers such as Isaac Galland, and a careful consideration of their options, they chose to settle on the Illinois side of the Mississippi River at a place called Commerce, 53 miles north of Quincy.

54The Mormon settlers changed the name of this settlement from Commerce to Nauvoo, a Hebrews word meaning "beautiful place." The horseshoe bend in the Mississippi and the panorama created by the heavily wooded hills certainly made Nauvoo unusually beautiful. By the end of 1839 the Mormons had established a growing community. In October of that year they organized the first stake in Illinois, the Nauvoo Stake.

54While Nauvoo was the main settlement of the Mormons in Illinois, it was certainly not the only community founded by the Saints in the Prairie State. In fact, Joseph Smith and his followers established 17 communities in Hancock County besides Nauvoo. The most important Mormon settlements in Hancock County included Ramus (now Webster) and Lima. While there were other settlements, Nauvoo was by far the largest town founded by the Latter-day Saints in Illinois.

54Joseph Smith envisioned a city on a grand scale and one that was well planned and orderly. The city of Nauvoo covered the entire floodplain along the Mississippi River as well as a part of the prairie land above the bluffs on the east. Surveyors platted Nauvoo in 1839 with a square grid system. Within the town itself, there were 150 square blocks of four acres each. The streets ran north-south and east-west. With the exception of Main and Water streets, the streets measured 49.5 feet in width. Main Street was 57 feet wide and Water Street 60.

54As the city grew, the Saints built several important public buildings. Some of the most noteworthy include the Red Brick Store, the Seventies Hall, the Masonic Hall (Cultural Hall), and the Times and Seasons Complex.

54In January 1841, Joseph Smith received a Revelation commanding the Saints to build a temple in Nauvoo, effectively duplicating the divine instructions to ancient Israel for constructing first a movable tabernacle and then a temple. In this heavenly communication, now known as D&C 124 of the Doctrine and Covenants, members of the Church received enlightenment on the purpose of temples as well as details of construction, including a description of building materials. The temple, a magnificent edifice for its day, was erected by a people who had very few financial resources. In place of monetary donations, the building was constructed by voluntary labor. Sacrifice was the required order of the day.

54What was life like for the citizens of Nauvoo? Basically, they experienced the same kind of successes and difficulties that most 19th-century Americans did. Agriculture played a major role in the economic life of the city, with every family tending at least a household garden. Some cooperated in farming outside the city. Still others owned large farms on the prairie, where they raised wheat, oats, rye, and potatoes. Livestock included cattle, sheep, and hogs. More than one-third of the male inhabitants of Nauvoo were farmers, while another third were stonemasons, bricklayers, blacksmiths, and shoemakers. Others earned a living by gathering rags, painting portraits, selling hats, or trapping animals. A few were doctors, lawyers, dentists, or teachers.

54Recreational activities corresponded to those of small-town America in the early 19th century. Often recreation had a practical character, such as joint woodcutting efforts, quilting bees, and cooperative house and barn construction. The Mississippi River provided recreational opportunities in both summer and winter. In warm weather, boating excursions were popular, and in cold weather, the surface of the river froze and the Saints engaged in sleigh riding and skating. Other diversions in Nauvoo included lectures, theater, and singing.

54The map that appears opposite is a partial reproduction of the original map prepared by the Mormons in 1842. The 1842 map of Nauvoo was drawn from the plat of the original surveys by Gustavus Hills, a professor of music at the University of Nauvoo who lived on Mulholland Street. To conform to an act of Congress, the map was entered in the clerk's office of the District Court of Illinois. The lithography was done in New York City by J. Childs of 90 Nassau Street. Nauvoo Restoration, Inc., published a new edition of the map in 1971.

Donald Q. Cannon, "The Founding of Nauvoo," The Prophet Joseph: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith, Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, editors (1988): pp. 246-260; David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974); Janath Cannon, Nauvoo Panorama (1991); Melinda Evans Jeffress, "Mapping Historic Nauvoo," BYU Studies 32 (Winter and Spring 1991): 269-275.
