Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Hancock County, Illinois

Donald Q. Cannon

56The Latter-day Saints established several planned settlements in Hancock County, Illinois. Joseph Smith's vision of the Mormon-settlement pattern was not limited to Nauvoo, the chief city. It is important to realize that he and his followers planned settlements according to their expected function.

56Hancock County was created January 13, 1825, from 797 square miles of unorganized territory attached to Pike County, and was named for John Hancock (1737-1793). Carthage became the county seat in 1833. The Mississippi River forms the western border, while Hancock County is bounded on the north by Henderson County, on the east by McDonough County, and on the south by Adams County.

56The 17 communities that the Latter-day Saints either planned or established in Hancock County can be divided into at least five categories. The first are the major colonies of Ramus (Webster and Macedonia) and Lima. The second are the minor colonies of Plymouth, Green Plains, Golden Point, Yelrome (Tioga), and Camp Creek. A third were missionary towns where the Saints lived among non-Mormons, hoping to convert them to the faith. Such towns included Carthage, Bear Creek, La Harpe, and Fountain Green. Several small settlements surrounding Nauvoo might be called Nauvoo suburbs, including String Town, Mormon Springs, Rocky Run, Sonora, and Davis Mound. The Saints planned one settlement that never came into being. This town, to be called Warren, might be designated a "paper town," meaning that it never got beyond the planning stage. There were also important non Mormon towns in the area, such as Warsaw and Pontoosuc.

56The largest and most important settlement was Ramus. Also known as Macedonia and Webster (its present name), Ramus was located 20 miles southeast of Nauvoo, 12 miles south of La Harpe, and 8 miles northeast of Carthage. The town was established entirely by Latter-day Saints and was clearly regarded as an important settlement in the plans developed by Joseph Smith because of its size and location.

56The establishment of Ramus was largely the work of the Joel H. Johnson family, who had settled in Carthage before the selection of Commerce (Nauvoo) as the principal settlement location. As a result of missionary work performed by Joel Johnson and others, several families along Crooked Creek joined the Church. Soon residents organized the Crooked Creek Branch and selected a site for the town. The inhabitants chose the name "Ramus" for their town. The word ramus is a Latin term meaning "branch," and may indicate the strong interest of the early Saints in ancient languages. When the Mormon settlers built the city, they introduced a more extensive Church organization. What had been called the Crooked River Branch became the Ramus Stake. Hyrum Smith organized the Ramus Stake on July 15, 1840, with Joel H. Johnson as stake president.

56The members of the Ramus Stake built their own meetinghouse, an unusual practice in the early days of the Church. Most Church meetings were then held in homes or out of doors. The building erected by the Saints in Ramus may have been the earliest meetinghouse built by Latter-day Saints.

56Joseph Smith frequently visited Ramus. He stopped there en route to other destinations, held Church conferences, convened disciplinary courts, and visited relatives. Perhaps his most celebrated visits occurred in 1843, when he received two Revelation, (now D&C 130 and 131). One other significant fact emerges from the study of Ramus. It is commonly believed that all Mormons left Hancock County in 1846, as they began their Exodus to the west. In fact, some Latter-day Saints remained in Ramus until 1850.

56Carthage, a missionary town comprising mostly non-Mormons, is very important in LDS history. The county seat of Hancock County, Carthage is located at its geographic center. It is best known as the place where the martyrdoms of Joseph and Hyrum Smith occurred. On June 27, 1844, a number of men in a mob of 150 to 250 persons forced their way into Carthage Jail and murdered the two brothers, who were being held on an unsubstantiated charge of treason.

56Warsaw, the most significant non Mormon town in Hancock County, was located 16 miles south of Nauvoo. This river town became notorious as an anti Mormon community. The person most responsible for the anti Mormon activities was Thomas Sharp, editor of the Warsaw Signal. The Warsaw Signal published dozens of vitriolic anti Mormon articles during the 1840s.

56The Mormon settlements in Hancock County constituted an important Mormon presence in western Illinois between 1839 and 1846. Along with Nauvoo they were home to the vast majority of Mormons in the state of Illinois.

Donald Q. Cannon, "Spokes on the Wheel: Early Latter-day Saint Settlements in Hancock County, Illinois," Ensign 16 (February 1986): 62-68; Susan Sessions Rugh, "Conflict in the Countryside: The Mormon Settlement at Macedonia, Illinois," BYU Studies 32 (Winter and Spring 1991): 149-174; Bruce A. Van Orden, "Items of Instruction: D&C 130 and 131," Hearken O Ye People (1984), pp. 231-247; Robert M. Cochran, History of Hancock County, Illinois (1968).
