Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Illinois

Kenneth W. Godfrey

60There are several significant Mormon historical sites in Illinois. Some of the more important of these are described here.

60The Zelph Mound. On June 3, 1834, more than 200 Latter-day Saints camped near the Illinois River, one mile south of modern Valley City. While exploring what anthropologists refer to as a prehistoric middle woodland mortuary complex of the Hopewell Indian culture, these Mormons unearthed a skeleton. Joseph Smith, through a Revelation, identified the bones as the remains of a Zelph, believed by Latter-day Saints to be a white Lamanite (or Indian) who may have participated in some of the last Nephite-Lamanite battles described in the Book of Mormon.

60Quincy. When most Latter-day Saints resided in Kirtland, Ohio, and several northern Missouri communities (1831-1837), missionaries gleaned a few converts as they proselyted in Illinois. However, following the 1839 Mormon expulsion from Missouri, hundreds of exiles congregated at the Illinois River town of Quincy. Accepting the kind hospitality of the non Mormon citizenry, these Latter-day Saints found shelter in Quincy for a few months and even held a general conference there to discuss their future.

60Springfield. A Church branch was established in the state capital of Springfield in 1839 and a Church conference was held, a major event for Church members. Later, John C. Bennett, representing Nauvoo, was elected secretary of the meeting that organized the Illinois State Medical Society. In 1840, the Illinois State legislature met in Springfield and granted the Nauvoo Charter.

60Monmouth. Joseph Smith was arrested on a Missouri writ and taken to Monmouth in Warren County, Illinois, for trial on June 1, 1841. Posting bail, the Prophet and Sheriff Thomas King of Adams County made their way to Nauvoo. King became ill and was nursed back to health by Joseph and Emma Smith. A week later, June 7, 1841, Smith went to Monmouth again and was tried before a large crowd by Judge Stephen A. Douglas. Jesse Little defended the Mormon leader, and on June 10, 1841, Joseph was acquitted.

60Dixon. In June 1843, the Prophet traveled to Dixon, Illinois, to visit Emma Smith's sister, Elizabeth Wasson, and her family. While in Dixon, Sheriff Joseph Reynolds from Jackson County, Missouri, and Constable Harmon Wilson of Hancock County, Illinois, arrested the Prophet in the Wassons' yard. Illinois governor Thomas Ford had agreed to allow a warrant of extradition to Missouri to be served. The lawyer Cyrus Walker, the Whig candidate for Congress, agreed to defend the Prophet. Shortly after the arrest, Stephen Markham and William Clayton arrived and arrested Sheriff Reynolds and Constable Wilson for false imprisonment and for threatening Smith's life. Meanwhile the Nauvoo Legion, under the command of Charles C. Rich, left McQueens Mill, traveling through Ottawa and Springfield. Traveling the 200 miles in two days and 18 hours, the legion reached Dixon and their arrested leader. Escorted by the Nauvoo Legion to Nauvoo, Smith was tried and acquitted.

60Norway. In May of 1843, George P. Dykes, a missionary, found a settlement of Norwegians living in LaSalle County, Illinois. Some of these Scandinavians were receptive to his message. Within three weeks, Dykes baptized many of them, including Gudmund Haugaas, a man of strong mind, skilled in the scriptures, whom he ordained an elder. Late in October 1844, two apostles visited the branch, which was located six miles northeast of Ottawa. They purchased 100 acres of ground, laid out a city, selected a site for a chapel, and appointed Dykes as the stake president. Furthermore, they set aside 10 acres for a temple. Brigham Young designated the area as a gathering place for the Scandinavian people and said that they would build the temple on the site selected and would receive their endowments in their own language.

60Chicago. Mormon missionaries proselyted in the city during the years 1839 to 1846, and some Chicagoans joined the Church. Early in 1842, Joseph Smith received a letter from John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat. Wentworth, a New Hampshire native, had received a request from George Barstow that he contact Joseph Smith and ask him to write a sketch of his life and something about the Mormons. Smith responded to Wentworth's request and penned what has become known as the Wentworth Letter, which includes an account of the Prophet's early visions, as well as 13 succinct declarations of belief denominated "The A Of F."

60Amboy and Plano. Sixteen years after the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Jason Briggs, Zenas H. Gurley, H. D. Deam, and others helped convince Mormons living in Wisconsin, Iowa, and Illinois that Joseph Smith's son, Joseph Smith III, should assume leadership of what historian Alma Blair calls moderate Mormonism. On April 6, 1860, at a special conference in Amboy, Illinois, Smith expressed his willingness to lead the movement known today as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Plano for a time served as its headquarters. Joseph Smith III moved there and the Saints Herald, the official organ of the RLDS church, was for a time published there.

60Times and Seasons, Vols. 1-6 (Nov. 1839-Feb. 1846); History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vols. III, IV, and V (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1905); Paul M. Edwards, Our Legacy of Faith (1991).
