Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Land Ownership in Nauvoo and Vicinity

James L. Kimball, Jr.

64The City of Nauvoo was incorporated by the General Assembly of Illinois in December of 1840. Its charter delineated boundaries that made Nauvoo, territorially, the largest city in the state. Roughly six square miles, the city contained 3,733 acres located on a peninsula in the northwestern corner of Hancock County, Illinois. Only a small portion of this was originally divided into lots. Encircled by the Mississippi River on three sides, the area was naturally divided into two geographic regions. From the river's edge the flat sloped gently upward some 65 feet to a bluff, which in turn stretched eastward to the prairie. The northern part of Nauvoo was interspersed with several ravines, springs, and streams, while some 15 or 20 acres on the central western edge was considered wet and swampy. Several large and small thickets of trees speckled both flat and bluff. All these elements lent to the entire area an unusually pleasing aspect. One can easily comprehend why Joseph Smith named the city Nauvoo after a Hebrews term connoting "pleasant." Not surprisingly, the entire peninsula upon which Nauvoo developed had been purchased by speculators by the mid 1830s and three town sites laid out to lure prospective buyers.

64Between 1839 and 1846 some 16,000 converts gathered at the site at the behest of their prophet-leader Joseph Smith. To aid the newcomers, many of whom were sick and poverty-stricken, Joseph Smith purchased 660 acres from non-Mormons Hugh and William White, Isaac Galland, and Horace Hotchkiss. These lands were then resold in parcels of various sizes to the new arrivals. Additions to the newly plotted town extended the borders of the newly plotted community to the east upon land included in the original charter. Located on the bluffs, these additions were known by the name of their original owner or developer. The largest additions were made by the family of Phineas Kimball of Orange County, Vermont. He and his sons, Ethan and Hiram, were responsible for three additions. Hiram, who acted as a resident agent for the family, was easily the most prosperous and influential. Daniel H. Wells also held sizable tracts of land and was active in Nauvoo governmental functions. His addition to Nauvoo was adjacent to those of the Kimballs. Other additions on the bluffs of the city were Davidson Hibbard (two), Hyrum Smith (two), heirs of James Robison (two), Hugh Herringshaw and Edward Thompson (two), Benjamin Warrington (one), William Spears (one), and George W. Robinson (one).

64Nauvoo citizens were natives of almost every state in the Union, Canada, and the British Isles. Nearly one-third of the emigrants spoke with a British accent, but German-speaking Saints also held regular church meetings. Native Norwegian converts came from Norway, Illinois, and at least 21 African Americans resided in Nauvoo, contributing to a diverse ethnic mix. Adults over age 20 tended to be natives of New England and those under 20 of New York and Illinois.

64Generally, antebellum towns and villages did not exceed 2,500 in population. This was particularly true in Illinois, where most settlements rarely surpassed 1,000 occupants. After only a few years, however, Nauvoo jumped from a few families to roughly 3,000 people, equaling in size the capital, Springfield, and other comparable communities of the time such as Quincy, Alton, and Peoria. Moreover, given the imperfect and impressionistic nature of 19th-century census data, there remains a remote possibility that from 1843 to 1844, Nauvoo may have rivaled Chicago, the most populous city in the state.

64Since Nauvoo's economy did not have much in the way of manufacturing, transportation, or marketing, its chief business item was real estate. Buying, selling, and trading land was a popular business in Nauvoo beginning in 1839.

64Collecting money to pay for the land was a problem. At the first general conference held in the Nauvoo area, Lyman Wight preached a sermon encouraging the Saints to pay for the land they had received so that the Church might be in a position to pay its debts to Isaac Galland and others.

64Most of the lots in Nauvoo consisted of one square acre. This large plot was designed to provide space for a home as well as a garden large enough to provide for some of the family's food supply. Individuals also owned farms outside of the city on the prairie, including the Joseph Smith farm. The cemetery was located adjacent to the city limits but outside of the territory included in the Nauvoo Charter.

James B. Allen, Trials of Discipleship: The Story of William Clayton, a Mormon (1987); Robert B. Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
