Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Divergent Paths From Nauvoo

Steven L. Shields

66For 20 years after Joseph Smith's death in 1844, the church that he founded was in a state of fragmentation. Nearly 30 different individuals or groups contended with Brigham Young for its leadership. By 1865, six distinct church organizations remained, continuing to the present.

66Sidney Rigdon, an early contender with Brigham Young for leadership at Nauvoo, had been a member of the First Presidency. Rigdon perceived himself to be similar to a vice president. When a special conference in August 1844 refused to grant him guardianship over the Church, Rigdon worked privately to gain supporters, eventually settling in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, designating himself president of a reorganized church. Although Rigdon's church essentially fell apart in 1846, there was a revival in the 1860s, which continued briefly after Rigdon's death in 1876.

66The heritage of Rigdon's church continues in The Church of Jesus Christ (Monongahela, Pennsylvania), first organized by William Bickerton in 1862 at Greenock (or Green Oak), Pennsylvania. Bickerton was an 1845 Rigdon convert who was left without a church when Rigdon's group fell apart. Bickerton and his associates organized branches and held conferences for several years prior to the official organization of this church, which in 1994 has some 15,000 members and is involved in missionary work overseas.

66 James J. Strang was Brigham Young's most serious contender in 1844. Strang claimed that, in addition to possessing a letter appointing him to be the next prophet, he was ordained by an angel when Joseph Smith died. Strang successfully persuaded a number of Nauvoo residents as well as several branches of the church to follow his leadership. Strang's several thousand followers located near Burlington, Wisconsin, but later moved to Beaver Island in Lake Michigan. Shot by two disgruntled followers, Strang died in 1856, leaving his church without a prophet. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints remains located mainly in the Burlington, Wisconsin, area, where there are two different buildings used by different groups of Strang's 200 or 300 followers.

66Alpheus Cutler began the trek from Nauvoo to the West but remained in western Iowa with several other families. In 1853 Cutler claimed he had received a vision telling him that the church should be reorganized. Followers established a community at Manti, Iowa, where they remained until the late 1860s, when they moved to Clitherall, Minnesota. In the 1920s, a mission was sent to Independence, Missouri, where the church, called The Church of Jesus Christ and numbering about 30 members, is headquartered today.

66The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS) emerged out of a grass roots movement of the 1850s. Unwilling to follow Brigham Young's leadership, several local leaders looked to others for prophetic leadership, such as that offered by James J. Strang and William Smith (brother of the slain prophet), but were disappointed each time. Joseph Smith III was eventually persuaded to take the leadership of this group of Latter Day Saints after experiencing what he called "a power not my own." At a conference at Amboy, Illinois, in 1860, the church was officially reorganized.

66The Reorganized Church was headquartered at Nauvoo, Illinois, until 1866, when Smith moved to Plano, Illinois. Headquarters were moved to Lamoni, Iowa, in 1881, and finally to Independence, Missouri, in 1921, where it remains today. The RLDS Church is the second largest of the Latter Day Saint churches, with about 250,000 members.

66After the death of Joseph Smith, a group of unaffiliated branches located in and near Bloomington, Illinois, concluded, after years of examination, that all the other leaders were in error and looked to Granville Hedrick for leadership. Hedrick and his band returned to Independence, Missouri, in 1867 and bought land in the area where land had been purchased under Joseph Smith's direction in 1831. The Church of Christ is today headquartered in Independence, Missouri, and claims about 3,000 members.

66Other would-be leaders included William McLellin, James Brewster, Hazen Aldrich, and Zadoc Brooks, who each attempted to establish their headquarters in the Kirtland (Ohio) Temple. The Lyman Wight colony in Texas was quick to join with the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints under the leadership of Joseph Smith III. William Smith, brother of the slain prophet, established his own church organization but eventually united with the Reorganized Church. Charles B. Thompson led a community at Preparation, Iowa, having started his work in St. Louis, Missouri. The community came apart in 1858 when Thompson was accused of misappropriating community resources.

66Through the years prior to Joseph Smith's death, and continuing to the present day, the Latter Day Saint movement has been touched by schismatic tendencies. Occasionally a schism provides serious concern for leaders and believers of the organized churches; most often, though, these unique schismatic movements provide a colorful footnote in the broader history of the movement at large.

66Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); Richard P. Howard, The Church Through the Years, Vol.1 (1992); Steven L. Shields, Divergent Paths of the Restoration, 4th ed.(1982); Steven L. Shields, The Latter Day Saint Churches: An Annotated Bibliography (1989).
