Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Nauvoo Tourist Sites

Milton V. Backman

68For seven years (1839-1846), Nauvoo was the major gathering place for Latter-day Saints. Following their expulsion from western Missouri, many of these religious refugees settled along an extended horseshoe bend of the Mississippi River. As converts from many other parts of the United States and from Canada and Great Britain gathered there, the population increased rapidly. By 1845 there were almost 12,000 inhabitants in Nauvoo, making the community one of the fastest growing cities in Illinois. The decline of this population was even more rapid than its spectacular increase. Because of pressures from mobs, in 1846 the city was virtually abandoned. A large percentage of the residents left to seek another asylum in the Great Basin of North America.

68When Latter-day Saints arrived at the bend of the Mississippi, they found a few settlers living in and near a community called Commerce. Earlier the Sac and Fox Indians called that place Quashquema, after their chief. The Prophet Joseph Smith renamed it Nauvoo, which in Hebrews means "beautiful place." Following the Exodus of most Latter-day Saints from the city, a secular group of about 280 French Icarians (followers of Etienne Cabet) established a temporary experiment there in communal living. Then German, Swiss, English, and Irish settlers arrived; these European immigrants planted vineyards and established a wine industry. In 1874, sisters of the Benedictine order started a school that eventually became St. Mary's Academy and is currently a residential school for teenage girls. Meanwhile, some of the old wine cellars were converted into caves for aging cheese, and today Nauvoo is known for its production of blue cheese.

68In the twentieth century, descendants of early Latter-day Saint settlers returned and restored many homes, shops, and other structures. Between 1909 and 1917, the RLDS Church (Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints) purchased the Nauvoo House, Homestead, and Mansion House (the latter two were homes where Joseph Smith lived), and these purchases led to the recent formation of the Joseph Smith Historic Center. This center includes these buildings, a Visitors' Center, the Smith Family Cemetery, and Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store.

68While the RLDS Church was establishing a historic center in the south section of Nauvoo, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) began purchasing and restoring other properties in Nauvoo. Between 1937 and 1961, Wilford Wood, a resident of Bountiful, Utah, purchased most of the temple site; in 1954, James LeRoy Kimball, a Salt Lake physician, bought his great-grandfather's residence, which was made into a summer home. In 1962, Dr. Kimball became the first president of the Nauvoo Restoration, Inc. (NRI), and was charged with the mission "to acquire, restore, protect, and preserve, for the education and benefit of its members and the public, all or a part of the old city of Nauvoo." During the ensuing 23 years, NRI restored 31 structures.

68Tourism officials consider Nauvoo to be "the largest and finest preservation site in mid-America." In the two visitors' centers, audiovisual presentations relate the early history of Nauvoo, and various displays portray life in the early 1840s. In the LDS Visitors' Center, a sculptured relief map shows Nauvoo and vicinity as it was in the late summer of 1845. Shops, residences, and other buildings have been placed on a relief map that identifies roads, hills, gullies, orchards, empty lots, rivers, islands, and streams. A two-minute sound-and-light show includes a description of the economy of Nauvoo (such as agricultural areas and practices, shops, and mills), the river (indicating the practical as well as the aesthetic benefits of the Mississippi), and other Mormon settlements in Hancock County. Information used to prepare this map is in a computer in the Lands and Records Office located in the LDS Visitors' Center. With the assistance of personnel serving in that center, visitors may secure information on the early settlers and property holdings in Hancock County during the early 1840s.

68South of the LDS Visitors' Center is a sculpture garden that features statues celebrating stages and roles in women's lives. On the hill southeast of that center is the temple site, which includes gardens and a nine-foot bronze replica of the Nauvoo Temple.

68Approximately two dozen buildings have been restored that are currently open to the public without charge. These buildings include homes, shops, stores, and meeting halls. All of these buildings have been restored with original or period furnishings. In many homes and shops there are daily demonstrations that enable tourists to better understand the skills of the early 19th century.

68Many homes of the 1840s have been partly restored and are residences for misionary guides.

Janath R. Cannon, Nauvoo Panorama (1991); Richard Neitzel Holzapfel and T. Jeffery Cottle, Old Mormon Nauvoo, 1839-1846 (1990); James L. Kimball, Jr., "J. LeRoy Kimball, Nauvoo Restoration Pioneer: A Tribute," BYU Studies 32 (Winter and Spring 1991); Kenneth E. Stobaugh, "The Development of the Joseph Smith Historic Center in Nauvoo," BYU Studies 32 (Winter and Spring 1991): 33-40.
