Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

From Nauvoo to Council Bluffs

Stanley B. Kimball

70The approximately 1,300-mile-long trek from Nauvoo to the Great Salt Lake valley occurred in two stages: the 265-mile march across Iowa in 1846, and the 1,032-mile journey across the plains of Nebraska and Wyoming into Utah in 1847. The Iowa portion of the trail was used relatively little, mainly by the Mormons fleeing Illinois in 1846, and by some other Mormons departing from Keokuk, Iowa, in 1853. The trail was again used in 1856 and 1857 by seven Mormon handcart companies that left from Iowa City, intersecting the 1846 Mormon trail at what is now Lewis in Cass County. Thousands of other Mormons crossed Iowa as late as 1863 both on variant spurs of the 1846 trail and on different trails. All trails, however, intersected the route of 1846 in western Iowa.

70Iowa consists mainly of rolling lowlands and is less visually dramatic than Nebraska, Wyoming, and Utah. Distinguishing natural features in Iowa consist largely of streams and rivers. These water sources largely fix the route of the trail, and along them many important events of Mormon history took place. The most important of the streams and rivers are Sugar Creek, Des Moines River, Fox River, Chariton River, Shoal Creek, Locust Creek, Medicine Creek, Weldon River, Grand River, Nodaway River, Nishnabotna River, and, of course, the Missouri River.

70In Iowa the trail generally followed primitive territorial roads as far as Bloomfield in Davis County; then it followed vague Indian and trading trails along ridges from one water source to another, ending at an Indian agent's settlement on the Missouri River at Council Bluffs. Little remains of the old trail in Iowa; time and the plow have erased almost all of it.

70Because Mormons left Nauvoo in February 1846, earlier than really necessary, and because they were ill-prepared and inexperienced in moving large groups of people, the pioneers suffered more crossing Iowa in 1846 than they did traveling through Nebraska, Wyoming, and Utah. The skills acquired and lessons learned in Iowa, however, later served them well on the trail and in the Great Basin. The first companies probably totaled about 500 wagons and 3,000 people.

70The trail of the pioneers of 1846 set out from Parley Street in Nauvoo. Arriving on the other side of the Mississippi River, they proceeded west some seven miles to the Sugar Creek staging ground. Thence they traveled by a variety of roads to Bonaparte, where they forded the Des Moines near the bridge on present-day Highway 79, where a marker commemorates this fact.

70The wagons continued west, crossing Big Indian Creek and the Fox River, to Bloomfield. From Bloomfield they bore toward modern Cincinnati. Three miles into Wayne County is Locust Creek, along which William Clayton composed the words to the noted Mormon hymn "Come, Come, Ye Saints."

70The pioneers next set up an important shelter at Garden Grove, the first permanent camp for the benefit of the Mormons who would follow. North and west the wagons reached Mt. Pisgah, which became the second permanent camp. Here an official Iowa state marker and an LDS kiosk tell the story of Mt. Pisgah.

70The wagons proceeded west to present-day Bridgewater. The modern Mormon Trail Park and the best Mormon trail ruts in Iowa are found near here. From Bridgewater they traveled west to present-day Lewis. Near Lewis, the Handcart Trail of 1856 from Iowa City intersected the Iowa trail of 1846. From Lewis the pioneers pressed west to Council Bluffs. The Mormons finally reached present-day Council Bluffs in June. From there the Mormon Battalion marched to war with Mexico. By September, the remaining Mormons had crossed the Missouri River and made another permanent camp at Winter Quarters, present-day North Omaha. Many Mormons remained in Council Bluffs for years.

Stanley B. Kimball, "The Mormon Trail Network in Iowa, 1838-1868," BYU Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 417-430; Stanley B. Kimball, Historic Sites and Markers along the Mormon and other Great Western Trails (1988); Elden J. Watson, editor, Manuscript History of Brigham Young: 1846-1847 (1971).
