Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

The Missouri River Valley

Gail Geo. Holmes

74The breadth and depth of Mormon farming and community development in southwest Iowa, 1846-1853, created a watershed in the history of the Middle Missouri Valley. From the early 1700s the region had sustained little except Indian fur trade with the French, then with the Spanish, and finally with the Americans.

74Delays that hampered the 1846 Mormon Exodus from western Illinois and southeast Iowa to Salt Lake Valley proved a blessing to southwest Iowa. Mormons cut roads through its beautiful loess hills and built bridges and ferries over streams in Iowa and Nebraska. Thousands of acres of sod were broken. The Saints developed productive farms and established schools, churches, mills, blacksmith shops, large supply houses, hotels, newspapers, and related businesses.

74Latter-day Saints organized town and county governments for the 16,000 to 18,000 original refugees. Several thousand more immigrants arrived from other parts of the United States and Canada. Additionally, more than 8,000 came from Europe. Mormons held elections, organized courts, and kept careful property records long before a federal land office was opened in Council Bluffs in 1853. In 1848 all southwest Iowa became Pottawattamie County. Soon, other counties were carved out of Pottawattamie.

74In 1849, 10,000 California Gold Rushers opened a huge market for the more than 80 southwest Iowa communities. In succeeding years, steamboats brought merchandise to Emigrant Landing at Council Point to supply mercantile houses booming in Kanesville and other towns. Dozens of LDS communities traded grain, wood, and leather products besides engaging in milling, blacksmithing, tinsmithing, and wagon making.

74Three Indian tribes occupied the Middle Missouri Valley when the first LDS wagon trains arrived at the Missouri River on June 14, 1846. Chiefs of about 2,250 Pottawatomie-Ottawa-Chippewas, in five scattered villages of southwest Iowa, had agreed just weeks before in Washington, D.C., to sell their lands and to move to the northeastern part of Kansas territory. About 1,300 Omaha and 930 Oto-Missouri Indians lived west of the Missouri River in five or six villages clustered near the confluence of the Platte and Missouri rivers. U.S. Indian agents at Bellevue and Point aux poules did not object to the amicable LDS presence, nor did the Indians themselves.

74LDS officials, before continuing west, seem to have left city and county records in Iowa. A few of these carefully handwritten records are still available in Pottawattamie County. Significant gaps exist, however, in city and county records throughout southwest Iowa. When the Mormons left, town and even street names were changed by new owners, new squatters, claim jumpers, and, in most instances, new officials. There followed even periods of no government at all. As a result, city and county governments today cannot find consistent records from before 1853.

74A few communities such as Honey Creek, Macedonia, Magnolia, and Pisgah retain their original LDS names. Still waiting to be plotted on maps are such staging communities as Bertrand, Brownell's Grove, Davis Camp, Highland Grove, Kidd's Grove, McClellin's Camp, Nishnabotna, Perkins' Camp, Pleasant Valley, Shirts' Branch, Springville, Unionville, and West Boyer.

74Communities that may have been known by two names include Allred's Camp/South Pigeon, Big Bend/Browning's Camp, North Keg Creek/Upper Crossing Keg Creek, Potter's Camp/Cutler's Camp, Dutch Hollow/Studyville, and Trading or Traders Point/Point aux poules. There may have been other LDS communities with more than one name. Occupied by Latter-day Saints but not established by them were Point aux poules, Old Agency, and probably Whipple. String Town may have been only a four-mile straggle of buildings south along the road from Kanesville to Council Point.

74Some LDS settlements must have been very small, such as Plum Hollow, Green Hollow, Dutch Hollow/Studyville, and Dawsonburg, a cluster of communities within a radius of about six miles, 35 miles south of Kanesville. Unlike most LDS towns, Big Grove was not renamed (Oakland) until 1881 and Plum Hollow (Thurman) until 1890.

74It is unlikely that the 98 presently known names of LDS communities constitute a complete list. Pioneer letters and journals indicate substantial movement away from wagon train organization, beginning in 1846. Families and individuals easily moved from community to community while pursuing free enterprise.

74Of the several hundred Mormons who remained in or returned to Iowa, some objected to the collection of taxes or to punishments for immorality. Others disagreed over who should direct missionary work among Indians. Some left their LDS communities in order to live in Point aux poules or Old Agency. Others broke with the Church and built their own settlements, such as Manti and Preparation Canyon. Others waited for Mormon Battalion husbands or sweethearts. A few induced returning veterans to remain rather than move to Utah. Some went west to Utah and then returned. Migrating east or west, these pioneers wrote new pages of trans-Mississippi history.

Ruth Daugherty, Unpublished Notes, Papers, and Maps of Harrison and Shelby, Iowa, Counties (1960-1992); Frontier Guardian (Kanesville, Iowa), Orson Hyde, editor (1849-1852); David C. Mott, Abandoned Towns, Villages & Post Offices of Iowa (1973); George M. Hilton, Maps and Survey Notes of Original (1851-1852) Government Survey of Pottawattamie County, Iowa, Pottawattamie County Engineer's Office, Council Bluffs, Iowa [1950s].
