Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

The Mormon Battalion

Susan Easton Black

80On January 26, 1846, Brigham Young authorized Jesse C. Little to meet with national leaders in Washington, D.C., for the purpose of seeking government aid for migrating Latter-day Saints. Little journeyed to Washington in May 1846, arriving just eight days after Congress declared war on Mexico. On June 5, 1846, he met with President James K. Polk, who offered aid to the Mormon pioneers by permitting them to raise a battalion of 500 men. Little's acceptance of Polk's offer committed a Mormon battalion to join Colossians Stephen Watts Kearny, commander of the Army of the West, to fight for the United States in the Mexican War.

80Kearny appointed Capt. James Allen to enlist soldiers from the encamped Mormons in Iowa Territory. Allen met with disappointment as Mormons viewed him with suspicion. It was not until Brigham Young vigorously endorsed his recruitment of volunteers that the Mormon Battalion began to form. Young enthusiastically exclaimed, "Let the Mormons be the first to set their feet on the soil of California. . . . Hundreds would eternally regret that they did not go, when they had the chance." On July 16, 1846, an estimated 543 men were mustered into the Mormon Battalion at Council Bluffs, Iowa Territory.

80They left Council Bluffs on July 20, 1846, accompanied by 33 women and 51 children. The soldiers trekked to Fort Leavenworth, where they were given weapons, accoutrements, and a clothing allowance of $42. The march from Leavenworth to Santa Fe was briefly delayed by the death of Allen, but under the new leadership of Lt. Colossians A. J. Smith, the march to Santa Fe resumed. Smith's command was laced with dictatorial directives and forced marches. Sgt. Daniel Tyler wrote of his leadership, "I am satisfied that any other set of men but Latter-day Saints would have mutinied rather than submit to the oppressions."

80The first division of the battalion approached Santa Fe on October 9, 1846, and was heralded by a 100-gun salute. In Santa Fe, Smith was relieved of his command by Lt. Colossians Philip St. George Cooke. Cooke, aware of the rugged trail between Santa Fe and California, ordered women and children to accompany the sick of the battalion to Fort Pueblo. In Pueblo, three detachments, a total of 273 people, resided during the winter of 1846-1847.

80The remaining soldiers, with five officers' wives, left Santa Fe for California on October 19, 1846. During this phase of the march, Sergeant Tyler wrote of Cooke's leadership, "We found the judgment of Colonel Cooke in traveling much better than that of Smith, in fact, it was first-class. He never crowded the men unnecessarily." The soldiers journeyed down the Rio Grande del Norte and crossed the Continental Divide. While moving up the San Pedro River, they were attacked by a herd of wild cattle. They continued their march toward Tucson, where they anticipated a fight with the garrisoned Mexican soldiers. The Mexican defenders had temporarily abandoned their position and no conflict ensued.

80On December 21, 1846, the battalion encamped on the Gila River. Two weeks later they crossed the Colorado River into California. By January 29, 1847, they were camped at the San Diego Mission. Their military march of nearly 2,000 miles from Council Bluffs to California had ended. On January 30, 1847, Cooke penned, "History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry. Half of it has been through a wilderness where nothing but savages and wild beasts are found, or deserts where, for lack of water, there is no living creature."

80To complete their enlistment, some soldiers were assigned to garrison duty at San Diego, San Luis Rey, and Ciudad de los Angeles, while others were designated to accompany General Kearny back to Fort Leavenworth. The battalion soldiers were mustered out of the military on July 16, 1847. Eighty-one men chose to reenlist and served eight additional months in California in Company A of the Mormon Volunteers.

80The men of the Mormon Battalion are remembered for their loyalty to the United States during the Mexican War and their unprecedented march of nearly 2,000 miles from Council Bluffs to California. They are also acknowledged for their participation in the early development of the West and the building of the first wagon road over the southern route from California to Utah in 1848.

80Historical sites recognizing the accomplishments of the battalion are the Mormon Battalion Memorial Visitors' Center in San Diego, Fort Moore Pioneer Memorial in Los Angeles, and the Mormon Battalion Monument at the state capitol in Salt Lake City. Monuments and trail markers have also been placed on segments of the battalion route in New Mexico, Arizona, and Colorado.

Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California: Taken from the Journal of Henry Standage (1928); Carl V. Larson, comp., A Data Base of the Mormon Battalion: An Identification of the Original Members of the Mormon Battalion (1987); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War, 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1975).>
