Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Mormon Trail

Wayne L. Wahlquist

86The Mormon migration to the Mountain West began with the expulsion of Mormons from Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1846. The first refugees left the state in early February, and the last were driven out in September. An estimated 12,000 to 16,000 people evacuated Nauvoo and its hinterland and found themselves scattered across Iowa during 1846 and 1847. Upon reaching the Missouri River, they began congregating at the present site of Council Bluffs, which they named Kanesville in honor of Colossians Thomas L. Kane, who had befriended them earlier and who then visited them on the Missouri. A larger number moved to the west side of the river. After examining several locales, a town site--Winter Quarters--was surveyed on the bluff above the west bank of the Missouri in what is now Florence in North Omaha. Here the majority built what shelters they could to enable them to survive the coming winter. Nearly 4,000 spent the winter in cabins, caves, or sod hovels. Approximately 400 did not survive because of inadequate shelter, winter cold, and an outbreak of cholera. An even larger number, approximately 10,000, were scattered in camps across Iowa. Winter Quarters served not only as a temporary hearth, where Mormon leaders could collect their flock and prepare for the long trek to the Salt Lake Valley, but also as the primary launching site for Mormon immigrants for the next several years.

86Under Brigham Young, a pioneer company of 148 persons left Winter Quarters on April 14, 1847, to establish a route to the Salt Lake Valley, later to be followed by thousands of others. En route, 19 men left the company on other assignments and 35 persons were added. The company moved west to the Platte River and then continued along its north bank. A well-traveled route, the Oregon Trail, followed the river on its south side. At one point the pioneer company debated crossing the Platte and following the Oregon Trail, but determined that for the thousands to follow, it would be better to keep the Mormon Trail on the north side to minimize contact with Oregon-bound immigrants.

86At first, distances were estimated; later they were measured by tying a piece of cloth to a wagon wheel and counting the revolutions. That task proved to be too laborious, and an odometer was rigged that would measure distances automatically. Not only did the pioneer company measure distances (1,031 miles between Winter Quarters and Salt Lake City); they also calculated longitude and latitude coordinates of significant points along the trail and used a barometer to determine elevations. They also recorded vegetation and rock strata through which they passed.

86The Mormon Trail followed the North Platte as far as Fort Laramie, Wyoming. Here the pioneer company crossed the river and followed the Oregon Trail to Fort Bridger. At difficult river crossings the company constructed ferries and left small contingents to operate the ferries for immigrant trains that would follow. At Fort Bridger the trails split, the Oregon Trail turning northwestward and the Mormon Trail following the Hastings cutoff southwestward to the Salt Lake Valley, the route pioneered by the ill-fated Donner-Reed company the year before.

86Although the staging areas for beginning the trek west varied, the route established by the initial pioneer company became the highway for approximately 62,000 Mormons who migrated to Salt Lake Valley before the completion of the railroad in 1869. In 1849, a revolving trust--the Perpetual Emigration Fund--was established to assist refugees scattered through Iowa and Missouri to emigrate to Utah. It soon became the means of assisting thousands of European converts to immigrate whose continual influx meant that the Mormon Trail remained in use until the completion of the railroad.

86An innovative transportation system was introduced in 1856 when several companies traversed the entire distance with handcarts. At first this seemed to be the fastest and cheapest method of travel. But when two companies that left too late in the season were caught by winter snows in Wyoming, 222 people perished from exposure. By 1860, handcarts had been abandoned.

86The Mormon Trail has become something of an icon in Mormon culture. The shared experience of the Great Trek to the Salt Lake Valley helped to bond and solidify several generations of Mormons, who still feel a strong kinship with their pioneer ancestors. Mormon hymns, folk songs, stage productions, and pioneer day celebrations help to engrave the Mormon Trail experience deep into the Mormon psyche.

LeRoy Hafen and Ann W. Hafen, Handcarts to Zion: 1856-1860 (1960); Stanley B. Kimball, Historic Resource Study: Mormon Pioneer National Historic Trail (1991); Brigham H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vol. 3 (1930); Wayne L. Wahlquist, "Settlement Processes in the Mormon Core Area 1847-1890" (Ph.D. diss., University of Nebraska, 1974).>
