Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Expansion Along the Wasatch Front

Dean L. May

88On July 22, 1847, the pioneer company of Latter-day Saints colonizing the Rocky Mountain West began settlement of what geographers now call the Wasatch Oasis, a series of narrow crescents of arable land rimming the western flanks of the Wasatch Mountains from present-day Brigham City southward to Nephi. The first site occupied was the northeastern part of the Salt Lake Valley. On July 22, 1847, before Brigham Young himself had entered "The Valley" (as they then and forever after called it), the pioneer company began plowing and planting. Within a few weeks they had explored the valley and its surrounding canyons, participated in a ritual rebaptism to sanctify their new beginning in the West, constructed a fort with adobe walls on three sides to enclose the rustic log cabins they were building, surveyed a city of 135 ten-acre blocks, harvested salt from the lake, put a whipsaw into operation, built a boat, hewn out a canyon road, set up a blacksmith shop, and established an adobe yard. By December 7, they had planted 2,000 acres of fall wheat, looking to the need to feed the nearly 2,000 people who already had arrived, as well as those who would be coming the next season. Great Salt Lake City, as it was then called, had been founded--the first Mormon settlement in the Great Basin, the future capital of Utah, and still a mecca for Mormons throughout the world.

88The new arrivals immediately began seeking sites to settle both north and south of the city along the Wasatch Front. On September 29, 1847, Peregrine Sessions claimed land in the area that became Bountiful, directly north of Salt Lake City, making it the second oldest Mormon settlement in the region. The next year others moved farther south in the Salt Lake Valley to settle Sugarhouse, Millcreek, and South Cottonwood; and north, occupying favorable sites at Centerville, Farmington, and Ogden, the latter including lands along the Weber River recently purchased from mountain man Miles Goodyear.

88The most dramatic aspect of 1850 settlement was the further spread into the Utah valley, the site of six of nine new colonies founded that year--Alpine, American Fork, Lehi City, Payson, Pleasant Grove, and Springville. The other three were near already established towns between Salt Lake City and Ogden.

88The year 1851 represented the apogee and the culmination of the Wasatch Front period of settlement. In that year, 15 new settlements were established, far more than in any year until 1859. They included Brigham City and Nephi, framing Wasatch Front expansion on the north and on the south. Also in that year the southern Utah outposts of Parowan and Cedar City were founded.

88It was common, when a particular need required movement far beyond the advancing line of settlement, for Church leaders to resort to the central planning of a new colony and then call or assign leaders and settlers to launch the enterprise. Salt Lake City (1847), Provo and Manti (1849), and Parowan (1851) were founded through such means. But as soon as the new colony was established, satellite towns grew up spontaneously in each vicinity until all available sites were filled.

88This technique of settlement, often noted and described as typical of Mormon colonization, was employed along the Wasatch Front only in founding Salt Lake City and the first of the Utah valley settlements, Provo. Salt Lake City, was, of course, the mother colony for the whole Great Basin region. In the Utah valley, Church leaders fostered a concerted effort because they feared (with good reason) Native American resistance. Elsewhere along the Wasatch Front, the stream of immigrants filled arable spaces spontaneously, without resort to planned and called colonization.

88The rate of new foundings was strong and sustained until 1852, when the number of new colonies each year declined dramatically for a seven-year period, to surge again in 1859. Two Mormon colonies had been founded in Utah in 1847, six in 1848, nine each in 1849 and 1850, 15 in 1851, and between one and four each year until 1859, when 26 new colonies were established, a consequence of increasing population pressures pushing them beyond the safe haven of the well-established Wasatch Front to the Cache, Heber, and Pahvant valleys and to southeastern Utah.

Eugene E. Campbell, Establishing Zion: The Mormon Church in the American West, 1847-1869 (1988); Milton R. Hunter, Brigham Young the Colonizer (1973); Richard H. Jackson, editor, The Mormon Role in the Settlement of the West (1978); Wayne L. Wahlquist, "Settlement Processes in the Mormon Core Area, 1847-1890" (Ph.D. diss., University of Nebraska, 1974).>
