Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Relations With the U.S. Military

Audrey M. Godfrey

98Unlike many frontier settlers who asked for military protection, Mormon settlers resisted the establishment of army forts in their territory, seeing such efforts as an encroachment upon their lands, government, and freedom. Through the years, Mormon-military relations have evolved from antagonism to accommodation.

98Church leaders welcomed U.S. Army topographical engineers who came to Utah to chart roads for emigrants in 1849 and 1853. Capt. Howard Stansbury and Lt. John W. Gunnison received cordial treatment but carried back warnings from Mormon ecclesiastical authorities that further efforts involving military interference in the territory would be met with force.

98The first large contingent of federal soldiers arrived in 1854, under Lt. Colossians Edward J. Steptoe, to investigate the possibility of constructing a road from Salt Lake City to California. Liaisons between soldiers and local women resulted in a charge by the Mormons that the men brought depravity into their Victorian communities, a charge revived three years later when U.S. troops returned.

98With each attempt to extend federal influence into the territory, Mormons' stubborn adherence to sovereignty sent government appointees back to the East carrying tales about the debauchery of polygamists and about the unpatriotic climate. Finally, President James Buchanan, determined to seat a non Mormon governor by force if necessary, ordered an army to accompany his appointee, Alfred Cumming, precipitating the Utah War in 1857 and 1858.

98A severe, early winter and Mormon resistance forced the army, under the leadership of Genesis Albert Sidney Johnston, into a winter bivouac, Camp Scott, near Fort Bridger. Before spring weather allowed movement, a peace commission had negotiated a pardon of the Mormons. The army then established Camp Floyd in Cedar Valley, 40 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. No battles ensued, but neither did agreement.

98For three years the army remained in Utah, virtually confined to its barren valley except for forays to prevent Indian attacks, guard the immigrant road, make a show of force when a U.S. court was convened in Provo, or, most important, survey and build existing and new roads for travelers. As the Civil War threatened, regiments were withdrawn to service in other areas, and the fort was disbanded in 1861. When the military left, $4 million in stores and livestock was sold to local buyers for less than $100,000. Some businesses that had serviced Camp Floyd continued to operate, further boosting the local economy.

98A year later, Colossians Patrick Connor led his California Volunteers into Utah and located them in full view of the Mormon capital on its eastern bench, founding Fort Douglas. Immediately, conflict developed. The colonel believed the army's role to be more than a directive given him to protect the mail route. He believed that continued surveillance of the Mormons was necessary. He also promoted local mining, which put him at odds with Brigham Young, who championed agriculture and said that mining would bring an unsavory population and a love of wealth into Mormon communities. Young and Connor also disagreed on relations with native peoples. Young thought that the military was too quick to exterminate natives before discerning guilt. Connor maintained that Mormons instigated Indian assaults on emigrant parties and supplied the attackers with weapons.

98After 1900, Fort Douglas gradually became an accepted part of the community. In 1916, the federal government used the post to train civilians in national preparedness. During both world wars, the fort was a stopping place for troops and a center for processing local draftees. Its closing in 1991 ended a long era of federal influence in Utah.

98Between 1872 and 1912, three federal army posts were established to deal with Indian problems. Fort Cameron, near Beaver, was built at the time of the Black Hawk War in 1872. An outbreak on the Uintah Indian Reservation and continued conflict there prompted Maj. Thomas T. Thornburgh and 200 cavalry troops to set up Fort Thornburgh near Vernal in 1881. Intertribal warfare on the Ute Reservation led to the establishment of Fort Duchesne in 1886.

98Relations between Mormons and the U.S. military at these three posts were mostly cordial. The army fed considerable funds into the areas serviced by the forts to pay for labor in their construction, to feed and clothe the men, and to provide forage for livestock. Indians also benefited through trade with the soldiers and paid labor. Many laborers freighted supplies, under contract, from the railroads to the forts. Soldiers worked at improving roads, and constructed a telegraph line from Price to Fort Duchesne. By 1912, the non-Indian population had increased, and the cessation of conflicts with Indians brought an end to the need for military intervention.

98Since the 19th century, Utah has been the site for training military troops; for testing and storing weapons, equipment, and matériel; and for arms research. Utah now depends on these installations for much of its economic well-being. Since World War I, Mormon youth have been encouraged to serve in the military as a patriotic duty. With the dangers of the frontier reduced and a more diverse population in the state, there has been little friction and more cooperation between Mormons and the military.

Thomas G. Alexander and Leonard J. Arrington, "The Utah Military Frontier, 1872-1912--Forts Cameron, Thornburgh, and Duchesne," Utah Historical Quarterly 32 (1964):330-354; Norman F. Furniss, The Mormon Conflict, 1850-1859 (1960); Donald R. Moorman with Gene A. Sessions, Camp Floyd and the Mormons: The Utah War (1992).>
