Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Economic Development in Early Utah

Leonard J. Arrington

100The remoteness of early Deseret from the remainder of the nation, the difficulty of transportation, and the separatist inclinations of the settlers forced Utah in the years before the coming of the railroad to go through an almost miraculously successful stage of self-sufficiency that was more complete and long lasting than that of any other section of the United States. Any scientific investigation at the time would have concluded that the settlement of substantial Numbers of people at even marginal levels was impossible. The land was too barren and the resources were too sparse to support more than a few scattered groups of people.

100And yet growth and development did occur through hard work and severe sacrifice. The settlers' formula for success was a puritanical attitude toward consumption and saving and an ecclesiastically organized cooperation. With religion as an essential tool of survival, development was based on cooperative, rather than individualistic, principles. Under Church direction, there developed group colonization; cooperatively built forts; the construction of cooperative canals, roads, fences, and mills; cooperative livestock herds; and even some cooperative farming of fields. However arid and barren the territory seemed to be, the settlers had faith that God had endowed their promised land with all the resources necessary for their use. Unlike other American states and territories that started by developing extractive export industries, Utah's growth began with a local self-sufficient subsistence agricultural economy mobilized to support an ever-increasing number of people.

100A closed economy of this type inevitably faces shortages of certain resources that inhibit development even though other resources lie unused. At that point further growth usually relies on export of abundant resources to exchange for resources in which the region is deficient.

100In 1869, at a time when the Great Basin kingdom was beginning to run into critical bottlenecks in its resource structure, the transcontinental railroad was completed, converting the closed Mormon economy into an open one. Industry based on export of abundant minerals developed, providing the territory the wherewithal to import the machinery and equipment necessary for further development.

100Instead of encouraging and supporting outside interests in the new mining and trading enterprises that were initiated, Brigham Young sought instead to preserve the political, social, and economic autonomy of the local cooperative village-based economy. The flourishing private mining and trading economy became an enclave within the self-sufficient, theocratic Mormon Commonwealth. Utah became a dualistic economy in which an imported non Mormon capitalistic system was superimposed upon the collectivistic and exclusive system of the Latter-day Saints.

100In an attempt to strengthen its cooperative sector and isolate it from the effects of the boom-and-bust cycles that typified the mining enclave, the Mormons inaugurated a protective campaign and established united orders, boards of trade, and tightly controlled cooperatives of many kinds. Locally built cooperative railroads were promoted, as were textile mills, clothing factories, tanneries, iron works, furniture factories, and wholesaling and retailing establishments. The economic base was broadened to locally owned industry, and Utah's economy became more diversified than that of other western states and territories.

100The United States refused to permit the continuance of a theocratically directed closed society within its borders. The public opposed continuation of the practice of plural marriage; American democracy objected to the institutions of theocracy; and eastern free enterprises bridled at the restrictiveness implicit in the Mormon cooperative system. The passage of the Edmunds-Tucker Act in 1887 tolled the death knell of Utah's protective institutions, and the Latter-day Saints ultimately abandoned their planned theocratic kingdom. A new era was ushered in as Utah's unique institutions were abandoned and the territory gained statehood in 1896.

100The Mormon Church sold nearly all its economic properties to eastern capitalists, who invested heavily in Utah mines, mills, smelters, and agricultural processing plants. The traditional Mormon sector accommodated to the national economy, and the state's economy became more highly commercialized and specialized. Although cash income increased, income and employment became more and more unstable. The economic fortunes of the state came to depend upon the decisions of centers of control that lay far outside the confines of the state. Utah's manufacturing relied on processing the raw materials produced locally by the agricultural and mining industries, which were then exported to the East. Required semiprocessed and finished goods were imported from the East. Utah's agriculture and mining were marginal, and the economy became dangerously vulnerable to fluctuations in the national economy. Consequently, Utah ultimately suffered relatively more, in terms of unemployment and decline in income, than almost any state in the Union during the great depression of the 1930s.

James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints (1992); Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom (1958); Leonard J. Arrington and Dean May, Building the City of God (1976).>
