Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Brigham Young's Travels in the West

Ronald K. Esplin

102In the East, before 1848, Brigham Young had been a man on the move. On foot, by wagon, stage, or canal boat, in a few cases by train, steamer, or sail, he traveled thousands of miles several times from Ohio to Missouri and from Illinois to New York, and once across the Atlantic. After three trips across the Great Plains in 1847 and 1848, he established his residence in Salt Lake City and turned his back on the East forever. Even the ease and speed of travel on the transcontinental railroad after 1869 failed to entice him from his mountain retreat.

102But the traveling did not stop. From 1847 to 1877, Brigham Young spent more time on the road than ever before. By horse and carriage, supplemented in the 1870s by rail, he traveled tens of thousands of miles. Several of the dozens of major treks were exploring expeditions--efforts to personally assess resources and judge the settlement potential of valleys, mountains, and deserts. Many involved important contacts with Indians. Most journeys were primarily pastoral in nature, undertaken with the express purpose of visiting and encouraging the widespread Saints in their villages and homes. Such visits enhanced community, unity, and loyalty; they helped people to persevere in difficult circumstances; and they demonstrated that each community was considered important. Whether Latter-day Saints lived 45 miles, 80 miles, or 300 miles from Salt Lake City, most could count on at least a yearly visit from President Young. During his visits he listened, observed, renewed friendships, counseled, instructed, comforted, motivated, scolded, strengthened, and blessed. So important were these visits to Young and to the settlers that even as he aged and his health declined, he continued his arduous travels. These trips were one key to his leadership and to the successful colonization of the Great Basin.

102President Young prepared carefully for the longer journeys, and on the road he oversaw everything from itinerary to repairs. Other Church leaders accompanied him, along with family, friends, and invited guests--often several dozen. Young packed his carriage, which would lead the column, with items for emergencies, goods for the Indians, trinkets for the children, plus tools, rawhide, marbles--whatever he thought might be needed. Baggage wagons followed the carriages.

102The arrival of the president's entourage in a settlement called for pageantry and celebration. Accounts of the 1864 journey south, for example, report that they were often met by an escort and then formed part of a grand procession into town. A brass band enlivened the reception as settlers lined the street. Either a public banquet or a more private feast usually followed. The centerpiece of the visit was the "meeting," in which visiting dignitaries instructed and encouraged the Saints. President Young's own sermons on such occasions were always filled with practical advice. Then, in the larger and more distant towns, fiddlers accompanied merry dancers in a celebration that would last far into the night. Throughout the reception, people sought and received their personal "audience" with the visiting leader. This mixture of entertainment, instruction, and renewing of ties was memorable and vital for young colonies far from Salt Lake Valley.

102The longest round trip south occurred in 1870. It included exploration beyond St. George into southeast Nevada and northwest Arizona and occupied 53 days. The more typical round-trip journey through the southern settlements required three to four weeks, but when pressed, as they were in 1871, Young's party covered the 300-plus miles from Salt Lake City to St. George in only eight days. As they returned through settlements recently visited, the pace often quickened, to 50 miles per day and occasionally more. Such journeys wearied human participants and taxed animals. Very often, spent horses were exchanged for fresh ones, and some died along the way. Of the 15 carriage loads that departed Salt Lake in 1864, only three returned with the same animals. That trip of 29 days covered 800 miles and included 37 settlements where the visitors delivered 124 discourses.

102Brigham Young made nearly two dozen trips to Parowan, Cedar City, and beyond. After 1860, these always extended to St. George, the heart of Utah's temperate "Dixie" and Young's winter home in the 1870s. One leg of these longer journeys frequently included the Sanpete settlements around Manti, but Young also made nearly a dozen more "southern" trips only as far as Manti or Fillmore. Young made extended trips northward just as frequently. Of the more than 30 trips beyond Ogden, most reached Cache Valley (after 1860) and many proceeded north to settlements in southeastern Idaho (after 1864). He also made four dozen shorter trips north into Davis and Weber counties, another four dozen excursions south to some part of Utah County, several to settlements east of Salt Lake, and at least 16 west to Tooele and Grantsville. These, plus numerous day or overnight trips to the spread-out settlements of the Salt Lake Valley or into nearby canyons, added up to approximately 40,000 miles traveled in the region by Young between 1849 and 1877.

Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young, American Moses (1985), pp. 306-311; Leonard J. Arrington and Ronald K. Esplin, "Building a Commonwealth: The Secular Leadership of Brigham," Utah Historical Quarterly 45 (Summer 1977): 216-232; Gordon Irving, "Encouraging the Saints: Brigham Young's Annual Tours of the Mormon Settlements," Utah Historical Quarterly 45 (Summer 1977):233-251.>
