Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Eliza R. Snow's Relief Society Travels (1880-1881)

Maureen Ursenbach Beecher

106The phenomenal contribution that 19th-century Mormon women made to community development was facilitated largely through networks of female leaders who traveled widely from city to city and settlement to settlement. Meeting the assembled membership, the leading sisters from Church headquarters heard reports of local societies, reported activities of sister groups, made suggestions for new or expanded projects, and carried the official messages of the Prophet and the Apostles to the female membership of the Church.

106Eliza Roxcy Snow (1804-1887) presided over all the women's organizations from 1866 to 1887. Her organizational genius, her secular and religious knowledge, her access to her Church president husband, Brigham Young, and her spiritual insight and direction gave her an additional authority to which Church members, male and female, responded enthusiastically.

106Accompanied by one or two of the corps of leading sisters, Snow maintained an ambitious program of official visits throughout her administration. Between March 1880 and December 1881, for example, as illustrated by the adjacent map, she traveled throughout Utah territory with either Emmeline B. Wells or Zina D. H. Young. Railroads had by then made travel possible into Cache Valley and as far south as Nephi; for the rest of their trips the women used whatever carriages or wagons local Saints could provide.

106"In company of Mrs. Z. D. H. Young, my 1st[Coun[selor]. in[R[elief].[S[ociety]. Central Board," wrote Eliza Snow, "I spent the Autumn and Winter of 1880-1 in St. George, officiating in the Temple for the dead, and visiting and organizing Associations in that interesting City, and adjacent country--having traveled one thousand[m[ile]s. by team over jolting rocks and through bedded sand, occasionally camping out at night on long drives, before I started for home, and returned to Salt Lake City in March" (Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life"). The Women's Exponent reported that Snow herself "drove a horse and buggy the whole distance from Fayette to Levan, twenty-six miles, over the most fearful roads," though usually one of the local men handled the reins.

106A major purpose of these visits was to organize Primary Associations for the children in the wards, though work in the recently dedicated St. George Temple and the furthering of ongoing Relief Society projects were also aims. "We welcome Sisters Eliza and Zina as our Elect Lady and her Counselor, and as Presidents of all the feminine portion of the human race," read the introduction of the two in meetings in Kanab, "although comparatively few recognize their right to this authority."

106Men and children as well as women attended meetings, remembering the events years later as significant moments. The sisters' testimonies of plural marriage, and of Joseph Smith's prophetic calling, accompanied by Snow's showing of the watch the Prophet had given her, were recorded by hearers.

106The map indicates only those places specifically named in Church and personal records. Each extended tour included visits to places unnamed as well as those in which documented meetings were held. To simplify the map, the return from distant centers is shown as a straight line back to headquarters; however in most cases the women stopped along the return trip as well.

[For dates of Snow's travels, see appendix.]

Deseret News Weekly, vols. 29-30; A. Karl Larson and Katherine Miles Larson, Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (1980); Minutes of local Relief Societies (holograph, LDS Church Archives); "Relief Society: Names of Stake and Branch Presidents of the Relief Society of Latter-day Saints," in Valleys of the Mountains (1884) (broadside, LDS Church Archives); Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life" (holograph, Bancroft Library, Berkeley, Calif.); Women's Exponent, vols. 8-10; Zina D. H. Young, Diary (November 9-13, 1880) (holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah).>
