Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Canada

Richard E. Bennett

108Within months of the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in upstate New York in 1830, Mormon missionaries were preaching their newfound gospel in nearby Canada (or British North America, as it was then known). In the 1830s and 1840s, some 2,500 Canadians joined the Church, many of whom gathered with other converts in Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and eventually the Great Basin. Several of these Canadian converts, such as John Taylor, William Law, Mary Fielding, and Theodore Turley, figured prominently in the later rise of the Church. Geographically proximate to Palmyra, New York, and Kirtland, Ohio, these converts were gained as the result of early Mormon missionary forays into Upper Canada either following established Methodist preaching circuits, returning to Canada to teach family and friends, or responding to scattered invitations to preach. Brigham Young and his brother, Phineas, were instrumental in converting many former Methodists in the Kingston-Earnestown-Loughborough-Sydenham area in 1832 and 1833. Joseph Smith, Jr., converted the Freeman Nickerson family in the Mt. Pleasant area just west of Niagara Falls. Parley P. Pratt reaped a rich harvest of followers in the Toronto area in 1835. And John E. Page converted well over 1,000 people in 1836 and 1837 in the Portland-North Crosby-Boston Mills area in the Rideau Canal district north of Kingston. Fewer converts were realized in the provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island, and fewer still in old Quebec (Lower Canada). By 1850, with so many departed, Mormonism in eastern Canada was but a memory.

108Fifty years later, however, the scene shifted from eastern to western Canada and the approach had changed from one of plucking to one of planting. At a time when the Church was expanding in the Rocky Mountain West, while experiencing persecution because of its adherence to polygamy, the Canadian West looked particularly attractive. John Taylor, an English-born Canadian from Toronto who had converted 50 years earlier and who succeeded Brigham Young as president of the Church, at one point seriously considered moving Church headquarters from Salt Lake City to Victoria Island but settled, instead, on sending Charles Ora Card north to plant a new colony on safer British soil. Card scouted out a new settlement in southern Alberta in 1886, but did not select the Lee's Creek site, now Cardston, until 1887. Pursued by American marshals because of his adherence to plural marriage, Card and his original party--consisting of eight families with their cattle and household goods--were assisted over the St. Mary River and into Canada in June 1887 by a detachment of the North-West Mounted Police.

108At that time the Canadian government, fearing possible American annexation of this southerly region of western Canada, was encouraging new settlements of every kind. Mormon communal skills and agricultural prowess, coupled with aid from Salt Lake City as well as from Ottawa, gave the early Cardston settlers a distinct advantage over neighboring settlers. Isolated but industrious, Mormons were gradually accepted into Canadian society. As the advantages of settling in Alberta became known, more Mormons moved northward, resulting in the founding of surrounding settlements south of Cardston. These included Aetna (1888), Mountain View (1890), Beazer (1891), Leavitt (1893), and Kimball (1897), all platted in characteristic grid pattern format common to other Mormon farm villages in the western United States. Cardston itself was laid out in square blocks, each containing 8.4 acres and subdivided into eight lots.

108In 1898, with the Alberta government's decision to build an irrigation canal from the St. Mary River near the Montana border to the lower lands near Lethbridge, some 500 new Mormon settlers arrived. Well-known for their expertise in irrigating semi-arid regions, this second wave of settlers established new towns situated in newly irrigated farm country such as Magrath, Stirling, Caldwell, and Taylorville (all 1898), and Woodford (1900).

108With the turn of the century, three other Mormon towns sprang into being--Orton (1901), Frankburg (1902), and Taber (1902)--as a result of the short-lived experimentation in sugar beet farming pioneered by Charles A. Magrath, Jesse Knight, and his son Raymond Knight. In 1906, with the Church's purchase of the 60,000-acre Cochrane Ranch northwest of Cardston, Glenwood (1908) and Hillspring (1910) were settled, marking the end of the early period of Mormon pioneering efforts in southern Alberta.

108The Mormon presence in Canada has grown considerably since the early 19th century. In 1994 the Latter-day Saint population in Alberta Numbers almost 60,000 (about half the total Mormon membership in Canada), the majority of whom have long since left the farm for opportunities in large urban centers such as Lethbridge, Calgary, and Edmonton. Meanwhile, thousands of other Alberta-born Mormon descendants have fanned out all across Canada, where they have played pivotal roles in the growth and reestablishment of the Church, often in those very regions that 150 years before had surrendered some of their best citizens to the message of Mormonism.

Richard E. Bennett, "A Study of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Upper Canada, 1830-1850" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1975); Lynn A. Rosenvall, "The Transfer of Mormon Culture to Alberta," in Essays on the Historical Geography of the Canadian West, Lynn A. Rosenvall and S. M. Evans, editors (1987), pp. 122-144; Brigham Young Card, "Charles Ora Card and the Founding of the Mormon Settlements in Southwestern Alberta, North-West Territories," The Mormon Presence in Canada, Brigham Y. Card et al., editors (1990), pp. 77-107.>
