Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Indian Farms

Howard A. Christy

112Mormons were uniquely motivated to reach out to their Native American brethren: they believed that they were brethren in fact--by blood and by birth, because the Book of Mormon told them so. Further, the Book admonished that they must seek out their ancient Lamanite brethren and bring them back to Christ.

112The first mission to Native Americans occurred soon after the Church was organized, when in the fall of 1830 a group of missionaries trekked westward from New York to teach the gospel to any who would listen. They were largely unsuccessful, and the effort was abandoned until two decades later--after the Exodus of the entire Church to the Great Basin. Once again, missionaries were sent out, and other, less religiously motivated, accommodations were attempted. For the first time, Mormons came face to face with Native Americans on a day-to-day basis as both groups competed for the same land and resources in the oases along Utah's Wasatch Front and elsewhere. At the earliest opportunity, Brigham Young, as territorial governor, ex officio superintendent of Indian affairs, and president of the Church, forthrightly and pragmatically addressed the serious problems that soon presented themselves between the two groups He met with only limited success.

112Relations were complicated, uneven, confused, and more often than not, tragic. The cultural gap between the two groups was very broad, and misunderstanding was deep. Leaders on both sides sought accommodation but were unable to succeed. Central to the dilemma was an irreconcilable disagreement as to how the bounties of the earth should be shared and controlled. On the one hand, the Mormon settlers immediately took ownership of the very limited usable land under the belief (shared by most Europeans) that it rightly belonged to those who could develop it to its fullest economic potential. On the other hand, Native Americans generally believed that the bounties of the earth were there for all to share--without the necessity for boundaries and individual ownership. Complicating this difference was an erroneous conviction (also shared by most Europeans) that Native Americans would easily become acculturated to European ways. Additionally, one of the most lamentable misfortunes of American history, the vulnerability of Native Americans to European diseases, had its effect in Utah soon after arrival of European settlers, and probably destroyed at the outset any chance for a successful cultural integration. By the time either side might have been able to accommodate the other, both disease and conflict had reduced the local Native Americans to a bitter remnant, whose members either emigrated or were forcibly removed to distant locales. For the most part, the two groups have lived separate existences ever since.

112Still, efforts to accommodate were made for several decades, including the establishment by Mormons of missions and farms, and in several cases, dual-purpose farm missions (among Native Americans both nearby and distant). Beginning in 1850, lands were set aside near Mormon settlements, supplied with the necessary tools, equipment, seeds, and animals, and local natives were invited to move there and learn to till the soil and tend livestock under the tutelage of a resident Mormon farmer. The presumption was that once the Native Americans learned to farm, they would give up their traditional hunter-gatherer way of living and become acculturated to the European system of agriculture. At the same time, the gospel of Christ was extended to the native people, also with limited success.

112Again, the effort largely miscarried. The farms were small, ill equipped, ill maintained, and sparsely attended, and, one by one, most were abandoned only a short time after they were established. Some were appropriated and operated by the federal government before being abandoned or absorbed into the reservation system, others were reabsorbed into the general Mormon agricultural landscape, and a few tiny outposts have survived into the present. Depending upon the wisdom and capabilities of the different individuals involved on both sides, some assistance, acquiescence, accommodation, and even love was achieved in one locale, while disagreement, lack of cooperation, resentment, hatred, and even bloodshed occurred in another.

112If any historical process could qualify as being inevitable, it might be the failure of the three-centuries-long effort to achieve viable accommodation between the anciently established but relatively powerless Native Americans and the more recently established but much more powerful Europeans who ultimately came to dominate the American scene. Honorable intent notwithstanding, the Mormon Indian farm program was doomed to fail along with the larger enterprise of which it was a part.

Howard A. Christy, "Open Hand and Mailed Fist: Mormon-Indian Relations in Utah, 1847-1852," Utah Historical Quarterly 46 (Summer 1978): 216-235; Howard A. Christy, "The Walker War: Defense and Conciliation as Strategy," Utah Historical Quarterly 47 (Fall 1979):395-420; Journal History of the Church, passim, 1847-1880; William M. Rieske, Utah Indian Farms and Reservations [map] (1980).>
