Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Abondoned Settlements in the West

Lynn A. Rosenvall

114During the latter half of the 19th century, the Mormons established nearly 500 settlements in an area covering seven western states and stretching from Mexico to Canada. Since abandoned settlements often leave little evidence of their past, it is difficult to determine which of these settlements still exist.

114Research, however, indicates that 69 of the 497 communities (13.9 percent) that were founded in the West during the period of 1847 to 1900 have been abandoned. When the communities that were founded in the Midwest, Canada, and Mexico are included, the failure rate jumps to 16.4 percent or 88 out of a total of 537.

114The year 1900 has been recognized as a practical terminal date for Mormon colonization, and on these maps only settlements that were founded prior to 1900 are shown. The year 1930, however, was selected as the closing date for abandoned settlements, and only settlements that failed before 1930 are included. The period of 1900 to 1930 provides a potential "failure zone" for settlements that were founded toward the end of the 19th century.

114It is difficult to assign an exact abandonment date to many of these settlements because they were vacated over a period of time and because adequate records do not exist. For some settlements, the failure period could be before or after the given date, or both. Some of these sites, such as San Bernardino, Mormon Station, and Las Vegas, were reoccupied in later years by others.

114Failure rates may appear to be high in light of the careful attention that Mormons gave to locating their settlements. On the other hand, one must consider the uninviting environment and the debilitating external factors that the inhabitants faced.

114Abandoned settlements can be divided into two major groups: (1) settlements that failed because of pressures from outside forces over which the Mormons had little or no control, and (2) settlements that ceased to exist because of the inhabitants' volition. The first group failed because of such factors as Indian conflicts, the coming of Johnston's army (in the Utah War), Nevada tax problems, religious conflicts, and the Mexican Revolution. This group is the smallest--26 failures out of 497 settlements, or 5.2 percent. The second group, whose failures were due to environmental factors, were abandoned, in general, because of floods, inadequate water supply, and poor location. Fully 43 settlements (8.7 percent) ceased to exist because of environmental factors. This group is possibly the more important of the two, because by analyzing these settlements one can begin to judge the ability of Mormons to locate permanent settlements within some of the harsh environments of the arid West.

114Because Mormons had to learn about their new surroundings by trial and error, one might expect that most of the failures would occur during the first few years. But, surprisingly, no settlements that were founded during the period 1847 to 1849 failed for reasons linked to the environment. The period with the highest failure rate was the decade of 1870 to 1879, when areas of the Colorado Plateau, mainly Arizona, were first settled. Moreover, by 1870 the most desirable areas of the Mormon region were occupied, and only marginal spots remained to be colonized.

114Even at their zenith, the population of these 43 abandoned settlements, abandoned due to environmental factors, was notably small. Therefore, their effect on Mormon colonization was minimal. For example, the average peak population per settlement was approximately 100 persons. Consequently, fewer than 5,000 persons were affected. Some of these communities consisted of only three or four families at most, and the largest ones contained no more than about 400 persons.

114Low population could have been a factor in the demise of some settlements. For example, large dams were often required to control the overflow of rivers, and these impoundments could not be readily built by a community consisting of 100 or fewer persons. Several settlements also suffered from low population because the removal of only a few families made the function of a community difficult or made the region undesirable to the remaining settlers.

114Most colonists did not give up readily. In fact, only three communities were vacated within the first year of occupancy, and some settlements lasted as long as 60 years or more before their demise. The average lifetime of these 43 settlements was approximately 22 years. Such statistics attest to the tenacity of the Mormon colonizing venture. The significant aspect is not that 43 settlements failed for environmental reasons, but that the marginal nature of the areas colonized by the Mormons did not lead to a much higher failure rate.

Stephen L. Carr, The Historical Guide to Utah Ghost Towns (1972); Andrew Jensen, Encyclopedic History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (1941); Lynn A. Rosenvall, "Defunct Mormon Settlements: 1830-1930," in The Mormon Role in the Settlement of the West, Richard H. Jackson, editor (1978).>
