Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Pioneer Property in Salt Lake City

Glen M. Leonard

120The Latter-day Saints left Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1846 with clear memories of a contest between competing land agents. In the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young established an orderly land distribution system to limit the profit motive. Each family received without cost a 1.25-acre city plot, one of eight in each 10-acre block. Men with plural wives could claim additional lots. Farm plots south of Ninth South were 5, 10, and 20 acres. Settlers agreed not to divide or sell their property, a provision not long enforced.

120With the initial survey launched on August 3, 1847, members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles selected their city lots near the temple block. Brigham Young eventually built his office and homes east of a corner reserved for the Deseret Store and Tithing Office. Heber C. Kimball claimed the next block north, while Willard Richards, the other counselor in the First Presidency, picked lots just south of Temple Square. Other General Authorities built nearby. TogEther these Church officials owned most of eight blocks surrounding Temple Square. Recorder Thomas Bullock charged a $1.25 recording fee, but owners received legal title only after the U.S. government established a land office in 1873.

120Other 1847 pioneers, wintering in the log fort on Block 48, waited a year for building lots. After Church leaders returned from Winter Quarters in September 1848, they allocated city lots through a lottery. The 1847 migration had numbered 2,000 immigrants; the arriving 1848 migration would double that number. The city expanded to meet growing needs. To supplement the useful lots in the 113 blocks of Plot A (22 blocks on the northern hillside were not assigned), Church leaders immediately added Plot B with 63 blocks to the east. Surveys in 1849 and 1850 added 24 blocks to the west (Plot C) and 240 smaller, four-lot blocks (18 of them set aside for a cemetery) on the slopes to the northeast (Plot D). Only one-third of Brigham Young's pioneer party of July 1847 received lots in Plot A; many of them settled elsewhere in the expanding city or in other communities (some single men were not ready to claim lots). Returning Mormon Battalion veterans who claimed lots in Plot A settled mostly in the northernmost tiers or west and south of the fort. So did a few of the Mississippi Saints, but most of that 1847-1848 immigrant company settled ten miles away, on a plot created for them at the mouth of Big Cottonwood Canyon.

120City lots were intended for residential use, with space enough for a home, garden, orchard, and small outbuildings. Tradesmen and merchants were expected to operate their businesses on their residential lots, but soon a concentrated business district developed. Settlers built the first public buildings on the temple block--boweries (temporary shelters), tabernacles, public works shops housing carpenters, stonemasons, and blacksmiths, and the Endowment House. Commercial and public buildings appeared outside Temple Square beginning with the Council Hall and nearby mercantile store and post office on Main Street. Soon, other merchants established operations in an emerging commercial district between First and Third South.

120With Brigham Young's death in 1877, the Church claimed property held in his name as trustee-in-trust. This included the temple block and commercial and administrative properties to the south and east. Other land surrounding Temple Square gradually moved to LDS Church ownership, especially since the 1950s. Today the Church, through various entities, holds title to nearly 90 acres downtown. Included are several apartment complexes and two shopping malls (ZCMI Center and Crossroads Plaza) with related office towers and parking plazas, all developed by the Church-owned Zions Securities Corporation. Salt Lake County uses Church land under the Salt Palace complex for one dollar a year. With the expansion of church holdings in the 20th century, the same central blocks originally owned largely by Mormon leaders are now under Church control.

120Looking ahead to needs of the community and an international Church in a new century, LDS leaders have carefully planned their downtown property. The plan maintains a central corridor of Church office buildings east and west of Temple Square. It looks to more multi-unit housing complexes east and north of that corridor and confirms a commercial use for the district south of South Temple. The master plan guarantees that the buildings of Church headquarters and Temple Square will have a compatible surrounding neighborhood in the vibrant north portion of downtown Salt Lake City.

Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (1985), pp. 146-147, 168-171; John S. McCormick, The Historic Buildings of Downtown Salt Lake City (1982); Nicholas G. Morgan, Sr., Pioneer Map: Great Salt Lake City (1950); Michael Phillips, "City, LDS Church Team Up to Create a Shangri-La in S.L.," Salt Lake Tribune, June 19, 1992.>
