Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Saints of the Western States (1990)

Lowell C. Bennion

128Since 1940, the American share of the LDS Church's world membership has shrunk to almost half--from about 90 to 50 percent. The western states' share of U.S. Saints has declined much less, despite the creation of LDS stakes throughout the East. About 80 percent of American Mormons reside in the 13 western states (including Alaska and Hawaii), with most of them (nearly 80 percent) living in the eight intermountain states. Moreover, neither percent has changed much during the past 20 years of rapid worldwide Church growth. Thus, in both 1970 and 1990, Utah counted roughly twice as many Mormons as California.

128How can one explain American Mormons' strong preference for the West, particularly the Great Basin Kingdom? Any complete answer would require mapping rates of natural increase, migration, and conversion, for some combination of such factors has enabled that region to maintain its preponderance of U.S. Saints. Arizona alone, with 200,000 LDS in 1990, had as many as the northern states of the East combined. The North has offered transplanted intermountain Mormons far less employment than the southern states, which recorded 430,000 LDS (55 percent in Texas, Florida, and the Washington, D.C., area).

128While LDS leaders have tried for a century to stop the Gathering to Zion, they have never quite succeeded, not even by building temples outside Mormon country. The pining for Zion attitude persists, affecting not only converts but born-in-the-Church members. Many intermountain Mormons who take jobs on the Pacific coast or east of the Rockies eventually return. Converts overseas, in the eastern United States, and even in the far West often join them, seeking a safer and more Mormon environment. If the Wasatch Front seems too crowded, they gather to a small town in rural Utah or an LDS ward in a neighboring state.

128The 1990 western Saints map may remind some readers of the classic "Mormon Culture Region" described by D. W. Meinig (1965). As his maps demonstrate so well, the spatial configuration of Mormondom keeps changing in myriad ways. By comparing his 1965 map and the 1990 map, one can detect both continuity and change. Meinig's core area remains centered on the four-county Wasatch Front, which contains more than 75 percent of both Utah's total and LDS populations, and which now spills over into all adjoining counties. Within the core, Provo and Orem--at the southern end--have eclipsed the railroad hub of Ogden to the north, intensifying the rivalry between Mormondom's Mecca (Salt Lake City) and Medina (Provo). Most rural counties of Utah and southeastern Idaho, Meinig's domain, have a population whose LDS percent runs even higher than Utah's and the Wasatch Front's average of just under 72. The exceptions naturally catch the eye. In Summit County (east of Salt Lake City), Mormons hold a bare majority (53 percent) because the old mining town of Park City has attracted flocks of non Mormon skiers and artists. Even more surprising is the minority position of Mormons in Utah's southeast corner, where the percent falls lower than in certain sphere (10-50 percent LDS) counties of Nevada, Idaho, and Wyoming. A century ago, Francis A. Hammond, the leader of Utah's San Juan Mission, often despaired of forming strong wards among the region's cowboys and Navajos. One cannot help but wonder why his successors never fared much better.

128Delineating an outer boundary for the sphere proves problematic because Latter-day Saints become much more dispersed and less visible away from the domain. In all but one county of the Mormon sphere, the LDS Church represents the largest single denomination. Its number one status reflects the fact that in every western state except New Mexico, only 30 to 50 percent of the total population professes any church affiliation. Since 1965, the sphere has expanded in all directions but most notably into western Wyoming and southwestern Idaho and across eastern Nevada. As new LDS temples in Boise, Las Vegas, Denver, and along the Pacific Coast indicate, most major metropolitan areas of the West now have sizable LDS populations (100,000 in Los Angeles County alone). Ironically, most western Mormons have become urban while most of the counties that constitute their culture region have remained rural.

Atlas of Utah (1981), especially the section "Churches and Church Membership," pp. 140-143; Lowell C. Bennion and Dean R. Louder, "Mapping Mormons across the Modern West," in The Mormon Role in the Settlement of the West, Richard H. Jackson, editor (1978), pp. 135-169; Martin B. Bradley et al., Churches and Church Membership in the United States, 1990 (1992); Francis A. Hammond, Journals: 1852-1900, half in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, and half in the Historical Department, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City; D. W. Meinig, "The Mormon Culture Region: Strategies and Patterns in the Geography of the American West, 1847-1964," Annals of the Association of American Geographers 55, no. 2 (1965):191-220.>
