Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Distribution of World Membership (1992)

J. Matthew Shumway

130n 1950, membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was at 1,111,314. Of this total, 951,400 (87 percent) were living in North America. By 1993, there were 8,406,895 members of the Church, but only 56 percent of these members were living in North America. Thus, much of the growth in Church membership in the past 40 years has taken place outside of the United States and Canada. As a consequence, the Church has restructured its administrative procedures. Such administrative restructuring was necessary for the Church to provide all of its members with similar facilities, programs, and resources. Out of this administrative restructuring came a new Church geography.

130The Church is administratively organized both functionally and spatially. Its functional organization consists of three types of structures: first, ecclesiastical, based on the priesthood; second, auxiliary organizations for different groups in the Church; and third, professional services. Church spatial organization consists of a hierarchy of geographic units (going from smallest to largest): branches, generally less than 200; wards, with anywhere from 200 to 800 members; stakes, a group of approximately six to 10 wards; regions, a group of stakes; and areas, which consist of a group of regions. Areas constitute the newest geographic unit and represent the major international division of Church spatial organization.

130The basic fundamental units of the Church have always been the branch, ward, and stake. Most members' direct experience with the Church is at these ecclesiastical and geographical levels. However, due to the rapid growth of the Church, a number of administrative changes have occurred. In 1967, stakes were organized into regions for the first time, and in 1975, regions were organized into areas. At that point in time, the area as a unit was simply a collection of regions that reported directly back to Church headquarters. In 1984, however, area presidencies were called to administer the new and larger geographical units. Area presidencies are made up of General Authorities from the First and Second Quorums of the Seventy with the responsibility to administer all Church programs within their assigned areas.

130In 1992, there were 23 Church areas that spanned the entire world. There are three areas in Utah, six in North America outside of Utah, two in Mexico, one in Central America, one in Brazil, two other areas in the rest of South America, one in the Pacific, one in the Philippines and Micronesia region, two other areas in the rest of Asia, three in Europe, and one in Africa. The number of Church areas by world region generally reflects the relative concentration of Church members in the various world regions. The area boundaries do not reflect rates of growth within areas. Thus, as has been the case in the past, the number and boundaries of Church areas will certainly change.

130Although the direct Church experience of most members is at the ward and stake levels, in order for the Church to deal effectively with its burgeoning worldwide growth, changes in its administration have been required. Administrative changes have facilitated the ability of the Church to ensure doctrinal consistency and to coordinate Church practices and policies that are essential to the gospel while still allowing cultural variation. The Church is no longer a Utah church nor an American one. As such it has had to find a way simultaneously to maintain doctrinal purity and to allow cultural variation to exist. The Church has been able to do this by maintaining functional linkages through which Church doctrine, programs, and policy can flow, and by creating geographical units, with increasing Numbers of Church leaders called from these areas, in order to allow cultural variation to exist. The second problem that this arrangement alleviates is the increasing demand put on General Authorities by the growth of the Church. By reorganizing spatially, the Church has been able to decentralize some administrative functions to Church areas, regions and stakes that were formerly the responsibility of Church leaders in Salt Lake City.

130Although members can expect organizational changes in the future, the flexibility introduced by the present administrative system enables the Church to prepare for continued growth and expansion.

"Area Presidencies Called as Church Modifies Geographical Administration," Ensign 14, no. 8 (1984):75; Perry H. Cunningham, "Area, Area Presidency," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 1:65-66; William C. Hartley, "Organizational and Administrative History," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 3:1035-1044; Lee T. Perry, Paul M. Bons, and Alan L. Wilkins, "Contemporary Organization," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 3:1044-1049. >
