Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Missions

David F. Boone

132Missionary work is the lifeblood of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Organized in 1830, the Church has grown steadily since that time through the efforts of thousands of missionaries who have given their time and energy, at their own expense, to share Church teachings and a unique way of life with others. Frequently today an individual Church member can readily trace his or her genealogy to an ancestor who came into the Church as a consequence of the Church's missionary program. As of December 31, 1992, there were 276 missions in the Church within 146 of the world's nations and territories. Within these missions 46,025 missionaries served full-time.

132A mission is a geographical and cultural designation for an area of the world where missionary activity is conducted by Latter-day Saints. It is a basic component for future growth of Church organization in a specific locale. For example, when missionary work begins within a country, Church leaders organize a mission by calling a mission president and two counselors to preside over other Church members and representatives in the area.

132The names of the missions have traditionally reflected their general locale in order to distinguish them from other proselyting regions of the world. For example, the first mission formally organized in the Church after its founding in April 1830 was the British Mission, established in July 1837. At the outset, mission designations included immense geographical regions because the Numbers of proselyting missionaries were small, and as a result, the ability to proselyte individuals within those regions was limited. Following the organization of the British Mission, the next earliest mission organizations were the Eastern States Mission in the United States (1839) and the Society Islands Mission (1844), the latter comprising virtually all of the islands of the South Pacific.

132In 1846, Latter-day Saints left the boundaries of the United States in an effort to find a place where they could live in peace and implement their religious practices. They located in the Great Basin and soon began to branch out into adjoining regions. During the next several decades, the Church colonized settlements from Canada in the north to Mexico in the south and from California to Texas. Whenever Church members settled in a new region, a part of their efforts often went to proselyting the local inhabitants. For a period of about ten years (1847-1857) the desired peace sought by the Latter-day Saints was realized, and consequently organized missionary efforts grew dramatically in terms of both the Numbers of missionaries who served and new geographical areas where gospel teachings were introduced.

132As the Church has grown in numerical strength and in social acceptability, the commitment to missionary work has also increased. As an accompanying consequence, individuals who were converted in various regions of the world became a part of the growing missionary effort because of their newfound faith. Thus the addition of converts to the Church has perpetuated a continual growth and expansion of Church membership and hence a continuing spread of the gospel throughout the world. Additional consequences have included the strengthening of the members who were distant from Church headquarters and a diminishing of their reliance upon missionaries from other regions because local members were able to carry out the work of the Church themselves. In time, the increased growth has enabled the Church to assign full-time missionaries to other areas that were not strong in spiritual or numerical strength.

132In 1978, Church President Spencer W. Kimball gave the challenge and set the standard for future growth of missions in a landmark address. He said, among other things, that "it seems clear to me--indeed, this impression weighs upon me, that the Church is at a point in its growth and maturity when we are at last ready to move forward in a major way. . . . We have paused on some plateaus long enough. Let us resume our journey forward and upward."

132Further prophetic direction came in 1980 during an area conference in Rochester, New York, when President Kimball admonished Church members to become better prepared individually, and stated, "We have already asked you and we now repeat that request, that every family, every night and every morning, in family prayer and in secret prayers, too, pray to the Lord to open the doors of other nations so that their people, too, may have the gospel of Jesus Christ."

132Since these declarations, almost 100 missions have been organized worldwide. A third of the new missions were created in South and Central America, 18 percent were organized in Asian countries, and 16 percent were organized in other, non-U.S. countries.

Richard O. Cowan, The Church in the Twentieth Century (1985); Deseret News 1993-1994 Church Almanac (1992); "Let Us Move Forward and Upward," Ensign (May 1979):82; "Statistical Report 1992," F. Michael Watson, Ensign (May 1993):22; The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball (1982), pp. 176 and 584. >
