Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Missionary Training Centers

David F. Boone

136One of the constants in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since before its organization in 1830 has been its missionary emphasis. An important corollary has been an interest in improving both the techniques and the preparation of the Church's missionaries. Early efforts to introduce such changes were slow and deliberate, but as the number of missionaries has increased, the need for training of Church representatives has become more pronounced.

136Early missionaries had little formal training except what they might have received from parents, extended family, or Church leaders. In addition, most of the elders were sent to missions that reflected their national origin or that required language skills they possessed. Thus, Scandinavian natives or those of Anglo-Saxon extraction were more likely to serve in northern European missions. Most went to their assigned missions without sufficient financial support, on the model of the ancient twelve Apostles. In doing so, many depended on the hospitality of the local citizenry and preached extemporaneously on the street or wherever they would be heard.

136Fewer opportunities for such hospitality were available in the 20th century as more and more people moved to urban areas. Also, the number of missionaries seeking hospitality increased. Accordingly, the techniques of the missionary work changed.

136During the administration of LDS President David O. McKay (1951-1970), the number of missionaries rose from approximately 5,000 to over 13,000. In 1961, the Language Training Institute was established at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. Originally, only the Spanish language was taught. The Institute experienced success, and, recognizing other missionaries' need for preparation in foreign languages, it expanded its operation in 1963 to create the Language Training Mission, which increased not only the amount of instruction but also the number of languages taught. Classes were held daily at Brigham Young University, and missionaries were encouraged to speak only in their assigned foreign languages in an effort to facilitate learning. In addition to the Language Training Center, where Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, German, Dutch, and Scandinavian languages were taught, another center specializing in Polynesian languages was opened at the LDS Church College in Hawaii.

136In 1978 each training facility was renamed a missionary training center. In 1993, fifteen training centers were in operation worldwide. All of the Church's missionary training centers are located adjacent to or in close proximity to a Latter-day Saint temple in accordance with Church policy.

136The expansion of the language studies and other training of prospective missionaries has involved other factors such as the costs of operation, not only to the Church, but also to the families of the missionaries, who are usually responsible for travel and boarding costs during the missionaries' training period. One reason for locating missionary training centers throughout the world is to encourage missionary participation at a reasonable cost.

136The number of missionaries continues to rise, and the training center in Provo has needed to acquire new properties, expand its present site, and use neighboring church buildings for classes. Other training centers around the world are not as busy as the Provo site; in fact, few are in operation year round or used to capacity when they are open. Approximately 75 percent of the Church's potential missionary force receives its orientation and preparation in the Provo facility.

136Mission training facilities (1993)

Asia Japan Missionary Training Ctr. Tokyo, Japan Korea Missionary Training Ctr. Seoul, South Korea Philippine Missionary Training Ctr. Manila, Philippines

Europe England Missionary Training Ctr. New Chapel (near London), England

Mexico and Central America Guatemala Missionary Training Ctr. Guatemala City, Guatemala Mexico Missionary Training Ctr. Unidad Arag , Mexico

North America Provo Missionary Training Ctr. Provo, Utah

Pacific New Zealand Missionary Training Ctr. Hamilton, New Zealand Samoa Missionary Training Ctr. Apia, Western Samoa Tonga Missionary Training Ctr. Nukualofa, Tonga

South America Argentina Missionary Training Ctr. Buenos Aires, Argentina Brazil Missionary Training Ctr. Sao Paulo, Brazil Chile Missionary Training Ctr. Santiago, Chile Columbia Missionary Training Ctr. Bogotá, Columbia Peru Missionary Training Ctr. Lima, Peru

Richard O. Cowan, "Missionary Training Centers," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 2:913-914; Jay E. Jensen, "The Effect of Initial Mission Field Training on Missionary Proselyting Skills" (Ph.D. thesis, Brigham Young University, 1988).>
