Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Welfare Projects

Garth L. Mangum

140Efforts of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to enhance the economic well-being of its members span the Church's entire history. Geography has also been a relevant element. The concept of gathering in the 19th century encouraged converts to gather first to Ohio, then to Missouri, Illinois, and the Intermountain West. Members needed relocation assistance and sustenance upon arrival.

140Resettlement needs became apparent first in 1831, when Joseph Smith consolidated the 200 original New York Saints with 300 converts in and around Kirtland, Ohio. The settled Ohio members were asked to share their lands under a concept called the law of consecration and stewardship. Few complied, but enough did to make the temporary gathering viable.

140Later in 1831, when a gathering place was designated in Jackson County, Missouri, no LDS residents lived there. Incoming Mormons could only share their liquid capital and tools, while members elsewhere were to donate monies for purchasing lands. When conflicts with non-LDS residents resulted in expulsion from Missouri, Church leaders purchased lands in and around Nauvoo, Illinois, and adjacent Montrose, Iowa, so that members could become self-sufficient. Driven later to the Mountain West (1846-1847), the Church again found sustenance for the trek and organized the infrastructure for transportation, communication, and irrigation throughout the Mormon settlements in the West.

140During the early 20th century, Latter-day Saints, like other Americans, began urbanizing. Welfare attention shifted to social work. When agriculture and mining overexpanded during World War I, depressing farm and metal prices, the area became vulnerable to the Great Depression. The chief victims were in Salt Lake City, the major urban center. Though poor, farm families could eat, but farmers often could not pay for harvesting. Stake presidents in the Salt Lake City area organized work crews to harvest crops, taking foodstuffs in pay. Owners of warehouses donated space for storage and food processing. Women organized to can food and make clothing. Ward bishops distributed commodities among their poor, insisting that all able-bodied persons work. Distant stakes began similar activities and, by 1936, the approaches were sanctioned in a Church-wide centralized program. Although World War II prosperity reduced needs, the Church purchased farms and added other processing facilities. At the end of the war, the Church sent massive amounts of produce to Europe.

140Convinced of the need for strategic reserves, as well as for work and service opportunities, the Church expanded production activities to over 500 farms--90,000 acres by 1960--with processing and storage facilities, all in the western United States and Canada. During the 1970s, farms and other facilities were established throughout the United States. Holdings in 1990 consisted of 199 agricultural production projects, 51 canneries, and 63 grain storage facilities feeding into 113 central, regional, and branch storehouses. In 1990, the cumulative size of Church farms included over 51,000 acres of cropland and 71,000 acres of grazing land in 1990. Another 50,000 acres were reclaimable for production should the need arise.

140However, with increasing urbanization, the welfare program was moving in other directions. In 1938, Deseret Industries was established to employ handicapped and other difficult-to-employ members in rehabilitating donated clothing, furniture, and household effects. Forty-eight Deseret Industries stores now operate in the western United States. As long ago as the depression of the 1890s, the Church had established an employment center in Salt Lake City. The Church currently operates 104 employment centers throughout the world, 34 staffed by professionals and the remainder operated by volunteers. Volunteer employment specialists in every stake and ward seek to identify both members needing placement and jobs available from LDS employers.

140With the stresses of urban life, personal welfare is no longer just an economic issue. LDS Social Services, with over 60 offices throughout the United States and Canada, and a few in Great Britain, Australia, and New Zealand, complements the counseling efforts of the LDS lay clergy.

140In the 1990s, the central thrust came to be provident living, emphasizing literacy and education, career development, financial and resource management, home production and storage, physical health, and social, emotional, and spiritual strength.

140Further, there are three areas of current experimentation. First, because Church membership has exploded, mostly in less developed countries, experiments are under way to develop programs abroad. Current emphasis is on employment preparation and placement, but microenterprise and small-plot agriculture development are promising possibilities. Second, the rise in Church membership in U.S. inner cities has sparked experiments to develop viable urban programs. Finally, the Church is extending itself to the nonmember needy in the United States and abroad through a Humanitarian Service program.

140Throughout all of this development, the objectives have remained constant: (1) provide short-term help to the needy, (2) help members become self-sufficient, and (3) pursue the ultimate goal of achieving a Zion Society where there are no rich and no poor because all dwell in righteousness (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:18).

Leonard J. Arrington, Feramorz Y. Fox, and Dean L. May, Building the City of God: Community and Cooperation among the Mormons (1976); Garth L. Mangum, "Welfare Services," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 4:1554-1558; Garth L. Mangum and Bruce D. Blumell, The Mormons' War on Poverty (1993).>
