Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Educational Institutions

Leon R. Hartshorn

142n June 1831, Joseph Smith received a Revelation calling Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps "to do the work of printing and of selecting writings for schools . . . that little children may also receive instruction" (D&C 55:4). In this connection, the Doctrine and Covenants also contains passages that form the basis for Mormon attitudes toward education.

142On July 4, 1838, at the cornerstone ceremony for a temple in Far West, Missouri, Sidney Rigdon, then a member of the First Presidency, indicated the nature of the educational plans of the Church and the very close connections between religion and education:

This building [temple] is designed for the double purpose of a house of worship and an institution of learning. . . . Next to the worship of our God, we esteem the education of our children and of the rising generation. For what is wealth without society or society without intelligence. And how is intelligence to be obtained?--by education. What is religion without intelligence; an empty soul. (Moffitt, 5-6)

142In 1840, Joseph Smith began his quest to open a university in Nauvoo, and on January 15, 1841, he issued the following proclamation: "The University of Nauvoo will enable us to teach our children wisdom, to instruct them in all the knowledge and learning, in the arts, science and learned professions" (History of the Church 4:269). Although Smith's dream was never completely realized, its organization would later become the groundwork for the University of Deseret, later renamed the University of Utah.

142During the exodus under Brigham Young, consideration was given to the future education of Mormon youth in the isolated West. In a general epistle written to the Twelve Apostles near Council Bluffs, Iowa, December 23, 1847, President Young said:

It is very desirable that all Saints should improve every opportunity of securing at least a copy of every valuable treatise on education--every book, map, chart, or diagram that may contain interesting, useful and attractive matter, to gain the attention of children, and cause them to love to learn to read; and also every historical, mathematical, philosophical, geographical, geological, astronomical, scientific, practical, and all other variety of useful and interesting writings, maps, etc., . . . for the benefit of the rising generation. (Millennial Star, 10:85)

142During the journey to the West, educational classes were conducted in the camps Within three months after Church members arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, formal elementary classes began. Because adequate secondary public education was not available for the youth in the growing western colonies, Brigham Young Academy was founded in 1875. It was the first of 33 academies established in five western states, Canada, and Mexico. Of these academies, 11 closed shortly after opening, and only 22 schools actually had buildings. The schools offered basic academic subjects as well as vocational and cultural skills, including agriculture, mechanics, homemaking, music, and art. Because students were involved in numerous debates, plays, athletic competitions, and music recitals, the academies also became social centers for communities. As the number of public high schools increased, Church academies closed. By 1934, all the academies either were closed or had been turned over to the state to become junior colleges, except four: Brigham Young University, Ricks College, LDS Business College, and Juárez Academy in Colonia Juárez, Mexico.

142As the Church has spread, it has continued the practice of providing education for its members. Schools have been built in Mexico, Chile, Paraguay, Bolivia, Peru, Indonesia, Hawaii, Samoa, Tonga, Tahiti, New Zealand, Kirabati, and Fiji. The majority have been closed as public education has become available. Enrollments in 1993 for Church universities and colleges are: Brigham Young University--30,724; Ricks College--8,217; BYU Hawaii--2,033; and LDS Business College--869. The total secondary and elementary school enrollment was 9,189 in 1992. The BYU Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, dedicated in 1989, had an enrollment of 171 in 1993.

142In recent years, the Board of Education of the Church and the Board of Trustees for Church colleges and universities has been the First Presidency, six members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, a member of the Presiding Bishopric, and the presidents of the Relief Society and the Young Women of the Church.

M. Lynn Bennion, Mormonism and Education (1939); Clark V. Johnson, Mormon Education in Mexico: The Rise of the Sociedad Educativa y Cultural (1977); John Clifton Moffitt, The History of Public Education in Utah (1946); Harvey Taylor, The Story of LDS Church Schools (1971).>
