Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Ethnic Makeup in the 20th Century

Jessie L. Embry

146Since the 1950s, the LDS Church has experienced its most rapid growth, and membership even within the United States has become less European American. Because membership records do not include notations of ethnic background, it is impossible to know precisely how dramatic the ethnic shifts have been. It is clear, however, that the LDS Church faces a multicultural challenge.

146This dilemma is new for the Mormon Church. In the early 20th century, most converts were Americans or Europeans. Even though some European converts immigrated to the United States, they gave up their language and much of their culture and became Americans as well as Mormons. To assist in the assimilation process, the Church supported ethnic branches and newspapers, but these features were deemed temporary until the members could learn English and fit into the geographical congregations.

146During World War I, local public opinion against foreign languages forced some of the ethnic branches to be discontinued. But with increased immigration during the 1920s, new foreign-language branches and newspapers were established. In 1923, 30 foreign congregations met in 21 stakes: 2 Swedish, 13 Scandinavian, 2 Danish, 9 German, and 4 Mexican. But the Church began discouraging immigration to the United States during the 1920s. Church-sponsored ethnic newspapers lost readership; all four--German, Danish-Norwegian, Swedish, and Dutch--were discontinued in 1935.

146With the outbreak of World War II, the First Presidency announced that all of the foreign language branches, except the Mexican branch in Salt Lake City, would be discontinued. Following the war there was a new influx of German-speaking immigrants, and monthly German meetings started again in Cache Valley, Utah. Attendance eventually dropped off and the gatherings were permanently discontinued during the 1950s.

146After the war there was a renewed interest in ethnic groups This time going further than merely setting up branches to serve Mormon immigrants, the Church inaugurated regional missions in Utah and Idaho to preach to non-Mormons. As a result of these activities and a concern for non-English-speaking members, the Church organized Japanese, Dutch, Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, and two Native American branches in Salt Lake City during 1962 and 1963. Salt Lake stakes also organized French, Mandarin, and Cantonese Sunday schools. At the same time, Native American branches were organized in the Southwest Indian Mission, which had been created in 1942 to serve the Navajo and Hopi peoples. By the late 1960s, the mission had 57 Native American branches. In 1964, the Church created another Indian mission in Rapid City, South Dakota. Spanish-speaking branches were also organized in the Spanish-American Mission in the southwest United States.

146Ethnic branches continued throughout the 1960s. However, during the early 1970s, Church leaders questioned the policy of sponsoring separate branches and missions. In 1972, Church leaders sent out a letter that many stakes interpreted to mean that they should absorb the ethnic groups In the same year, the Southwest Indian Mission was also dissolved. At first, some missionaries in the three geographical missions--Colorado, Arizona, and Arizona-New Mexico--continued to learn Navajo and work exclusively with Native Americans. By 1980, however, the mission president in the Rapid City, South Dakota, mission informed his missionaries that they were not called strictly to an Indian mission. The idea of separate branches and missions for ethnic and foreign-language-speaking members started to vanish.

146With the introduction of the Basic Unit plan in 1977, however, the idea of ethnic branches returned. Several factors influenced the formation of new branches. Increasing Numbers of Southeast Asians immigrating to the United States, a growing Church population in largely black sections of American cities as a result of increased missionary efforts following the priesthood Revelation in 1978, and a desire by ethnic groups such as Tongans, Samoans, Hispanics, and Native Americans to worship in their own language and with members of similar backgrounds led to separate congregations. Branches representing these ethnic groups can be found throughout the United States. The map shows branches and wards whose primary language is not English. There were at least 405 foreign-language branches in the United States in 1992. There are other ethnic branches that are more difficult to identify because the meetings are conducted in English. Native American and African American branches, for example, would not show up in such a listing. For example, while there are only two Navajo units listed for the Chinle Stake in Arizona, created in 1990, most of the stake's members are Native Americans.

146Dealing with multicultural groups creates a dilemma for the Mormon Church. While the Doctrine and Covenants states, "Every man shall hear the fullness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language," the Church has encouraged integration so that members can become "fellow citizens with the saints" (Eph. 2:19). These dissimilar ideals have led to the changing policy toward ethnic branches. This continues to be an unresolved issue for the Church.

Jessie L. Embry, "Ethnic Groups and the LDS Church," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 25 (Winter 1992):81-97; Jessie L. Embry, "Little Berlin: Swiss Saints of the Logan Tenth Ward," Utah Historical Quarterly 56 (Summer 1988):222-235; Richard L. Jensen, "Mother Tongue: Use of Non-English Languages in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the United States, 1850-1983," New Views of Mormon History: A Collection of Essays in Honor of Leonard J. Arrington, Davis Bitton and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, editors (1987), 273-303.>
