Richard H. Jackson, Donald Q. Cannon, S. Kent Brown, Historical Atlas of Mormonism ( 1994)

Emergence of Mormonism on the American Landscape (1950-1965)

Jan Shipps

152For more than a century after the settlement of the Great Salt Lake Valley (1847), the great majority of Latter-day Saints lived in "Zion in the tops of the mountains," an area extending outward from Temple Square across all of the state of Utah, northward to Idaho and Wyoming, southward to Arizona, westward to Nevada, and eastward to Colorado. Known to geographers, historians, and other social scientists as the Mormon culture region, to the Saints the Intermountain West has always been Mormonism's center place; the remainder of the world, including the rest of the United States, was the mission field.

152While nearly 20 percent of the membership of the LDS Church lived outside Zion as early as 1930, references to the Saints in both textbooks and the popular press continued for decades to picture Mormonism as a regional phenomenon, a faith community situated in the Intermountain West. This is not as surprising as one might think: with the exception of California and a few large metropolitan areas, branches of local Mormons outside the Intermountain West were nearly all associated with the geographical headquarters of regional LDS missions, which, for the most part, were housed in Victorian mansions or other substantial dwellings in residential areas. Although identified by signs as LDS mission headquarters, these structures did not resemble churches; therefore, they did not advertise the existence of local Mormon congregations. Moreover, despite the fact that a number of LDS ward houses had been built in southern California and in other Pacific states before 1941 and despite several substantial meetinghouses located in the larger urban areas of the nation, these buildings likewise failed to advertise the presence of LDS congregations effectively since they were not peculiarly Mormon from an architectural standpoint.

152But this changed dramatically between 1945 and 1965 as LDS members from the Intermountain West, most of whom belonged to the Church's lay priesthood, settled with their families in many different areas of the United States. Joining branches of longtime Mountain Saints and the rapidly expanding cadre of LDS converts who had never gathered to Zion, these Utah Mormons provided the lay leadership critical to the organization of LDS stakes and wards all across the country. The formation of these basic congregational units of the Church called for the building of meetinghouses on an unprecedented scale.

152In what turned out to be a brilliant decision from the standpoint of the maintenance of LDS identity in an altered situation, the Brethren at the head of the Church hierarchy decreed that the Church's standard building plans would be used for all these LDS structures. Their edict, which appears to have been made on practical and economic grounds, has been from an aesthetic point of view much maligned. But in view of the significance of place to the Saints, the sagacity of the decision that led the Saints to build structures that gave the impression of the appearance of a new religious enterprise is evident in retrospect.

152Members of virtually all of these newly formed mission field stakes and wards included western Saints who had been born in the Church and reared in a distinctive Mormon culture. This culture was as firmly rooted in a sense of place (Zion in the tops of the mountains) as in the sense of unity and order implicit in a world whose structure rested on a coherent plan of salvation and a clearly defined system of ecclesiastical hierarchy that stretched from twelve-year-old boys ordained as deacons in the Aaronic Priesthood to the president of the Church, who was also its prophet, seer, and revelator. In many of these newly organized units there were also members who were lifelong Saints and longtime converts who had never moved west, but whose religious imagination as well as institutional life revolved around Salt Lake City, Mormonism's center place. In addition, the new LDS congregations included substantial and sometimes overwhelming proportions of Latter-day Saints whose conversion to this particular form of Christianity was only the first step in becoming Mormon; they needed a special place where the mormonizing process could go forward. No matter what their physical location, the neat utilitarian multifunctional structures that the local Saints built according to the Church's standard plan were distinctively Mormon places. The very fact that these clearly identifiable LDS structures could be found in town after town and suburb after suburb cultivated among the Saints what might be called a Zionic sense, making the very LDS meetinghouses themselves agents of assimilation and signals that wherever the Saints gather, there Zion is.

Martha Bradley, "The Church and Colonel Saunders: Mormon Standard Plan Architecture" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1981); Richard O. Cowan, The Church in the Twentieth Century (1985), especially Chapter 14; Tim B. Heaton, "Vital Statistics," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, editor (1992) 4:1518-1537.>
