Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

EVERY MAN WALKETH IN HIS OWN WAY

In a defining article printed in The Wall Street Journal, William J. Bennett, former Secretary of Education in the government of the United States, noted that during the last three decades, from 1960-1990, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the United States nearly tripled, and total social spending by all levels of government (measured in constant 1990 dollars) rose from $143 billion to $757 billion—more than a fivefold increase. At the same time, inflation-adjusted spending on education increased by 225 percent.<#>1

On the surface it all sounds wonderful, the reflection of a golden age for the country, a time when America stands preeminent above all other nations in its efforts to attend to the social needs of its people. But don't be fooled by the figures; there is a dark and somber side to what is happening in our country, something Bennett describes as the "decline of America." These hard realities are illustrated by the following:<#>2

♦ Violent crimes increased from 288,460 in 1960 (16.1 per 10,000 population) to 1,820,130 in 1990 (73.2 per 10,000 population). The rate of violent crimes in the U.S. is higher than in any other industrialized country: According to the U.S. Department of Justice, eight out of every ten Americans will be a victim of violent crime at least once in their lives.

♦ Nearly three of every four convicted criminals in the U.S. are not incarcerated, and fewer than one in ten serious crimes results in imprisonment. In 1990 the expected punishment for someone convicted of murder was 1.8 years in prison; for rape, the expected sentence was 60 days; for robbery, 23 days; for aggravated assault, only 6.4 days. The wages of sin, at least in terms of incarceration, don't amount to much!

♦ The percent of American children dependent on government welfare rose from 3.5 in 1960 to 11.9 in 1990. This more than threefold increase in welfare dependence directly reflects the alarming collapse of the family in the United States.

♦ The incidence of illegitimacy continues to escalate. In 1990, 65 percent of all births to African American women were illegitimate; in many inner-city communities, essentially all births are extramarital. Some observers have termed illegitimacy "the single most important social problem of our time—more important than crime, drugs, poverty, illiteracy, welfare, or homelessness because it drives everything else."<#>3 Federal government statistics for 1993 provide the following information on extramarital births in the United States:

Â Over 1.2 million babies were born outside of marriage (31% of all births, up from 28% only three years previously).

Â Only 48% of all nonmarital births were first births.

Â Of mothers giving birth outside of marriage, 30% were teenagers, 35% ages 20-24, and 35% ages 25 and over.

Â 82% of women born between 1954 and 1963 had premarital sex.

Â The proportion of couples who marry between the conception of a child and its birth has declined. For white couples the figure fell from 61% in the 1960s to 34% in the 1980s; for African American couples it fell from 31% to 8% in the same period.

Â Fewer babies are being placed for adoption. In the period between 1960 to 1973, one in five babies born outside of marriage to white women were placed for adoption; but in the 1980s only one in thirty such babies were placed for adoption.<#>4

♦ Nearly one in four pregnancies now ends in abortion, with approximately 1.6 million abortions performed in 1990 and more than 28 million abortions during the years from 1973 (when the Roe v. Wade decision of the U.S. Supreme Court legalizing abortion was promulgated) to 1990.

According to a recent national survey, abortion is relatively common throughout a broad section of American women, including members of some religious groups considered by reason of their public positions to be opposed to it. About half of American women will have an abortion at some point in their lives.<#>5

♦ The number of divorces in America has increased by nearly 200 percent in the last thirty years; only about 50 percent of U.S. marriages now are first-time marriages. The increase in divorces has led to an increase in the number of children directly affected by divorce.

The Plight of Our Children

The erosion occurring in the moral and ethical underpinnings so essential for the health and well-being of the nation is having a particularly deleterious effect on our children and adolescents. Indicators of the turmoil and tragedy that rip apart so many young lives include the following:

♦ The percent of children living in single-parent homes has more than tripled in the last three decades, to its current level of nearly 29 percent of all families with children. Approximately 90 percent of single-parent homes are fatherless. Some 1.3 million so-called "latchkey" children ages 5-14 are left to fend for themselves for much of the day. Unfortunately, without supervision, many of them get into trouble.

♦ The percent of mothers who work outside the home and who have a husband present in the home and children ages 6-17, increased from 28 percent in 1950 to 75 percent in 1993.<#>6 Statistics for the state of Utah, where Latter-day Saints make up the majority of the population, closely resemble those for the U.S. as a whole.

♦ According to the Children's Defense Fund,<#>7 every day in America:

Â 3 children or youths under the age of 25 die from HIV infection (AIDS).

Â 6 children or youths under the age of 20 commit suicide.

Â 13 children or youths under the age of 20 are victims of homicide.

Â 255 children or youths under age 18 are arrested for drug offenses.

Â 318 children or youths under age 18 are arrested for alcohol-related offenses.

Â 327 children or youths under age 18 are arrested for violent crimes.

Â 2,217 students drop out of high school.

Â 2,699 babies are born into poverty.

Â 3,356 babies are born to unmarried mothers.

♦ The reported incidence of child abuse increased from 101 per 10,000 Americans in 1976 to 390 per 10,000 in 1990, an almost fourfold increase. Most experts agree that the majority of such cases are never reported to law enforcement authorities.

♦ The fastest growing segment of the criminal population in America is our nation's youth. Young people between the ages of thirteen and nineteen comprise only 12 percent of the U.S. population but account for more than 22 percent of violent crime. Juvenile crime rates have decreased overall during the last couple of years, but juvenile arrests for violent crimes are continuing to increase. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the nearly quadrupling in juvenile arrests during the past three decades has involved not only the "disadvantaged minority youth in urban areas" but "all races, all social classes, and all lifestyles." Youths also are being arrested for violent crimes at younger ages. In 1982, for example, 390 teens aged thirteen to fifteen were arrested for murder. A decade later, this total had jumped to 740.<#>8 Many young criminals, who trust no one and live with no sense of the future, commit crimes of extreme violence for what seem to be unfathomably trivial reasons—the theft of sneakers, sweatpants, or lambskin coats, supposed insults, bragging rights, or perceived "props" (as in "proper respect"). Seemingly devoid of conscience, these vicious young people evince little or no regret for what they have done.

♦ Illicit drug use among teenagers rose an alarming 105 percent between 1992 and 1995, from 5.3 percent of those surveyed in 1992 to 10.9 percent in 1995.<#>9

♦ The number of unmarried teenagers getting pregnant has nearly doubled in the past two decades. By the late 1980s, nearly one unmarried teenage girl in ten got pregnant. The number of abortions undergone by unmarried teenagers (43.8 per thousand) is now approximately the same as the number of live births (42.5 per thousand) in young women of this age group, and in numerous inner-city settings there are many more babies aborted than are carried to term.

♦ Since 1960 the rate of teenage suicide has more than tripled, to a level where suicide is now the third leading cause of death among adolescents, behind only motor vehicle accidents and all other accidents. The 2 April 1991 issue of USA Today reported that one-third of U.S. teenagers say they have considered suicide, 15 percent have thought seriously about it, and 6 percent have actually tried it.

♦ Sexually active youth are the norm, not the exception. Since the 1960s, acceptance of sexual promiscuity has increased in the United States and most other Western societies to the point that having sexual relations outside of marriage is widely portrayed as acceptable behavior in television shows, movies, popular songs, and in newspaper and magazine articles. This so-called "sexual revolution" has had a marked impact on the behavior of young people. Many more unmarried youth are sexually active today than ever before in American history.

The extent of teenage sexual activity in America is well-illustrated by the results of a study conducted in 1990-91 in Forsyth County, North Carolina, by the Department of Public Health Sciences at Bowman Gray School of Medicine.<#>10 The Bowman Gray group surveyed 1,269 youth between the ages of twelve and nineteen—744 girls and 525 boys—representing a broad sampling of family incomes, although most described their family's lifestyle as "comfortable." Just over half (52 percent) of the respondents were African Americans, 48 percent were White.

The authors of the report concluded that "Forsyth County is experiencing an epidemic—teens having sex and having babies." The results of the study certainly substantiate such a conclusion: by the time they reach fifteen, half of all Black males surveyed, almost a third of the White males, a third of the Black females, and a quarter of the White females said they were having sex regularly. Before they turn twenty, from sixty to seventy percent of Forsyth County girls will have been pregnant at least once. Early sexual activity was found often to be part of a larger pattern of behavior—a lifestyle—that includes substance abuse. Fully sixty-five percent of young men who were heavy alcohol users were sexually active, as were forty-five percent of young women. Only about half as many of those who did not use alcohol were sexually active. Similar relationships were found between sexual activity and marijuana use. In other words, use of alcohol or marijuana is strongly associated with sexual activity in teenagers. The relationship between drug use and premarital sexual activity is not necessarily one of cause and effect; but the two are associated together as part of an overall lifestyle. Drug use is well-known to lower inhibitions, which may lead to increased extramarital sexual activity.

The authors of the Bowman Gray study concluded that the strongest compulsion to engage in early sex is what youth believe their friends, both boys and girls, expect of them. Sexually active youth think that having sex will give them acceptance and status, and they believe most of their friends are sexually active.

I know of no reason to believe the results of the Bowman Gray study are not at least generally applicable elsewhere in the United States and in other Western countries. The findings indicate a crisis in teenage morality in this country, an epidemic of immorality that should concern us all and that threatens to morally destroy many in the next generation of Americans.

Information on how to respond in the Lord's way to the crisis currently engulfing the family is given in Part Two of this book (chapters 6-8).
