Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

THE DECLINE OF THE FAMILY

No aspect of the change that has so altered American society during the last thirty years is more foreboding than is family breakdown. Across the sweep of time and history, family disruption has been regarded everywhere as something that threatens a child's survival, health, and well-being. The reason is rooted in our biology. Colts, calves, and fawns are fully mobile and functional within a few hours of birth. But humans are different: the human child is born helpless and totally dependent on adults for food, shelter, and general care. Years of nurturing and protection are needed before an infant grows to physical independence. Similarly, years of loving, supportive interaction by caring adults are needed for a child to grow into a socially, emotionally, and spiritually competent adult.

In every culture and historical period, the social arrangement that has proved most successful in ensuring not only the physical survival and development of the child but also its social, emotional, and spiritual growth is the family unit—the child and its biological or adoptive mother and father. In a well-balanced and thoughtful essay in The Atlantic Monthly (April 1993), Barbara Defoe Whitehead pointed out that divorce or out-of-wedlock childbirth are transforming the lives of American children. She noted that in the post-World War II generation, more than eighty percent of children grew up in a family with two biological parents who were married to each other. By 1980 only fifty percent of children born in the U.S. could expect to spend their entire childhood in an intact family. "If current trends continue," Ms. Whitehead concluded, "less than half of all children born today will live continuously with their own mother and father throughout childhood. Most American children," she noted, "will spend several years in a single-parent family led by a mother. Some will eventually live in stepparent families, but because stepparent families are more likely to break up than intact [i.e., two-biological-parent] families, an increasing number of children will experience family breakup two or even three times during childhood." It requires little imagination to predict the social consequences of that kind of family instability and attendant trauma.

It has become conventional wisdom, accepted by many in universities and government, and eagerly embraced by Madison Avenue and Hollywood, that divorce is like a bad cold, with a phase of acute discomfort, followed by a short recovery period, and a rapid return to full health. The truth is tragically different. According to a growing body of well-documented evidence, children in families disrupted by divorce or out-of-wedlock birth do much worse than children in intact families on several measures of well-being. They include the following as documented in the article by Whitehead referred to previously, unless otherwise referenced:

♦ Children in single-parent families are two to three times as likely as children in two-parent families to have emotional and behavioral problems. Results from a California study conducted by Professor Judith Wallerstein,<#>1 show that five years after a divorce more than a third of the children involved experienced moderate or severe depression. Whitehead notes that at ten years after divorce, a significant number of the now young men and women appeared to be troubled, drifting, and underachieving. At fifteen years, many of the children of divorce, by then in their thirties, were struggling to establish strong love relationships of their own. A higher than normal proportion of children from disrupted families have a harder time achieving intimacy in a relationship, forming a stable marriage, or even holding a steady job.

♦ Children in single-parent families are more likely to drop out of high school, to get pregnant as teenagers, to abuse drugs, and to be in trouble with the law. More than seventy percent of all juveniles in state reform institutions in the United States come from fatherless homes. The relationship between crime and one-parent families is so strong that it erases the relationship between race and crime and between low income and crime. Indeed, the single factor that best determines whether a young man will become a criminal is not his race, nor his economic status, but whether he has a father who lives with his mother and is married to her.

♦ Incidents of physical and sexual abuse of children are much higher in disrupted families than in families involving both biological parents. In a Canadian study conducted by Martin Daly and Margo Wilson at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, preschool children in step-families were found to be forty times as likely as children in intact families to suffer physical or sexual abuse.<#>2

♦ The father-child bond is severely, often irreparably damaged in families disrupted by divorce or illegitimacy. Close to half of such children have not seen their father at all in the past year. Many fathers have simply vanished. Legislative action to find "deadbeat dads" and require them to accept their responsibilities toward their children can hardly be expected to replace what conscience has failed to voluntarily elicit. In the California study by Professor Wallerstein already alluded to, nearly three-fourths of the respondents, now young men and women, report having poor relationships with their absentee fathers.

The Family Is in Peril

Barbara Whitehead has stated that "survey after survey shows that Americans are less inclined than they were a generation ago to value sexual fidelity, lifelong marriage, and parenthood as worthwhile personal goals. Motherhood no longer defines adult womanhood; equally important is the fact that fatherhood has declined as a norm for men. In 1976 less than half as many fathers as in 1957 said that providing for children was a life goal. The proportion of working men who found marriage and children burdensome and restrictive more than doubled in the same period. Fewer than half of all adult Americans today regard the idea of sacrifice for others as a positive moral virtue."<#>3

The conclusion to be reached from a recounting of this lamentable litany of selfishness and irresponsibility seems clear: the most important stabilizing influence in society, the family, is in dire peril. The family is being dramatically weakened and undermined, and too few people seem to care enough to do anything about it. A leading American academic expert agrees with that view. David Popenoe has said: "The American family is not simply changing: it is getting weaker. . . . Family decline drives some of our most urgent social problems. . . . The heart of the family problem lies in the steady breakup of the two-parent home. Most social scientists who study the family have become much more, not less, pessimistic in recent years about the state of the American family."<#>4

Where Have All the Fathers Gone?

In a recent intelligent and courageous book, David Blankenhorn has chronicled what he describes as the most dangerous social trend of our generation, fatherlessness.<#>5 He points out that more than half of American children will spend at least some of their childhood growing up without a father in the home, and that in a radical departure from virtually all of human history, responsible fatherhood is declining disastrously in our society. Fathers are increasingly viewed as expendable, irrelevant, and of no real value. Fatherlessness, Blankenhorn points out, is the engine driving our most urgent social problems, from crime to adolescent pregnancy to child abuse to domestic violence against women. Yet in the face of the alarming facts so carefully assembled by Blankenhorn, our society does little, or worse, glorifies the increasing "deculturation" of fatherhood. As a result, fatherhood is rapidly losing its four traditional roles: caregiver and protector, moral educator, head of family, and breadwinner.

The following table (Blankenhorn, 18, 227) illustrates the shrinking role of fatherhood in America.

Indicators of Fatherhood in America

#Percent of children living with biological father and mother #80.6 #57.7

# #1960 #1990 #Percent of births outside marriage #5.3 #28.0 #Divorced males per 100,000 married males #27.4 #112.5 #Percent of children living apart from their fathers #17.5 #36.3

Fatherhood, as Blankenhorn points out, is the social role that obligates men to their biological offspring. Its demands, more than anything else, help men become good men, be good citizens, act altruistically rather than selfishly, and fulfill their destinies as sons of God. Unless maleness is tempered by responsible fatherhood, the result is narcissism, violence, predatory sexual behavior, and the rule of the strong over the weak. Furthermore, fatherhood, by supplementing and adding to the maternal investment in children, is essential for the normal development of offspring. Fathers physically protect their children and provide them with the food, clothing, shelter, and other material resources they cannot provide for themselves. It is a father's personal involvement in the lives of his children that gives them what only a father can contribute to their identity, character, and moral foundations. Further, on a day-to-day basis, fathers provide the essential nurturing and bonding associated with feeding, playing, story-telling, loving, and even diaper changing! Indeed, Margaret Mead insists that "every known human society rests firmly on the learned nurturing behaviour of men."<#>6

The effects of fatherlessness are profound, both for men and for their offspring. The impacts on the young are especially distressing. They include the following:

Adolescent Childbearing

Adolescent childbearing is linked closely to the decline of fatherhood, not only because more males (both adolescent and adult) are willing to impregnate girls without the slightest intention of becoming an effective father but also because more girls are growing up without a father in the home. It is well-established that girls who grow up without fathers are at much greater risk for early sexual activity, adolescent childbearing, and divorce.<#>7 These findings are independent of economics: it is not lack of money but lack of a father that counts.

Domestic Violence against Women

The sickening and cowardly spectacle of men beating women is tragically common. We wince as we read of it nearly every day in our newspapers or watch reports of it on television. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 1994 about six percent of all pregnant women in the U.S. were battered by their "husbands or partners."<#>8 For every married pregnant woman who reported she was abused by her husband, almost four unmarried pregnant women reported being abused by their boyfriend. In other words, violent behavior by men toward women is strongly linked to marital status: married men are much less likely to beat the women in their lives than are unmarried men.

Childhood Poverty

A multitude of statistics and studies confirm that children in single-mother homes are much more likely to live in poverty than those in families with both parents present. In 1992, for example, about eight percent of the children of married couples in the United States lived in poverty; but in homes headed by a single mother about forty-six percent of the children lived in poverty.<#>9 The poverty experienced by single mothers is likely to be long-lasting. Single mothers remain single on average for roughly six years. In fact, only one-third of African American mothers remarry within ten years of separation. Furthermore, of never-married mothers who receive welfare benefits, about forty percent remain on the welfare rolls for ten years or more.<#>* This welfare dependency tends to be passed on from one generation to another, from mother to daughter and granddaughter.

Most observers agree that the link between family structure and child poverty is one of cause and effect, not simply a statistical correlation. Simply put, fatherlessness, with all its attendant ramifications, causes child poverty. The best antipoverty program ever devised for children is to have a stable, intact family, with both father and mother present.

It is clear from the foregoing that the declining status and importance of fatherhood in our society does not bode well for the future. No society can long survive that denigrates, demeans, and devalues fatherhood. Men who do not look upon fatherhood, preceded by an honorable marriage, as a sacred privilege and obligation, deny their own manliness and can never rise to their divine potential, either in this world or the next.

Counsel on how to deal effectively with the grave problems affecting fathers is given in Part Two of this book (chapters 6-8).

* This statistic will of course change in light of recent (1996) changes in the length of time people are eligible for government welfare assistance.
