Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

MODERN GADIANTON ROBBERS: CRIMINAL STREET GANGS IN AMERICA

Secret combinations of groups of conspirators who plot and carry out "works of darkness" have been known since the days of Cain (see Moses 5:51). Indeed, as Moroni wrote, "it hath been made known to me that they [i.e. secret combinations] are had among all people" (Ether 8:20; emphasis added). The purpose of such conspiracies is and ever will be to get power and gain. Their author is Satan, "who stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness" (2 Ne. 9:9). The tools they employ include subversion of public virtue and legally constituted authority, fraud, murder, robbery, extortion, assault—every item in the long, lamentable catalogue of greed, crime, and corruption.

Perhaps the most well-known secret combination mentioned in the Book of Mormon is that of Gadianton, himself an expert in wickedness, who became the leader of a band of villains originally led by Kishkumen. So great was their power and evil influence, the Gadianton gang did "prove the overthrow, yea, almost the entire destruction of the people of Nephi" (Hel. 2:13).

Although the concerted efforts of the people succeeded in subduing for a time "Gadianton's robbers and murderers," as they came to be called (Hel. 6:18), in the last bloody days of Nephite history they arose and spread again over the land (see 4 Ne. 1:42). Their devilish deeds contributed in a major way to the final destruction of the Nephites.

In our day, secret combinations are expressed most notably in organized criminal syndicates, such as the mafia, and in certain political and commercial organizations. Though such organizations have, as noted, plagued mankind since time immemorial, a more recent phenomenon is the rise of so-called youth<#>1 gangs. These groups display characteristics and patterns of behavior strikingly similar to those of the Gadianton robbers.

Criminal street gangs represent a new culture. For many "gangsters," the lifestyle they have adopted becomes a thrill-seeking, risk-taking way to express contempt for the status quo and to deliberately affront and insult those in society's mainstream. Although some rebellion against the structures and strictures of society is experienced by many youth as part of the process of growing up and expressing independence, gang members are characterized by their violent and destructive behavior. In the Salt Lake City area, for example, during 1995 there were 8,496 gang-related crimes, of which 2,130 were nongraffiti crimes.

Gang members are outlaws from mainstream society. The personal value system embraced by these young criminals values above all else loyalty and respect. The gang becomes, in effect, their family. Devotion to their "family" is expressed in unwavering, unquestionable loyalty to their "home boys" or "homies."

Closely related to loyalty is the issue of respect. The degree of self-worth and self-esteem held by gang members is determined by the degree to which they are able to command or demand respect. Gang members often are unable to differentiate between power and respect and believe that only if they obtain power over another person, often through fear and intimidation, will they be respected. Failure to acknowledge demands for respect prompts the expression of outlaw behavior. The gang member feels obligated to challenge, threaten, and perhaps commit violence against whoever dares to "diss" (disrespect) him/her.

Another noteworthy tenet of the gang culture is the belief held by many in an unalterable destiny, a road one is fated to go down until a point of incarceration or death is reached. Gangsters speak of "mi locos vatos" (my crazy life). This belief fuels the need to "eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die." It encourages getting what you want now, even at the expense of those who get in your way. This sense of fatalism also discourages long-term goals such as getting an education and making other provisions for the future. This attitude is reflected in the "smile now—cry later" tattoo frequently displayed by gang members.

Graffiti—the spray painting of slogans and names by gang members on public surfaces including buildings, fences, walls, desks, park benches, etc.—is of two basic types. The first, "gang" graffiti, is directly involved with gang culture and is generally confined to the specific neighborhood or "turf" of a dominant gang. It is used to "stake out" an area or neighborhood, to display ownership, to mark territory, and to show disrespect for other gangs or the police. In gang culture an act of perceived disrespect is a challenge to one's honor and requires a response by the offended party, almost always violent in nature. Gang graffiti is often called "the newspaper of the street" because it provides information on what is going on within local gang communities. It identifies gang members, their territory or "turf," alliances with other gangs, current enemies, attitudes toward the police, etc.

The second type of graffiti, "tagger" graffiti, is not confined to a specific geographic area. "Taggers" strive for notoriety and name recognition. They adopt a specific nickname or moniker, which they use in signing or identifying their work. The harder or more dangerous the task, the more prestige is attached to the "tagger" and his associates (his "crew" or "posse").

Obviously, the lines between "gang" graffiti and "tagger" graffiti become blurred as the motivations of taggers and street gangsters—for recognition, excitement, notoriety, etc.—merge and become identical.

Graffiti is without doubt the most conspicuous gang-related crime—one that adversely affects community pride and introduces a sense of fear and insecurity. In order to bring control over the life of a community back into the hands of responsible, law-abiding citizens, it is essential that graffiti promptly be removed. In addition, every effort must be made to reduce the attractiveness of a neighborhood to the sprayers of graffiti. This can be done by the use of climbing shrubs (preferably with thorns) to cover walls; neighborhood watch programs; and the installation of outside lights, perhaps linked to lawn sprinkling systems; and so forth. To effectively combat graffiti, the community must take steps to minimize its visibility. When it is quickly removed, it makes the risk and effort involved in defacing public property discouraging to the perpetrators.

Street gang culture crosses all social boundaries. Although many gang members come from dysfunctional and/or minority families, often with low incomes, some come from apparently strong, traditional middle- or upper-class families. Furthermore, although the dominant percentage of gang members may come from minority racial or ethnic groups, the culture of criminal street gangs encompasses every hue of the ethnic rainbow. There are no racial, ethnic, cultural, age, gender, religious, socioeconomic, or geographic boundaries to gang membership.

The reasons why youth join gangs are complex. An important clue to the etiology of gangs lies in the fact that ethnic gangs developed in America following the arrival of each of the waves of foreign immigrants during the last hundred years or more. In general, most immigrants who achieved "the American dream" did so by legitimate means and moved within a generation or so into the mainstream of American life. But some of those who felt excluded from the larger society by reason of discrimination, poverty, language problems, etc., sought to escape their plight by illegitimate, criminal means.

The feelings of belonging to an ethnic underclass, excluded from the mainstream of American life, of being considered of little worth as a person, powerless, and disenfranchised, open the door to violence and other antisocial behavior. Under such conditions, joining a gang may give a sense of belonging, of power, of solidarity with others, and of family.

Those who become fully committed to the criminal street gang culture are, for practical purposes, beyond the reach of families, schools, churches, and social agencies, unless and until they want with all their hearts to change and become willing to persevere in a prolonged, conscious effort to do so. Those who wish to get out of a gang may face the threat of physical violence at the hands of other gang members. In some instances, they may be required to move away from their neighborhood and start life anew elsewhere.

Street gangs are typically involved in a broad variety of criminal activities, including drug trafficking, armed robberies, rape, intimidation, extortion, homicide, etc. They are in today's world increasingly well-armed; some gangs in the United States have access to highly sophisticated weapons such as grenades, machine guns, rocket launchers, etc. The potential for effective terrorist activities by well-organized gangs is obvious.

Gang members often display tattoos and wear clothing associated with their particular organization. They may "flash" distinctive hand signals that instantly identify them both to friend and foe. It is wrong, however, to believe that all youth wearing baggy clothing—oversized pants that are worn low on the hips and the like—or who sport colored (usually red or blue) hats, bandanas, or other articles of clothing, are necessarily involved in a gang; although they may be. Such clothing is popular among today's youth, both with those who belong to gangs and those who do not. However, naive youngsters, who are not "gangsters" but wear clothing associated with the gang culture, may give the false impression to real gang members that they are affiliated with a gang. This may put the individual involved at considerable personal risk.

The impact of gang activities on other law-abiding youth can turn the lives of the victims into nightmares. Extortion, threats, bullying, and assaults are common. The following two incidents, taken from the proceedings of the 1993 Gang Conference of the Salt Lake Area Gang Project, illustrate what is all too common.

At a Salt Lake City elementary school, a fifth grader refused to go to school because a classmate threatened that his older brother's gang would kill him. The victim's error: he had accidentally bumped into the other student on the playground!

In another incident, also in the Salt Lake City area, a seventh-grade girl refused to join a neighborhood gang and became the target of extortion. The gang also threatened to kill her and her family if she divulged to anyone their tactics of terror and intimidation. Not surprisingly, the girl began to fall apart psychologically under the strain. Her school grades plummeted, and she became progressively more withdrawn in class. Finally, her teacher was able to learn of the torment and put an end to it.

The fear felt by children who live in gang-infested neighborhoods is told with the honesty and openness of childhood in the following true story:

In my neighborhood there is a lot of shooting and three people got shot. On the next day when I was going to school I saw a little stream of blood on the ground. One day after school me and my mother had to dodge bullets. I was not scared.

There is a church and a school that I go to in my neighborhood. There are robbers that live in my building, they broke into our house twice. There are rowhouses in my neighborhood and a man got shot, and he was dead. On another day I saw a boy named Zak get shot. By King High School Susan Harris got shot and she died. It was in the newspaper. When me and my mother was going to church we could see the fire from the guns being shot in 4414 building. I was not scared. In my neighborhood there are too many fights. I have never been in a fight before. There are many trees in my neighborhood.

God is going to come back one day and judge the world. Not just my neighborhood.

I know these are really, really bad things, but I have some good things in my neighborhood. Like sometimes my neighborhood is peaceful and quiet and there is no shooting. When me and my mother and some friends go to the lake we have a lot of fun. Sometimes the children in my building go to Sunday School with me and my mother. Also the building I live in is so tall I can see downtown and the lake. It looks so pretty.

I believe in God and I know one day we will be in a gooder place than we are now.<#>2

Finally, a word about girls and gangs. Females may be full-fledged members of gangs or be associated with them. They are used not only as sex objects by male gangsters but increasingly as couriers, who carry weapons and drugs on their persons for male gang members, in the belief they are less likely to be searched by male law enforcement officers. They may also be used to lure or entice rival gangsters into an ambush.

There are, however, all-girl gangs. One that comes to mind is the infamous Krazy Rose Park Queens, a Salt Lake area female gang. I talked to two members of that group recently while visiting the juvenile prison at Decker Lake, Utah, where I attended a Sunday School class with them. Both were in prison for armed robbery. Their copies of the scriptures were well-read, and the girls were obviously familiar with them. These two young women, both soft-spoken and polite, unwittingly demonstrated the ability of gang members to compartmentalize their lives. They saw no dissonance, no incongruity, between their membership in a gang and their deep commitment to the Church. Church was for Sundays, and the rest of the week was for the gang.

Against the background of this necessarily brief and sketchy outline of gang culture, let us now examine how gang behavior parallels that of the Gadianton robbers who did so much damage to Nephite society. Sociological information is of great value in helping us understand how gangs function and what motivates gang members. But it is well to keep in mind that behind it all stands the menacing, malignant figure of the adversary, the "founder of murder and works of darkness." Gangs are literally the devil's work. That is not to say, of course, that all gang members are the conscious, direct agents of the devil. Far from it. But we can be sure that, figuratively speaking at least, he rubs his hands in glee at their deeds of darkness. The scriptures cited below make clear the association between the deeds and behavior of the Gadianton robbers and those of contemporary gang members:

Loyalty to Fellow Gang Members

"Satan did stir up the hearts of the more part of the Nephites, insomuch that they did unite with those bands of robbers, and did enter into their covenants and their oaths, that they would protect and preserve one another in whatsoever difficult circumstances they should be placed, that they should not suffer for their murders, and their plunderings, and their stealings" (Hel. 6:21).

An Outlaw Society with Its Own Laws

"And whosoever of those who belonged to their band should reveal unto the world of their wickedness and their abominations, should be tried, not according to the laws of their country, but according to the laws of their wickedness, . . . And it came to pass that all these iniquities did come unto them in the space of not many years" (Hel. 6:24, 32).

Signs and Signals

"They did have their signs, yea, their secret signs, and their secret words; and this that they might distinguish a brother who had entered into the covenant, that whatsoever wickedness his brother should do he should not be injured by his brother, nor by those who did belong to his band, who had taken this covenant. And thus they might murder, and plunder, and steal, and commit whoredoms and all manner of wickedness, contrary to the laws of their country and also the laws of their God" (Hel. 6:22-23).

Distinctive Clothing

"And they were girded about after the manner of robbers; and they had a lamb-skin about their loins, and they were dyed in blood, and their heads were shorn, and they had headplates upon them" (3 Ne. 4:7).

Recruitment Activities

"And there was also a cause of much sorrow among the Lamanites; for behold, they had many children who did grow up and began to wax strong in years, that they became for themselves, and were led away by some who were Zoramites, by their lyings and their flattering words, to join those Gadianton robbers" (3 Ne. 1:29).

A Spreading Menace

"And these Gadianton robbers, who were among the Lamanites, did infest the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof began to hide up their treasures in the earth" (Morm. 1:18).

Can anyone doubt that the criminal street gangs that "infest the land" represent the modern counterpart of the Gadianton robbers of old?

The Special Burdens Borne by Children

Although all of society suffers from the activities of criminal gangs, children suffer perhaps most, both as victims of gang violence and as tragic participants lured into gang activity. Law enforcement officers indicate that gang members often will entice younger children into carrying out the most dangerous activities such as being the shooter in drive-by shootings, in the belief they will receive lighter treatment if apprehended.

Children deserve and have a right to peace and security. The great prophet Isaiah intoned, "And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children" (Isa. 54:13).

And Jesus himself declared, "Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish" (Matt. 18:14).

Jesus' great love for children is illustrated with great poignancy by this tender passage from the Book of Mormon:

"And it came to pass that he commanded that their little children should be brought. So they brought their little children and set them down upon the ground round about him, and Jesus stood in the midst . . . and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them. And when he had done this he wept again; And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones . . . and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them" (3 Ne. 17:11-12, 21-24).

Modern-day prophets have lifted their voices in pleading on behalf of children. President Gordon B. Hinckley said:

"My plea—and I wish I were more eloquent in voicing it—is a plea to save the children. Too many of them walk with pain and fear, in loneliness and despair. Children need sunlight. They need happiness. They need love and nurture. They need kindness and refreshment and affection. Every home, regardless of the cost of the house, can provide an environment of love which will be an environment of salvation" (Ensign, November 1994, 54).

Is there anything we can do to combat the modern Gadianton robbers who comprise today's criminal street gangs? We should not despair, much can be done. Chapter 7 provides some counsel.
