Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

THE DECLINING ROLE OF RELIGION IN SOCIETY

President James E. Faust has noted that in contrast to earlier, God-fearing times, a new civil religion seems to be developing in America. He said: "The civil religion I refer to is a secular religion. It has no moral absolutes. It is nondenominational. It is non-theistic. It is politically focused. It is antagonistic to religion. It rejects the historic religious traditions of America. It feels strange. If this trend continues, nonbelief will be more honored than belief. While all beliefs must be protected, are atheism, agnosticism, cynicism, and moral relativism to be more safeguarded and valued than Christianity, Judaism, and the tenets of Islam, which hold that there is a Supreme Being and that mortals are accountable to him? If so, this would, in my opinion, place America in great moral jeopardy."<#>1

The secularism that is so aggressively being promoted rejects the historical religious traditions of the nation, is openly antagonistic toward religion based upon belief in God and his commandments, and has a definite political axe to grind. This "secular religion" seeks to trivialize and marginalize belief in God and ridicules religious people as either credulous fools or conniving knaves.

Such secularism is a relatively new phenomenon in America. Until recently, prevailing public attitudes toward religion in America were generally respectful. A case in point: I enjoyed recently watching again a movie entitled Heaven Knows, Mr. Allison, produced in 1957 and starring Robert Mitchum and Deborah Kerr. The movie depicts the adventures of a U.S. Marine (Mitchum) and a Catholic nun (Kerr) stranded on a Japanese-occupied island somewhere in the Pacific during World War II. Though the man and the woman are attracted to each other, there is no hanky-panky, no impropriety, none of the sexual promiscuity and casual coarseness seen in many movies produced today. Mitchum is a perfect gentleman, bound by his loyalty to the Corps; Kerr a perfect lady, bound by her loyalty to her religious vocation. Kerr's religious beliefs, though portrayed as largely incomprehensible to Mitchum, are referred to in terms of the respect that they deserve. Both the marine and the nun display a nobility of character and an integrity, which leaves viewers of the film exalted rather than in need of a good wash. How things have changed, for the worse, in the last forty years!

The Status of Religion in Modern America

What then is the status of religion in modern American society? Is it healthy or in need of rejuvenation and renewal? For more than fifty years the Princeton Religion Research Center and the Gallup Poll have studied religious behavior and opinion in America. Each year up to 40,000 interviews are held with representative nationwide samples of men and women, ages eighteen and older. From eight fundamental measurements of religious behavior, a composite average index is calculated as a means of tracking broad trends over time. Some of the indicators examined have been found to be remarkably constant from year to year, while others have changed markedly in reaction to events, both secular and religious. In 1991 the index stood at 656 out of a theoretically possible 1,000, up modestly (by 5 to 6 points) over the previous three years, when it had reached an all-time low.

The current status of the individual components that go to make up the index may be summarized as follows:

Â Belief in God, however defined, is unusually high in America, ranging from 94-99% of adults over the last fifty years.

Â Approximately nine in ten adults say there is a religious denomination or faith they prefer. This level has stayed relatively constant since 1947.

Â Only six of ten adults feel that religion is able to answer today's problems. This indicator of religious faith has ranged widely over time, from as high as 81% in 1957 to a low of 56% in 1984.

Â Approximately 2/3 of the adult population claim to now be members of a church, synagogue, or similar place of worship.

Â In 1993 about 55% of adults had confidence in a church or "organized religion." Confidence in churches was severely tested during the 1980s, as scandals involving certain televangelists and doctrinal or policy differences within denominations were widely reported in the media.

Â Confidence in the clergy also suffered during the 1980s but has risen somewhat in more recent years. In 1993 just over half of those surveyed expressed confidence in the integrity and honesty of the clergy.

Â Although three Americans in four questioned in the early 1950s said that religion was very important in their lives, that figure stood in 1993 at just under 60%.

Â Approximately 40% of the adult population attended a place of worship during a typical week in 1993.

Denominational switching is common in the United States. The Princeton Religion Research Center has noted that about one adult in four has changed faiths or denominations at least once from the religion in which he or she was raised. For the most part these switches have benefitted Protestant denominations, with nine times as many becoming Protestants as become Catholics.

Roof and McKinney have examined in detail current religious trends in America.<#>2 They note that religious individualism is characteristic of contemporary life in this country. Involvement within a religious institution seems of decreasing significance. Another author puts it this way: "The mainline denominations are bleeding. Their churches have more pew than flock, and unless they change, they have more history than future. Little congregations of fewer than a hundred at worship in rural communities and inner cities are shutting their doors at the rate of fifty a week, by one estimate."<#>3

Religion in America is becoming increasingly a matter of personal choice and conscience, with people "shopping around," picking a little here and a little there from one denomination or another, discarding what they don't like and keeping what appeals to them. Thus, many American Catholics, who still consider themselves to be "good Catholics," reject the teachings of their church on such matters as abortion and divorce, viewing such issues to be private matters outside of the purview and authority of their church.

The long-standing synthesis of religion and culture that has existed since almost the beginning of the nation is crumbling. Ascriptive factors, such as race, ethnicity, social class, and region, which have long been of major importance in determining religious affiliation in America, are becoming less important. Perhaps in part this change relates to the general weakening of traditional social roots and ties in this country. What the end result of these changes will be is still difficult to ascertain, but one thing is certain: the consequences for many churches are and will be important.

Considerable evidence indicates that people with strong religious convictions are more resistant to physical and social ills than are nonbelievers. The well-known reduced incidence of heart disease and most cancers among practicing American Latter-day Saints is a case in point. A recent editorial in The Wall Street Journal, 6 March 1996, entitled "Drugs and God," pointed out that drug abuse is not just a social problem but rather is a moral problem requiring a moral solution. The writer notes that in the inner city, churches are often the only institutions that still work, albeit imperfectly, and adds, "Religion gives people, particularly teenagers, what they most need to combat drugs, a reason to say no."

Before leaving this brief discussion of the current status of religion in America, it is important to note that Americans express considerable unease about the ethics and moral standards of the populace. In 1,000 interviews conducted by the Princeton Group in 1991, only thirty-three percent of respondents expressed satisfaction with the ethical and moral standards of the American people; only twenty-four percent were satisfied with the honesty and standards of behavior in this country; and only thirteen percent were satisfied with our care of the poor and needy.

The Spiritual Malaise in American Society

From the foregoing it seems fair to state that while religious practice in America is flourishing, religious behavior—behavior that comes from deep and abiding religious faith—is much more narrowly based. It is important to consider the reasons for this discrepancy.

Many thoughtful observers have noted the increased coarseness, vulgarity, gratuitous violence, pessimism, and cynicism evident in our society. A growing percentage of Americans have lost confidence in the capacity of government, industry, and churches to provide solutions. A recent story in the Deseret News, March 8, 1996, illustrates the point. An organization calling itself "Campaign for America" has been asking groups of citizens about their views on the future. When asked what makes her most angry, one woman in a recently convened "focus group" replied without hesitation, "The sadness of America." Few thought their children would do better. One man said, "I feel that I probably lived in the golden age of America, and that young people are probably not going to see that." "Downhill," one after another said when asked how things are going for the nation.

There is a pessimistic and anxious mood abroad in the country. The ethos of America—its moral, spiritual and aesthetic character and habits—is ill and in serious need of treatment.

There are, perhaps, nearly as many diagnosticians of what is wrong with our society as there are chroniclers of the unraveling of the moral fabric of America. Materialism, drugs, permissiveness, Marx, Freud, a lack of credible role models, the transiency of our society, self-indulgence, technological change, which leaves many feeling alienated and adrift, humanism—you name it; all have been indicted.

I submit that the real reason for the crisis of our time is spiritual malaise—a spiritual anomie, an exhaustion of the soul. People experience but do not learn. This spiritual apathy is described by the word acedia. Acedia comes from the Greek, a (not) plus kédos (care)—hence, not caring, boredom, or apathy. In its modern usage acedia refers to sloth, one of the Seven Deadly Sins enumerated by Thomas Aquinas in his Summa Theologiae.

More instructively for our purposes, acedia also means spiritual torpor. But acedia signifies more than just spiritual laziness or even indifference. It connotes misplaced priorities, a darkening of the soul, a hatred of the good, a rejection of spiritual things, which leads ultimately to a cankering of the soul, bringing sadness, ill temper, and death of the heart. It is termed a "deadly sin" by some because it is "an oppressive sorrow that so weighs upon a man's mind that he wants not to exercise any virtue." It leads to spiritual paralysis.<#>4 It is related to that condition described by Nephi when he said that Laman and Lemuel "were past feeling" (1 Ne. 17:45).

Acedia, a sour, ill-tempered rejection of spiritual things, manifests itself in the querulous assertion that only secular arguments should be entertained on moral questions. It is seen in the mean-spirited shouting down in a public forum of those who use arguments based on religious beliefs to object to homosexual or other immoral activities. Yet, as Richard John Neuhaus has pointed out: "In a democracy that is free and robust, an opinion is no more disqualified for being `religious' than for being atheistic, or psychoanalytic, or Marxist, or just plain dumb. There is no legal or constitutional question about the admission of religion to the public square; there is only a question about the free and equal participation of citizens in our public business."<#>5 In my view acedia lies behind Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's concerns about what he terms a "relentless cult of novelty" in art, with its assertion that art need not be good or pure, just so long as it is new, newer, and newer still. Such art, Solzhenitsyn asserts, "conceals an unyielding and long-sustained attempt to undermine, ridicule and uproot all moral precepts. There is no God, there is no truth, the universe is chaotic, all is relative. . . . How clamorous it all is, but also—how helpless."<#>6 Widespread feelings of acedia lead inevitably both to cynicism and to reduced capacity for shock, disgust, and outrage—an anesthesia of the soul that inures one to the sufferings of others. During the riots in Los Angeles in 1992, for example, two men were filmed pulling a truck driver from his truck, crushing his skull with a brick, and then doing a victory dance over his unconscious body. They were successfully defended in the courts on the basis that people cannot be held accountable for getting caught up in mob violence. They were just in the wrong place at the wrong time—themselves victims more than criminals, it was claimed successfully.

What is happening in our society, then, is "a corruption of the heart, a turning away in the soul. Our aspirations, our affections, and our desires are turned toward the wrong things."<#>7

Abraham Lincoln, one of the noblest sons this nation or any other has ever produced, understood, as de Tocqueville had observed more than a century before Lincoln's presidency, that America will be great only to the extent that it is good. In designating and setting apart a day for National Prayer and Humiliation in 1863, Lincoln declared in words that apply equally to our time: "We have grown in number, wealth, and power as no other Nation has ever grown. But we have forgotten God. We have forgotten the gracious hand which preserved us in peace and multiplied and enriched and strengthened us, and we have vainly imagined, in the deceitfulness of our hearts, that all these blessings were produced by some superior wisdom and virtue of our own. Intoxicated with unbroken success we have become too self-sufficient to feel the necessity of redeeming and preserving grace, too proud to pray to the God that made us!"<#>8

Perhaps acedia—spiritual torpor and apathy—can be explained in part by the failure of some who profess religious belief to be spiritually in tune. Under such circumstances, though those involved may draw near to God with their lips, their hearts are frequently far from Him. "They teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (JS-H 1:19). Like the seed that fell upon stony places in the parable of the sower (Matt. 13:4-8), they have "no deepness of earth: and when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away." Those so involved may have given mental assent, but they have not experienced the "mighty change of heart" needed for true spiritual commitment. Only with that commitment can the storms of adversity found in every life successfully be weathered and the growing disdain for spiritual things, which characterizes our society, be overcome.
