Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

IT STARTS WITH ME

What can we do, as individuals, families, and the people of Christ, to push back the world, to combat the spreading evil that threatens to engulf us all? There are no ready answers, no magic buttons to press. The road ahead is long and hard, and we will surely suffer casualties along the way. However, a few principles may serve as guideposts on our journey.

Public and Private Morality Have Their Foundations in Religion

No man or woman can maintain personal morality unless his or her actions flow out of a genuine religious faith and are based on eternal religious principles. Those who are not so based will eventually be tripped up by the moral relativism of situational ethics. This may sound like an extreme position, but it is one that the scriptures proclaim and history affirms. "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it" (Ps. 127:1).

In his address of 19 September 1796, given as he prepared to leave office, President George Washington spoke about the importance of morality to the country's well-being, "Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education . . . reason and experience both forbid us to expect that National morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle." Washington also said: "Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. . . . And let us with caution indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion. . . . Can it be, that Providence has not connected the permanent felicity of a Nation with its virtue?"<#>1

According to James Madison, often referred to as the father of the American Constitution: "We have staked the whole future of American civilization, not upon the power of government, far from it. We have staked the future [of all of our political institutions] upon the capacity of each and all of us to govern ourselves, to sustain ourselves, according to the Ten Commandments of God."<#>2

To the extent that this nation weakens or abandons the religious foundations on which it was based, it will surely fail and eventually fall. By contrast, any nation that keeps God's commandments and walks in his ways will prosper. Our whole Western system of laws and jurisprudence flows from our Judeo-Christian heritage as set forth in the Old and New Testaments. The strength of America is neither basically political nor legal. The foundation of this land, whether the citizenry wish to admit it or not, is spiritual. When that foundation is weakened, the future of the nation itself is put in jeopardy.

Most observers agree that the roots of Western society go back to ancient Greece and Rome. In a myriad of ways the contributions of those ancient states are permanently woven into the fabric of our modern society. Although we admittedly are the heirs of the Greco-Roman world, modern Western societies trace their direct spiritual and cultural ancestries to the contributions of Judeo-Christian thought as it developed from the teachings of the Hebrew prophets and Jesus of Nazareth.

In no country are Judeo-Christian contributions to every aspect of society of greater importance than in the United States of America. The early colonists, who came to America from Europe in the seventeenth century, journeyed here to fulfill their religious faith, to obtain the liberty to worship God according to the dictates of their consciences. For over two centuries, Americans have held fast to our founding fathers' belief in freedom for all people—a belief that springs directly from their spiritual heritage. John Adams, our second president, wrote in 1789, "Our Constitution was designed only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate for the government of any other."<#>3 The French jurist and historian, Alexis de Tocqueville, who traveled America in the early nineteenth century, stated, "Religion in America takes no direct part in the government of society, but it must be regarded as the first of their political institutions; for if it does not impart a taste for freedom, it facilitates the use of it."<#>4

What, then, are the major contributions of Judeo-Christian thought to modern political and social principles and practices? Some of the most important contributions include the following concepts:

The Concept of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Mankind

God, who created humankind in his own image, gave his sons and daughters their moral agency—the right to choose for themselves. His very nature forbids God from creating slaves. An ancient American prophet, Samuel the Lamanite, described mankind's freedom of choice as follows: "And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free. He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you" (Hel. 14:30-31).

The practical results of this belief in God, who created his sons and daughters "in his image," and endowed them with moral agency, include the following:

Liberty Is the Inherent Right of All of God's Children

Thomas Jefferson put it this way, "The God who gave us life gave us liberty." Any system of government that denies liberty denigrates man and denies God. Margaret Thatcher, former British Prime Minister, has observed that societies founded on the basis of morality and freedom prosper, but those that are not founded on those principles do not survive for long, as witness the recent demise of the Soviet Union, though they may do much harm during their existence.<#>5

The Progression of Mankind

The concept of progress is neither Greek nor Roman; both viewed history as an endless cycle, without any notion of progress. The idea of historical progress is rooted in Jewish and Christian thought. As God's nature forbids him to create slaves, so too it forbids him creating sons and daughters intrinsically and eternally destined to be forever his inferiors. God's work and glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of his children, to have them share in his glory, growing ever more like him, progressing toward Godhood itself. Jesus said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect" (Matt. 5:48), and to the Romans Paul wrote, "We are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:16-17). The view that mankind's eternal destiny is to progress, that in a sense our very nature demands it, and further that history, as we know it on earth, has a beginning and an end, puts new perspective on who men and women are and what they may become and underlines the urgency on spending our mortal probation in endeavors that will further our eternal progression.

God Hath Made of One Blood All Nations of Men

In Judeo-Christian thought, God grants a fundamental equality to all human beings. With him there is no hierarchy of position, station, inheritance, or worldly honor. The American Declaration of Independence reflects this idea: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal." The founding fathers did not, of course, suffer from the dangerous illusion that all men are equal in terms of talents and abilities. Common experience teaches otherwise: there is, after all, only one Michael Jordan! But the signers of the Declaration of Independence believed passionately that all of mankind possess inalienable rights, including life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; and that men and women are, by reason of those rights, considered equal before the law. The language of the Declaration of Independence, in spirit at least, has its origin in these words of the Apostle Paul to the Athenians: "God that made the world and all things therein . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:24, 26). The Prophet Nephi, unknown though he was by the signers of the Declaration of Independence, expressed much the same thought concerning the human race: "He [God] inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God" (2 Ne. 26:33).

The Judeo-Christian concept of the equality yet uniqueness of every human soul differs from Communist notions of man, which pull all down to the same level and enforce uniformity.

The Concept of Compassion

In most religious traditions, concern for the suffering of others is limited to one's own family, clan, tribe, faith group, or nation. Christ's concept of compassion, however, puts no limit on it. In the noblest and most exalted expressions ever voiced of God's concern for all and of our mutual interdependence, Jesus said:

Â "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you" (Matt. 5:44).

Â Care for the hungry, the naked, the sick, the stranger, the prisoner (see Matt. 25:31-45).

Â "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35).

Â "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13).

Â To one who inquired, "Who is my neighbour?" Jesus recounted the story of the good Samaritan. After others—a priest and a Levite—had passed by a man who lay wounded, without helping, it was the despised Samaritan who bound up his wounds, brought him to an inn, took care of him, and left funds for his further care. Then said Jesus, "Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?" The listener, his vision enlarged, replied, "He that shewed mercy on him." Then said Jesus unto him, "Go, and do thou likewise" (Luke 10:29-37).

Â "If any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment" (D&C 104:18).

The Concept of Absolute Truth

"I am the way, the truth, and the life," Jesus proclaimed (John 14:6), and Moses said, "Ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he" (Deut. 32:3-4). President John Adams noted that in giving to the world the notion of God as the source of all truth, the Hebrews laid before the human race the possibilities of civilization. Truth is independent of temporal power, riches, or worldly position. It comes from God; he is its author. There are moral absolutes. Speaking to Brigham Young University students, Rex E. Lee, former university president, said this about absolute truth: "There are in this life some absolutes, things that never change, regardless of time, place, or circumstances. They are eternal truths, eternal principles—and, as Paul tells us, they are and will be the same yesterday, today, and forever."<#>6

In his usual thoughtful, insightful, way, Elder Dallin H. Oaks has reminded us: "One of the consequences of shifting from moral absolutes to moral relativism in public policy is that this produces a corresponding shift of emphasis from responsibilities to rights. Responsibilities originate in moral absolutes. In contrast, rights find their origin in legal principles, which are easily manipulated by moral relativism."<#>7

The understanding that there are absolute truths empowers humankind; it frees them to search for truth, albeit truth as seen by mortal eyes as "through a glass, darkly (1 Cor. 13:12). It encourages education as a search for truth, teaching us of our own finite limitations while assisting us in reaching for the ultimate truth, the Divine. Now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known" (ibid.).

A shared search for truth unites individuals of differing backgrounds and implies civilized social intercourse between those whose visions of truth may differ. It teaches humility, a decent respect for the opinions of others, a willingness to learn of truth "where'er 'tis found, whether on Christian or on heathen ground." It helps us love, or at least better understand, those, who like ourselves, seek for truth, each in his or her own way.

It is ironic that many in today's world no longer believe there is absolute truth. To today's cynics, all things, including right and wrong, are relative. Every assertion of right or wrong is open to debate.

The only absolutes for many today are power and self-interest. Studies done at the Princeton Religion Research Center show that about seven American adults in ten believe there are few moral absolutes and that matters of what is right or wrong must be judged as each situation arises. Even among those who characterize their religious views as conservative, a majority reject the concept that there are moral absolutes.<#>8

These findings suggest that religious faith in America, though widespread, is relatively shallow. However, those Jews and Christians possessed of deep and abiding faith "ground their confidence in reason in the Creator of all reason, and their confidence in understanding in the One who understands everything He made—and loves it, besides."<#>9

Elder Dallin H. Oaks has reminded us that "No person with values based on religious beliefs should apologize for taking those values into the public square."<#>10

Questions of right or wrong, based on religious or secular principles, are therefore legitimate issues for debate on public policy. Abraham Lincoln certainly thought so. In his famous debate with Stephen A. Douglas regarding slavery, Lincoln rejected Douglas's assertion that the national government should allow the majority of voters in a territory to decide whether slavery should be allowed therein. In rebuttal, Lincoln stated, "When Judge Douglas says that whoever, or whatever community, wants slaves, they have a right to have them, he is perfectly logical if there is nothing wrong in the institution; but if you admit that it is wrong, he cannot logically say that anybody has a right to do a wrong."<#>11

The Concepts of Justice and Mercy

The concept of justice lies at the bedrock of civilization. Indeed, as Professor Harold J. Berman has pointed out, "At the highest level, surely, the just and the holy are one—or else not only all men but the whole universe, and God Himself, are condemned to an eternal schizophrenia."<#>12

Without justice there can be no civilization, only the law of tooth and fang, with victory going to the most powerful. No matter what pressures there are upon us or how much we are misunderstood, no matter the opinions of those in authority, no matter what others say or do, we are all under the judgments of a just God who comprehends perfectly what is right and wrong and knows us better than we know ourselves. These words of the Psalmist come to mind: "Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity" (Ps. 98:8-9).

The knowledge that an all-seeing and all-knowing God will judge us brings both humility and honesty into our lives and our relationships with others. It gives us reason to pause and consider our own motives and examine the possibility that we might, after all, be wrong. It helps us maintain a balance in our lives. It is the enemy of extremism, the ally of moderation.

Old Testament prophets, including Isaiah, Amos, and Micah, proclaimed that God is deeply concerned with how people treat each other. Isaiah wrote, "Cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow" (Isa. 1:16-17). And Amos proclaimed, "Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream" (Amos 5:24). Micah asked, "What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:8). From these teachings flowed the emphasis in Jewish history upon justice and mercy as religious duties. Jesus drew upon that tradition when He said, "Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God" (Luke 11:42).

How grateful we should all be that God is merciful. We are all sinners, and in need of Christ's redeeming grace and the Father's merciful love, as the scriptures and the living prophets attest.

There Is No Public Morality without Private Virtue

The founders of this nation understood that private morality is the fount from whence sound public policy springs. Replying to Washington's first inaugural address, the Senate stated: "We feel, sir, the force and acknowledge the justness of the observation that the foundation of our national policy should be lain in private morality. If individuals be not influenced by moral principles, it is in vain to look for public virtue."<#>13

To Whom Much Is Given, of Them Much Is Expected

God has placed a special responsibility on the Latter-day Saints. We have been given more knowledge about sacred things than others have, and ours is the responsibility not only to live the truths entrusted to us but also to convey them to others. President Brigham Young pointed out our unique responsibility as a people and the reason for it: "We have reason to be thankful more than any other people. We have no knowledge of any other people on the face of the earth who possess the oracles of God, the priesthood, and the keys of eternal life. We are in possession of those keys, and, consequently, we are under greater obligations, as individuals and as a community, to work righteousness."<#>14 Elder Brigham Young Jr. noted our blessings and their attendant responsibilities as follows: "This people are greatly blessed by receiving the Spirit of the Almighty, and by being privileged to go into His house and making covenants with Him, and in return receiving the keys of eternal life from His hands. We are peculiar in this. There is no other people upon the face of the earth that we know anything about who are permitted to make such covenants with the Most High God. If we do not appreciate these blessings it is because we do not live faithfully to the covenants we have made—because we do not do all in our power to fulfill the commandments of the Almighty, and obey, fully and freely, the words and counsels of those who hold God's authority upon the earth, who have led us thus far efficiently, and who can lead us into the presence of our Father and God."<#>15

President John Taylor spoke along the same lines:

It is difficult, as has been remarked, for us sometimes to realize the position we occupy—the relation we sustain to our heavenly Father—the responsibility that rests upon us and the various duties we have to perform in the fulfillment of the purposes of God; in the interest of a world lying in wickedness; in the building up of the Zion of our God, in the establishment of righteousness and in bringing to pass those great and glorious principles which have been contemplated by the Almighty "before the world rolled into existence or the morning stars sang together for joy." It is our lot to be placed upon the earth in this time. It is our lot to have our minds enlightened by the Spirit, intelligence and revelation that flows from God. It is our lot to operate and co-operate with God our heavenly Father,—and with his Son Jesus Christ,—and with the ancient patriarchs, apostles and men of God who have lived before; and while they are operating behind the veil in the interests of humanity in the fulfillment of the purposes of God and in the establishment of righteousness upon the earth, we are here to operate with them, that we and they may act conjointly under the influence and guidance of the Almighty and the power and Spirit of the living God, in carrying out the designs of the great Jehovah. This is what we are here for.<#>16

President Joseph F. Smith also reminded us of the need to keep sacred the covenants we make. He said:

Now, so long as the Latter-day Saints are content to obey the commandments of God, to appreciate the privileges and blessings which they enjoy in the Church, and will use their time, their talents, their substance, in honor to the name of God, to build up Zion, and to establish truth and righteousness in the earth, so long our heavenly Father is bound by His oath and covenant to protect them from every opposing foe, and to help them to overcome every obstacle that can possibly be arrayed against them or thrown in their pathway; but the moment a community begin to be wrapt up in themselves, become selfish, become engrossed in the temporalities of life, and put their faith in riches, that moment the power of God begins to withdraw from them, and if they repent not the Holy Spirit will depart from them entirely, and they will be left to themselves. That which was given them will be taken away, they will lose that which they had, for they will not be worthy of it. God is just as well as merciful, and we need not expect favors at the hand of the Almighty except as we merit them, at least in the honest desires of our hearts, and the desire and intent will not always avail unless our acts correspond.<#>17

Change Must Start with the Individual

Make no mistake about it: if the world is to be changed, the change must start with the individual and spread outward to families, communities, and nations.

"When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren," said Jesus to Peter (Luke 22:32). Conversion begins with self; we cannot change the world until we have changed first ourselves and then those of our own household. We must therefore teach correct principles to our children and grandchildren and practice those principles faithfully in our own lives, recognizing that example is the great teacher.

Jesus, the Great Exemplar

Jesus, the only perfect and sinless man, provides the perfect example for us in all aspects of life. Desiring neither notoriety nor adulation, he had no ego needs at all. He was totally selfless; his only desire was to do the will of God. "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. . . . I am come in my Father's name" (John 3:30, 43).

Yet Jesus knew exactly who he was and his purpose on earth. his selflessness did not lead to lack of self-assurance or reduce his ability to act decisively. At the very beginning of his ministry, he came to Nazareth, "where he had been brought up," and spoke in the synagogue there, quoting from Isaiah, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord" (Luke 4:16-19). Then, closing the book, he intoned these words of power and majesty: "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears" (Luke 4:21).

To the Samaritan woman at Jacob's well Jesus spoke of living water, springing up unto everlasting life. The woman, not fully comprehending Jesus' words nor who he was, said to him, "I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things." Then came this wondrous reply: "I that speak unto thee am he" (John 4:25-26). The power and majesty of Jesus' words, his total self-assurance, coupled with majestic humility, touch and tug at the heart!

On the cross, drenched not only with the deep physical suffering he was forced to endure but also with the infinitely greater spiritual agony having to do with his atonement for the sins of the world, Jesus thought of others, not of himself. No cry of self-pity escaped his lips, no plea for mercy was heard, indeed, "No mur-m'ring word escaped his tongue" (Hymns, no. 191). His thoughts, as always, were turned toward others. To the plea of the repentant thief He responded with these words of comfort, "To day shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke 23:43) to his mother, he proclaimed, pointing to John, "Woman, behold thy son!" (John 19:26). His final words were to him who had "sent him to die," "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit" (Luke 23:46). So majestic is the scene, so tender the feelings it invokes, "I scarce can take it in. . . . Then sings my soul, my Savior God, to thee, How great thou art! How great thou art!" (Hymns, no. 86).

The Example of Paul the Apostle

Though no mortal can even approach Christ's glory and majesty, Saul of Tarsus, known to us by his Latin name Paul, stands for all time as a great example of total consecration to Christ and his cause. Pierced to the heart by the glory of the resurrected Christ, whom he met and accepted under dramatic circumstances on the Damascus road, Paul wore out his days in "weariness and painfulness," bearing testimony to "great and small" of the Master whom he loved more than life itself, ever grateful to be in the service of the Savior.

For nearly three decades the noble Cilician lived "as it were appointed to death" (1 Cor. 4:9), reviled, persecuted, defamed, hungry, thirsty, buffeted, with no certain dwelling place (see 1 Cor. 4:11-12), but glorying always in his testimony of the Savior and his gospel. Oh, how Paul suffered in Christ's cause: "Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep," he wrote of his hardships (2 Cor. 11:24-25).

Paul's trials and tribulations molded him as clay in the potter's hands, until he became one whose every deed and desire were dedicated to Jesus, "For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified" (1 Cor. 2:2). Paul longed for only two things—to "preach . . . the unsearchable riches of Christ" (Eph. 3:8), and then, when his mortal ministry was over, to feel worthy to say, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing" (2 Tim. 4:7-8).

One of the saddest statements in all of Paul's writings is found in his second letter to his beloved Timothy. "For Demas hath forsaken me," wrote Paul from Rome, "having loved this present world" (2 Tim. 4:10).

I have often wondered and worried about what happened to Demas. He is mentioned in two of Paul's earlier letters— to the Colossians and to Philemon. He had obviously been a useful and loved companion in the work. Why did he forsake the cause he had once embraced? Did he perhaps tire of the discipline needed for Christian commitment?

Was he overcome by the selfishness of the natural man, and, looking back to old ways and old habits, did he become unfit for the kingdom of God? (See Luke 9:62.) Perhaps he was seduced by one or more of the temptations of the flesh. Certainly Demas did not endure to the end; but losing his grip on the iron rod, he fell away into the dark and filthy torrent of the world. Remembering the Savior's admonition to seek after and bring back the lost lamb, how Paul must have wept and grieved over Demas.

Though our world of the late twentieth century is much different from that in which Paul lived, there are many who represent the modern counterparts of Demas. Having loved too much this present world, thinking more of themselves than of the Savior, they slip away from the Church and kingdom of God, forsaking the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints for the tinsel and glitter of the world's tawdry counterfeits. With no "deepness of earth" they are soon scorched and wither away (see Matt. 13:5-6). For some such "social saints," the root of the problem is selfishness, an unwillingness to "give away all [their] sins to know [Christ]" (see Alma 22:18).

Blessed Are the Meek

Is there, then, one single attribute of character that best characterizes the man or woman of Christ, enabling him or her to subdue the "natural man"? Some might say love, courage, faithfulness, or integrity. Without in any way decrying the importance of each of the above, and many others as well, I submit that perhaps the most Christlike of all attributes of character is that of meekness, or in other words, humble submissiveness. Elder Neal A. Maxwell explains why: "Meekness ranks low on the mortal scale of things, yet high on God's: `For none is acceptable before God, save the meek and lowly in heart' (Moro. 7:44). The rigorous requirements of Christian discipleship are clearly unattainable without meekness. In fact, meekness is needed in order to be spiritually successful, whether in matters of the intellect, in the management of power, in the dissolution of personal pride, or in coping with the challenges of daily life. Jesus, the carpenter—who, with Joseph, `undoubtedly had experience making yokes'—gave us that marvelous metaphor: `Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart.' (Matt. 11:29.) The yoke of obedience to Him is far better than servitude to sin, but the demands are real. . . . Among the qualities to be developed in order to . . . be more like Him and later with Him, is the quality of meekness. It is upon this quality that so many other things, in turn, depend. Without meekness, we cannot accept the gospel, be baptized worthily, maintain our faith, or enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Without meekness, we cannot retain a remission of our sins, nor can we come to have still further knowledge about Jesus Christ. And, finally, without meekness, we cannot enjoy the highest gospel ordinances worthily."<#>18

It hardly needs mentioning that meekness is not the same as servility. He who is meek does not grovel or cringe; he is no milksop. Meekness connotes strength, not weakness. After all, Jesus, the perfect example of meekness, and our model in every way, was the epitome of strength.

But, oh, how meek he was, humbly submissive to his Father's will in all things. To Pilate's query, "Art thou a king then?" Jesus replied with calm majesty: "Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth" (John 18:37). Then he, the creator of worlds without number, who could for the asking have had "more than twelve legions of angels" to come to his aid, went "as a lamb to the slaughter" and was crucified between two malefactors on Golgotha's ghastly hill. None can—or ever will—compare with him. But each of us must try to follow him every day of our lives.

Let Virtue Garnish Your Thoughts

Private virtue is a fabric made up of small threads of goodness that combine to produce the tapestry of a life of integrity. The real heroes and heroines of the world most often go unheralded and unsung. Virtue and its companions, integrity and courage, are found in the everyday decisions and actions of ordinary life. Those worthy of our admiration ought to include the employee who gives a full and honest day's work; the employer who rewards loyalty and service; the craftsman who takes pride in the cunning of his or her hands; the father who cherishes his relationship with his children above life in the fast track; the stay-at-home mother who sees herself not as a second-class citizen but as a partner with God who is privileged to participate in the most difficult and noblest of all human tasks; spouses who are loyal and true to each other through the joys and sorrows of life; the professional who places honesty, honor, and service above the making of money; the corporate executive who sees himself or herself as a steward, not a freebooter. These are they who possess spiritual wholeness and are the real heroes of life.

How glorious and pure are those who live lives of private virtue. They can sleep at night secure in the knowledge that they have done their best. Their consciences are devoid of offense to anyone, their honor unsullied by the sordid compromises and shady dealings of a wicked world. Their values and convictions are clearly fixed and defined and well-known to their associates. They are not for sale, at any price. They seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness and are little interested in power or wealth. They understand that "a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth" (Luke 12:15), and they love people, not things. Others see them as people who can be trusted, men and women of honor and of real substance.

As virtue is built brick by brick from a multitude of little thoughts and actions, so too are most sins seductively small. In his book The Screwtape Letters, C. S. Lewis, with his unusual grasp of "things as they really are," has the master devil, Screwtape, instruct his apprentice nephew, Wormwood, in proper devilish tactics: "You will say that these are very small sins; and doubtless, like all young tempters, you are anxious to be able to report spectacular wickedness. . . . It does not matter how small the sins are, provided that their cumulative effect is to edge the man away from the Light and out into the Nothing. . . . Indeed, the safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts."<#>19

Beware of the small sins, which bleed us drop by drop from a thousand small cuts, rather than from one single dramatic slash!
