Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

PROTECTING THE FAMILY

The scriptures tell us that marriage is "ordained of God unto man" (D&C 49:15), and God's modern-day prophets have repeatedly reaffirmed that eternal principle, reminding us that heaven is the origin and continuation of the ideal home and that God intended husband and wife to serve together as full and equal partners in a sacred enterprise of eternal consequence.

"The time will come," said President Spencer W. Kimball, "when only those who believe deeply and actively in the family will be able to preserve their families in the midst of the gathering evil around us."<#>1 I submit that time is now upon us.

In a solemn proclamation to the world on the family dated 23 September 1995,<#>2 the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles declared that marriage between man and woman is essential to God's eternal plan, and "that successful marriages and families are established and maintained on principles of faith, prayer, repentance, forgiveness, respect, love, compassion, work, and wholesome recreational activities." In fulfilling these sacred responsibilities regarding children, "fathers and mothers are obligated to help one another as equal partners."

Why is it that God has ordained marriage between a man and a woman as the pattern all societies must follow if they are to survive and flourish, a pattern that is the foundation of all human community? Several reasons come to mind.

Human society extends over time; it has a past and a future.

Through the mysterious miracle of our participation in the procreative process, in partnership with God, we transmit life to the next generation, to those who will succeed us. Only in marriage can there be a full and effective expression of the commitment and time necessary to successfully nurture children. In marriage we learn to see ourselves not only as the link with past generations but also as stewards of the future, particularly the future of our children and their children. We see ourselves as an integral part of the great unfolding tapestry of the human race, linked both to the past and the future.

In marriage we learn to value differences.

We learn that male and female complement each other, not only physically and intellectually but also spiritually. There are differences in the natural gifts of men and women. In marriage these differences complement each other to create a divine wholeness. President Spencer W. Kimball pointed out that "in his wisdom and mercy, our Father made men and women dependent on each other for the full flowering of their potential. Because their natures are somewhat different, they can complement each other; because they are in many ways alike, they can understand each other."<#>3

Marriage requires the direction and restraint of many impulses, particularly the selfishness of the "natural man" (see Mosiah 3:19).

In marriage we learn to place another person's needs rather than our own desires at the center of life. Our priorities and commitments thus go beyond the demands of self-interest. As we serve our spouse and other family members, we master the selfishness that is the great enemy of spirituality, and in the process we find who we really are and what we can become. The absence of the loving, caring, and mutually supportive relationships found only in marriage and in the family circle leads almost inevitably to the malignant and distorted culture now predominant in many communities, a culture characterized by physical violence, predatory sexual behavior, and social irresponsibility.

Marriage is the school for Zion.<#>4

In Zion, divine love, based upon the equal worth of all souls, is the foundation for all laws. Only in the exercise of that divine love may all enjoy the fullness of life and become a Zion people. Marriage for time and all eternity, performed in the holy temple by an officiator endowed with priesthood authority, unites husband and wife in a sacred relationship intended to endure forever. In marriage we learn to be one with another while retaining our own individual identities in full, complete, and equal partnership with our spouse. The true intimacy necessary for the fullness of life can only be achieved within the context of unconditional love and equality between spouses. Roles, of course, differ between spouses, but both are co-equals in the relationship. Each home, then, has the potential to become a small Zion, and from that foundation the city of Zion can be built.

Marriage is the best mechanism to ensure that two parents share in the raising of children.

The lessons of history make this point clear. The best mechanism ever developed to assist in raising children is to have both parents participate in the task. Indeed, it is a divinely conceived concept. "Parents have a sacred duty to rear their children in love and righteousness, to provide for their physical and spiritual needs, . . . Husbands and wives—mothers and fathers—will be held accountable before God for the discharge of these obligations."<#>5

The Words of the Prophets

The prophets, whose teachings are increasingly honored more in the breach than the observance, paint a starkly different picture of family life than that espoused by the strident voices of secularism. They teach that marriage is ordained of God as the basic unit in His kingdom. By virtue of the sealing power and by obedience to gospel laws and ordinances, marriage can endure eternally (see D&C 49:15; 132:19). Marriage and family life must be our highest priorities. We must do all in our power to protect, enrich, and preserve them. Fathers and mothers play distinct but complementary roles in establishing and maintaining families. President Spencer W. Kimball summarized the eternal importance of the family and of parents as follows: "The Lord organized the whole program in the beginning with a father who procreates, provides, and loves, and directs, and a mother who conceives and bears and nurtures and feeds, and trains. The Lord could have organized it otherwise but chose to have a unit with responsibility and purposeful associations where children train and discipline each other and come to love, honor, and appreciate each other. The family is the great plan of life as conceived and organized by our Father in Heaven."<#>6

His words echo those of a proclamation of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, dated April 6, 1980: "We affirm the sanctity of the family as a divine creation and declare that God our Eternal Father will hold parents accountable to rear their children in light and truth, teaching them `to pray and to walk uprightly before the Lord' (D&C 68:28). We teach that the most sacred of all relationships, those family associations of husbands and wives and parents and children, may be continued eternally when marriage is solemnized under the authority of the holy priesthood exercised in temples dedicated for these divinely authorized purposes."<#>7

In their prophetic declaration on the family dated 23 September 1995, the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve included this somber warning: "We warn that individuals who violate covenants of chastity, who abuse spouse or offspring, or who fail to fulfill family responsibilities will one day stand accountable before God. Further, we warn that the disintegration of the family will bring upon individuals, communities, and nations the calamities foretold by ancient and modern prophets."<#>8

Latter-day prophets have spoken plainly about the importance of mothers remaining in their homes to care for their children. Unfortunately much of their counsel has gone unheeded, even by many Latter-day Saint families.

There are, of course, many women with young children who are widowed or divorced or who find themselves in unusual circumstances where they are required to work outside the home. Numerous others, however, are not in that situation. In the words of President Spencer W. Kimball: "Too many mothers work away from home to furnish sweaters and music lessons and trips and fun for their children. Too many women spend their time in socializing, in politicking, in public services when they should be home to teach and train and receive and love their children into security."<#>9

The truth of the matter is that mothers are needed in the home to teach moral standards to their children. Elder Boyd K. Packer put it this way: "I would go back to the home that has a mother there. I ask you, what good is the big picture window and the lavish appointments and the priceless door in a home if there is no mother there? The mother as a mother, not a breadwinner, is an essential figure in this battle against immorality and wickedness. I would also go back to the family where children were accountable and where the father was the head of the family. Would you think me naive if I were to propose that this battle ultimately will be won on such simple grounds as the children coming in after school to homemade bread and jam with Mama there?"<#>10

Principles to Follow in Teaching Youth

Those responsible for teaching youth may wish to keep the following principles in mind.

Focus first on doctrine, not on errant behavior.

The scriptures tell of the power of the word of God: "And now, as the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just—yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them—therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God" (Alma 31:5).

Elder Boyd K. Packer has reminded us: "The study of the doctrines of the gospel will improve behavior quicker than a study of behavior will improve behavior. Preoccupation with unworthy behavior can lead to unworthy behavior. That is why we stress so forcefully the study of the doctrines of the gospel."<#>11

It is especially important that youth be taught the doctrine of the Atonement and helped to see how the Savior's sacrifice and suffering applies to them personally. The best place to teach doctrine is in the home, in family home evening discussions, personal and family scripture study, and, perhaps most importantly, by example.

The basic responsibility to teach youth lies with their parents.

These well-known words of Elder Boyd K. Packer bear repetition:

"If my boy needs counseling, bishop, it should be my responsibility first, and yours second.

"If my boy needs recreation, bishop, I should provide it first, and you second.

"If my boy needs correction, that should be my responsibility first, and yours second.

"If I am failing as a father, help me first, and my children second.

"Do not be too quick to take over from me the job of raising my children.

"Do not be too quick to counsel them and solve all of the problems. Get me involved. It is my ministry."<#>12

There are eternal rewards resulting from sexual purity.

They include peace of mind, an unsullied reputation, the presence and help of the Spirit in one's life, a life of worthiness to partake of sacred covenants and holy ordinances, and finally, and most importantly, a life that will qualify us to return to the presence of the Father and his Holy Son.

Sexual impurity is a serious matter.

In instructing his wayward son, Alma counseled Corianton as follows: "And this is not all, my son, Thou didst do that which was grievous unto me; for thou didst forsake the ministry, and did go over into the land of Siron among the borders of the Lamanites, after the harlot Isabel. Yea, she did steal away the hearts of many; but this was no excuse for thee, my son. Thou shouldst have tended to the ministry wherewith thou was entrusted. Know ye not, my son, that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost?" (Alma 39:3-5).

There are many aspects to the seriousness of sexual transgression, which youth deserve to be taught in power and plainness. They include the following:

♦ Difficulty of repentance. There are many who do not realize how difficult it is to repent, how many tears must be shed, what agony of soul is involved. On this subject President Ezra Taft Benson has said: "I would not have anyone believe that there is no hope if there are some who have made such a grievous mistake, because repentance and forgiveness are also a part of the gospel. Thank God for that! But it must be real repentance. Such repentance is a deep, heartfelt sorrow for sin that produces a reformation of life. It is not just a confession of guilt. Sometimes we regard all too lightly the principle of repentance, thinking that it only means confession, that it only means feeling sorry for ourselves. But it is more than that. It is a deep, burning, and heartfelt sorrow for sin that will drive us to our knees in humility and tears—a deep, heartfelt sorrow for sin that produces a reformation of life. That is the right test: a reformation of life. Only then may the God of heaven in his mercy and his goodness see fit to forgive us. He—not the priesthood on the earth—is the judge. Priesthood holders can only carry out certain requirements. They can require certain things set forth in the revelations, but forgiveness comes from above."<#>13

♦ Sexually transmitted disease. In addition to devastating diseases that have been around for centuries, the ghastly specter of AIDS now hovers over many relationships. The incidence of AIDS is increasing with fearful rapidity among teenagers. The way to avoid sexually transmitted disease is remarkably simple: total sexual abstinence before marriage and total sexual fidelity within marriage to an equally faithful spouse.

♦ Unwanted pregnancy. The consequences of unwanted pregnancy are replayed scores of thousands of times each month in this and every other nation. Of even more serious consequence is the wicked way in which many unwanted pregnancies are taken care of, by abortion.

♦ Loss of reputation. Even in today's world, gossip's tongue inevitably touches all involved with sexual impurity. There are no secrets. This loss of reputation may jeopardize future relationships with people who have high moral standards.

♦ Restrictions in missionary service. "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord" (Isa. 52:11), the scriptures remind us. The First Presidency has pointed out, in an inspired letter to priesthood leaders dated March 4, 1993, that "full-time missionary service is not a right, but a privilege." Only those who are morally clean and worthy to enter the temple may be called to missionary service. Nor should individuals harbor the erroneous supposition they can "sow their wild oats," be profligate for a season, and then after hasty repentance qualify for missionary service. It's not that easy; in certain cases, they may have disqualified themselves permanently from serving as one of the Lord's chosen ambassadors. Do not trifle with sacred things!

♦ Last, but perhaps most importantly, sexual impurity leads to loss of the companionship of the Spirit. Without the guidance and direction of the Holy Ghost, we are vulnerable to the buffetings of the adversary and ill-prepared to withstand the temptations and evil of the world.

Each individual, by reason of his or her divine nature, possesses an inherent power to resist temptation.

To the Saints of Corinth, Paul wrote, "There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it" (1 Cor. 10:13).

♦ In this respect, President Gordon B. Hinckley taught, "That man [woman, boy, girl, child] who knows that he is a child of God, created in the image of a divine Father and gifted with a potential for the exercise of great and godlike virtues, will discipline himself against the sordid, lascivious elements to which all are exposed" (Ensign, November 1975, 39).

Our youth today do live in perilous times. Adult purveyors of drugs, violence, and pornography use every means to sell their products to a new generation. The world is too much with us!

♦ Elder Harold B. Lee spoke of the need for all Saints, including youth, to live apart from the world, pointing out the blessings that come to those who have the courage to withstand temptation and live as they should. He said:

Against the daily temptations that come to influence us to live below the standards that we profess and teach, the Lord admonishes us first with a blessing as he has said to his disciples: "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake . . . for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you" (Matt. 5:11-12).

And then he warns us: "Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets" (Luke 6:26).

While it becomes us to seek the goodwill of righteous men and women everywhere, it is well for us to remember that when the lewd, the immoral, and the corrupt begin to compliment us and to curry favor with us, that we had better begin to examine ourselves to see if we are doing our full duty.<#>14

Helping Youth to Be Strong

What are the keys to helping youth live righteously in a world full of sin? They include the following:

All youth need to have a personal experience of healthy, loving, appropriate relationships.

♦ Teens need to feel the love of their parents. When trust and love exist, teens welcome counsel. Siblings, other family members, friends, and Church leaders can also provide both love and counsel.

♦ Teens learn much about appropriate behavior by observing appropriate loving relationships of affection and mutual respect between their parents.

♦ Parents must set the example by their own behavior. As one of the parents of a young person surveyed in the Bowman Gray study cited previously (pp. 8-10) said, "I think if we want to teach responsible behavior to our teens, the responsible behavior must begin with ourselves."

These words of scripture come to mind: "And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized. And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands. And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord" (D&C 68:25-28).

Teenagers need to experience a feeling of self-efficacy, a feeling their lives are under control.

♦ Young people need experience and confidence in making and putting into effect sound decisions, thereby building their feelings of self-reliance and self-respect.

♦ One of the best ways teenagers gain a feeling of self-efficacy is through work—not mindless drudgery, of course, but meaningful work, which makes them think, make decisions, and sweat.

Teenagers need a clear statement of standards they are expected to follow.

♦ The scriptures and our prophet-leaders have set out clearly the standards of morality to which all—youth and adults—must adhere if their behavior is to be acceptable to God. President Ezra Taft Benson gave this advice to our precious youth: "Do not be misled by Satan's lies. There is no lasting happiness in immorality. There is no joy to be found in breaking the law of chastity. Just the opposite is true. There may be momentary pleasure. For a time it may seem like everything is wonderful. But quickly the relationship will sour. Guilt and shame set in. We become fearful that our sins will be discovered. We must sneak and hide, lie and cheat. Love begins to die. Bitterness, jealousy, anger, and even hate begin to grow. All of these are the natural results of sin and transgression.

"On the other hand, when we obey the law of chastity and keep ourselves morally clean, we will experience the blessings of increased love and peace, greater trust and respect for our marital partners, deeper commitment to each other, and therefore a deep and significant sense of joy and happiness.

"We must not be misled into thinking these sins are minor or that consequences are not that serious."<#>15

President Thomas S. Monson added these words of wise counsel: "Because sexual intimacy is so sacred, the Lord requires self-control and purity before marriage, as well as full fidelity after marriage. In dating, treat your date with respect, and expect your date to show that same respect for you. Tears inevitably follow transgression. Men, take care not to make women weep, for God counts their tears."<#>16

With parental support, guidance and encouragement, youth should scrupulously follow the standards set by the Brethren.

The booklet For the Strength of Youth (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1990) is a precious guide for teenagers and their parents. Parents and youth should read and discuss it together.

From my own experience as a father and as a counselor of youth, I believe the following standards are worthy of special emphasis:

♦ No early dating. There is great wisdom in the standard given by the Brethren: "Do not date until you are sixteen years old."

♦ Date people with high standards. This advice from For the Strength of Youth provides assurance both for anxious parents and teenagers: "Date only those who have high standards, who respect your standards, and in whose company you can maintain the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ."

♦ Parents should meet and become acquainted with their children's dates. I have a friend, the father of several vivacious, beautiful teenaged daughters, who insisted that he meet and, yes, approve of the young men who came to take his daughters out on dates. "I wouldn't let a young man take my new car out for an evening's driving unless I knew his name and something about his honesty and integrity," he assured me, "so why should I let him take my daughter, who is infinitely more precious?"

As an extension of the above, wise parents take the time to become acquainted with their children's friends. They know where their children are and, without being intrusive or stifling, keep tabs on their whereabouts. And they don't wait until their children are teenagers to start doing so. If you don't know where your child is at age eight, how likely are you to know where he or she is at eighteen?

♦ Be scrupulous in observance of the Word of Wisdom. The association between drug use, including alcohol and marijuana, and sexual activity is so strong it cannot be ignored. By lowering inhibitions and dulling the conscience, drug use may lead to immoral behavior.

Combating Street Gangs

We turn now to the terrible scourge of criminal street gangs. What can we do, as parents and citizens, to combat them? Part of the answer, at least in the short-term, lies with aggressive law enforcement. But much more is involved. In speaking of the declining values in our society, which lie at the root of the gang problem, President Gordon B. Hinckley, with prophetic wisdom has noted: "Those who are concerned with the problem advocate more legal regulation, large appropriations for increased police forces, tax increases to build additional jails and prisons. These may be needed to deal with the present problems. They may help in the near term. But they will be only as a bandage too small for the sore. They may help in taking care of the fruits, but they will not get at the roots. In searching for remedies, we speak of a greater work that must be done in our schools. But educators have largely abdicated their responsibility for teaching values. The Church is looked to—this and all other churches. I am grateful for what the Pope recently said in Denver in warning against moral pitfalls. I am pleased to note that the Baptists have begun a campaign for chastity. We as a church are doing much, very much, and I think we are accomplishing much. But it is not enough.

"When all is said and done, the primary place in building a value system is in the homes of the people."<#>17

Prevention, then, must start at home. Recent studies on risk-focused prevention have identified three risk factors within the family which increase the likelihood of violent behavior in children. Violence and gangs are of course inextricably connected.<#>18 The factors are:

Poor Family Management Practices, including the absence of clear expectations and standards for children's behavior, excessively severe or inconsistent punishment, and parental failure to monitor their children's activities, whereabouts, or friends;

Family Conflict, either between parents or between parents and children, which enhances the risk for violent behavior;

Favorable Parental Attitudes toward and Involvement in Violent Behavior, which increases the risk that children witnessing violence will act violently themselves.

Other factors also increase the likelihood youth will engage in violence. As outlined by Hawkins, they include the following social conditions:

Neighborhoods

Availability of Guns

A teenager with ready access to firearms through family, friends, or a source on the street, is at increased risk of violence.

Community Laws or Norms Favorable to Crime

Social practices often send conflicting messages to young people. If school officials or parents promote "just say no" themes while abusing alcohol and other drugs themselves, teenagers quickly discern the hypocrisy involved and are turned off by it.

Media Portrayals of Violence

Despite Hollywood's protestations to the contrary, three decades of research show there is a clear connection between repeated depictions of violence and the development of aggressive and violent behavior.

Community Disorganization

Indifference to cleanliness and orderliness, high rates of vandalism, little surveillance of public places by neighborhood residents, and an absence of parental involvement in schools, are indications of a community with a reduced sense of organization and attachment. In such places a sense of pride in belonging to a community is lacking.

Extreme Economic Deprivation

Children who live in deteriorating neighborhoods characterized by extreme poverty are more likely to develop problems with delinquency, teen pregnancy, dropping out of school, and violence. By extension, they are more vulnerable to the attraction of street gangs.

Schools

Antisocial behavior that manifests itself as early as kindergarten through third grade is often an indicator of violent behavior that will surface during adolescence. Misbehaving in class, displaying a defiant attitude, and getting into frequent fights are signals that must not be ignored.

Persistent academic failure in the late elementary grades also puts a youngster at risk. The attendant loss of self-esteem and self-confidence can result in belligerent behavior, which in many cases is an effort to compensate for a sense of inadequacy. It is the experience of failing and not a lack of ability per se that promotes the violence. Lacking positive peer pressure, parental support, or an understanding teacher or some other mentor, the young person is left to find his or her own troubled way, which is too often marked by recurring violent behavior.

Peer Groups

Young people who associate with peers who engage in antisocial behavior such as drug abuse, delinquency, sexual activity, or violence are much more likely to do the same. The earlier in life this occurs, the greater the likelihood of prolonged, serious, and chronic involvement. (My mother's advice to stay away from inappropriate friends was right!)

Hawkins also points out that there are protective factors that reduce the impact of negative risk factors by providing positive ways a person can respond to them. They include the following:

Morally uplifting beliefs and standards.

The gospel of Christ and the teachings of the Church provide the basis for such beliefs and standards, but they also should include demands for good performance in school and consistent disapproval of problem behavior.

Positive relationships with family members, teachers, or other adults.

For many young people a positive relationship with an admired parent, sibling, uncle, grandmother, teacher, bishop, quorum advisor, etc. can make all the difference. For this to take place three conditions must be met:

Â The young person must be given an opportunity for active involvement, a chance to participate consistently and appropriately.

Â The young person must have the skills needed to succeed. This requires wise, consistent teaching.

Â There must be a consistent system of recognition or reinforcement for doing the right thing. Praise is a powerful aid to the development of self-esteem.

It is instructive to note the views of gang members themselves. Thirty Salt Lake City gang members were recently invited to participate in a think tank in which the young toughs were asked what should be done to help other youth avoid gang involvement. They came up with the following ideas:<#>19

Â Teach youth early that gangs are bad. According to the youth, parents should be doing this for children between the ages of six and eleven.

Â Youth need punishment for bad behavior and rewards for good behavior. Youth want stricter enforcement for offenses. They are concerned that juveniles commit too many crimes before consequences are imposed. They feel detention centers and corrections facilities should be more punitive. They want judges to hand down stricter sentences earlier. The punishment should fit the crime.

Â Kids need a safe place to share their feelings and where kids from different gangs can learn to get along together.

Â Families need to spend time together. The youth had definite ideas about their expectations of parents. They stated that good parents provide food, clothes, and shelter; they help youth with homework or problems at school; they talk to youth about all sorts of problems (sex, money, medical, etc.); they provide consequences when youth break the rules; they offer encouragement; and they believe in their children. Several youth expressed gratitude that their parents had never given up on them, no matter what they had done.

Â Kids need other adults (besides parents) in their lives who care about them and make a difference. Qualities named that were important in these adults included: cares about the youth, works with the parents, talks and listens to the youth, is fair, has free time to spend with the youth, gives warning before punishment, rewards good work, has a sense of humor, makes the youth feel important. Influential people in the lives of youth include teachers, religious leaders, coaches, neighbors, family members, tutors, mentors, etc.

Â There need to be more opportunities for youth to succeed in education, including tutoring, scholarships, and getting parents involved.

Â Youth want more opportunities to get a job. They also want to know how to get a job, what employers are looking for, and how to do well at work.

Â Youth felt stronger efforts should be made to get guns off the streets.

Â Youth want to be needed in the community. They want to be involved in making the community a better place. They often feel that adults look down on them and treat them as though they're from a different planet. Youth want to belong.

It seems clear from the above that although street gangs represent a scourge on our society, the means are available to us to reclaim our communities and to refuse to be held hostage to outlaw elements. The task of doing so starts in the home; it is one in which all citizens must share if we are to succeed. It was the English philosopher Edmund Burke who reminded us of our duty by saying, "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing."

Strengthening Fathers: The Prophets Speak

The prophets of God speak plainly about the importance of fatherhood. They teach men that marriage and family life must be our highest priority and that we must do all in our power to enrich and preserve those institutions. The prophets proclaim that fathers and mothers have essential, distinct, and complementary roles in the cooperative work of establishing and maintaining families. They remind us that the family, with both father and mother present, is the basic unit in the kingdom of God. By virtue of the sealing power exercised by the priesthood, and by faithful continuance in obedience to God's laws and sacred ordinances, families may endure forever. "That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there" (D&C 130:2), assuming, of course, that we have lived worthy to receive such ineffable blessings.

In one of his last general addresses as president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, President Howard W. Hunter spoke to priesthood bearers on the responsibility they have to be a righteous husband and father.<#>20 His comments on the four traditional roles of fathers—to be caretaker and protector, moral educator, head of family, and breadwinner—are eminently worthy of repetition. They represent a primer for men everywhere.

Father As Caretaker and Protector

"A righteous father protects his children with his time and presence in their social, educational, and spiritual activities and responsibilities. Tender expressions of love and affection toward children are as much the responsibility of the father as the mother. Tell your children you love them."

Father As Moral Educator

"Take seriously your responsibility to teach the gospel to your family through regular family home evening, family prayer, devotional and scripture reading time, and other teaching moments. Give special emphasis to preparation for missionary service and temple marriage. As patriarch in the home, exercise your priesthood through performing the appropriate ordinances for your family and by giving blessings to your wife and children."

Father As the Head of Family

"Of necessity there must be in the Church and in the home a presiding officer (see D&C 107:21). By divine appointment, the responsibility to preside in the home rests upon the priesthood holder (see Moses 4:22). The Lord intended that the wife be a helpmeet for man (meet means equal)—that is, a companion equal and necessary in full partnership. Presiding in righteousness necessitates a shared responsibility between husband and wife; together you act with knowledge and participation in all family matters. For a man to operate independently of or without regard to the feelings and counsel of his wife in governing the family is to exercise unrighteous dominion. . . . You are to love your wife as Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it (see Eph. 5:25-31)."

Father As Breadwinner

"You who hold the priesthood have the responsibility, unless disabled, to provide temporal support for your wife and children. No man can shift the burden of responsibility to another, not even to his wife. The Lord has commanded that women and children have claim on their husbands and fathers for their maintenance (see D&C 83; 1 Tim. 5:8). . . . Men who abandon their family and fail to meet their responsibility to care for those they have fathered may find their eligibility for a temple recommend and their standing in the Church in jeopardy."

President Hunter's prophetic counsel needs no amplification, clarification, or expansion. If we in this and other nations are to overcome the curse of fatherlessness, which blights our societies, we must do as God and his holy prophets have commanded. In particular, men must learn to act as sons of God rather than as "natural" men who are the enemies of God. As real men, not simply as males, they must honor women; nurture, love, and care for their children; and stop excusing the gross sins, which, in Elder Neal A. Maxwell's felicitous phrase, "arise ominously and steadily out of the swamp of self-indulgence and self-pity. . . . Real, personal sacrifice . . . is a willingness to put the animal in us upon the altar and [let] it be consumed."<#>21

Faithful Latter-day Saint fathers, however, have a key responsibility in addition to these, which God requires of fathers everywhere. Latter-day Saint fathers, if they are true to the sacred covenants they have made, bear the awesome responsibility of the priesthood of God. With this priesthood they have the power and authority to bless their families and others. Elder John A. Widtsoe stated, "Every father having children born to him under the covenant, is to them as a patriarch, and he has the right to bless his posterity in the authority of the priesthood which he holds."<#>22 President James E. Faust has noted: "The natural leaders of the family unit are the parents, standing side by side as equals in their loving guidance of their children. Each parent brings a separate enriching influence. The power of the priesthood should be the dominant influence in family affairs. Priesthood blessings do not just involve men. They bless equally and fully the women and children of the family."<#>23 Men who bear God's holy priesthood are under divine obligation to use it to bless others, including most especially the members of their own family.
