Alexander B. Morrison, Zion: A Light in the Darkness ( 1997)

BUILDING A COMMUNITY OF BELIEVERS

God's prophets, both ancient and modern, put great stress on the family as a vitally important vehicle for the development and expression of personal purity. In their recent proclamation to the world on the family, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles stated that "the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children. . . . The family is ordained of God. . . . Happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . The disintegration of the family will bring upon individuals, communities, and nations the calamities foretold by ancient and modern prophets."

Without in any way diminishing the importance of individuals and families, it must be noted that people also live in communities. One dictionary defines community as "a body of people having common organization or interests, or living in the same place under the same laws and regulations."<#>1 Obviously, "community" is different than "congregation," which has been defined as "a body of persons met for the worship of God and for religious instruction." People are by nature social beings whose lives and feelings are eternally connected to and intertwined with those of others. For members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, community is an essential and eternal part of life in this world and throughout the eternities. Individuals reach their full potential only in association and community with others.

Elder Erastus Snow, who played an important role in Latter-day Saint settlement of the Intermountain West, understood the importance of community in its relationship to the family and the individual. He said: "What man, however good be his desires, can control himself and his family in their habits and manners of life and fashions, without the aid of the surrounding community? What sensible man can hold me or my brethren responsible, in all respects, either for ourselves or our households, unaided by the community or while the community are all working against us? But when the community learn to work together, and are agreed in a common purpose, what is it that they can not accomplish? Union is strength."<#>2

This concept of mutual interdependence is well-illustrated by the following words, which John Winthrop, later the first governor of the colony of Massachusetts, read to fellow Puritans aboard the Arbella on their voyage to what has evolved into the United States of America: "We must be knit together in this work as one. . . . We must delight in each other, make other's conditions our own, rejoice together, mourn together, labour and suffer together . . . as members of the same body."<#>3

At the same time, however, each person must retain his or her own individual autonomy. The distinctiveness—indeed, the uniqueness—and independence of "the one" are essential for the health of the community. The reverse of course is also true. Healthy communities are required for the full health of individuals. Communities that do not recognize the sanctity of the individual, that treat people only as a means to further some supposedly greater good and melt all into the lowest common denominator, destroy individuality and quickly become tyrannical and coercive.

It is no exaggeration to say that as the family is to the individual, so too is the community to the family. Families nurture and strengthen individuals, providing the setting and vehicle for them to grow physically, emotionally, and spiritually. The family protects individuals, particularly the young, who are most vulnerable to forces that adversely affect their health and well-being. Families aid in the development and maintenance of the intellectual, emotional, and spiritual strength of all, particularly children.

So, too, do communities nurture families, providing a setting within which they can become or stay strong. Families are both protected and assisted by strong communities. Strong community organizations, including churches and schools, supplement and complement the efforts of parents, making not only their work easier but often making the difference between success and failure. Without denying in any way the importance of the family, the old African proverb that it takes a village to raise a child has much truth to it.

If experience shows the validity of the assertion that it is much easier to raise and maintain strong families if the community also is strong, the reverse is also true. It is much more difficult for families to succeed if the community is rundown, crime-ridden, and unsafe. If adults do not care about children, if children are daily exposed to sights and behaviors that frighten and threaten them, and if young people have constantly before them examples of evil and wrongdoing, these things will eventually twist and blight their lives. How difficult it is for a child in many innercity settings in this nation to grow up normally, regardless of what his or her family struggles to accomplish. The streets too often are unsafe. In many places people dare not venture out after dark but lock their doors and pray they will survive the night. When there are few jobs, and unemployed youth congregate on street corners with little to do, it provides many opportunities to get into trouble. Drug and alcohol abuse, drug trafficking, sexual promiscuity, illegitimacy, and crimes of all sorts are the offspring of idleness and too little supervision. The wickedness of the streets is a potent teacher of the young.

Of course, there are exceptions to the general rule that strong communities are needed if we are to have strong families. Just as some strong individuals survive life in severely dysfunctional families, so too some families do well even in severely dysfunctional communities. But the odds are much against such happening.

Let us, then, briefly discuss the significance of community. In his recent and important book, Rodney Stark, perhaps the leading sociologist of religion in North America, provides deep insight into the growth of the Christian community from the time Christianity rose from obscurity to become a world faith.<#>4 Many factors, of course, were involved, not all of which apply to conditions in our day, but some apply directly to the growth of the worldwide community of Latter-day Saints in the closing years of the twentieth century. An examination of factors influencing the growth of the first Christian communities in light of our needs today thus seems useful. Furthermore, because The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a revelatory restoration of the Church established by Christ and led by his apostles in the meridian of time, it is relevant to consider the realities of today in light of what transpired in the early Church. I say that in full recognition of the fact that following the death and resurrection of Jesus, and the subsequent death of the apostles, the early Church, bereft of apostolic leadership, eventually lost its way and entered a long, dark night of apostasy. Despite that, there is ample evidence that in the first few centuries after Christ there was a strong sense of community amongst Christians. This should not surprise us, given the differences between Christians and the other inhabitants of the pagan world in which they lived.

Stark mentions the following factors as being significant in the growth of the early Christian community. Their application to our time is shown by illustrations drawn from Latter-day Saint history.

Love and Charity toward Others

A great epidemic, perhaps of measles, swept through the Roman Empire around 260 A.D. Millions died and society was in chaos.<#>5 In the midst of it all, unlike the pagan peoples around them, who fled for their lives, abandoning the stricken, the Christians distinguished themselves by caring for the sick and dying.

To care for the sick was to many Christians a sacred religious responsibility, something to be embraced, not shunned. Dionysius, a Christian bishop of Alexandria, wrote of the heroic efforts of Christians to care for and comfort others during the terrible plague: "Most of our brother Christians showed unbounded love and loyalty, never sparing themselves and thinking only of one another. Heedless of danger, they took charge of the sick, attending to their every need and ministering to them in Christ, and with them departed this life serenely happy; for they were infected by others with the disease, drawing on themselves the sickness of their neighbors and cheerfully accepting their pains. Many, in nursing and curing others, transferred their death to themselves and died in their stead. . . . The best of our brothers lost their lives in this manner, a number of presbyters, deacons, and laymen winning high commendation so that death in this form, the result of great piety and strong faith, seems in every way the equal of martyrdom."<#>6

A century later, the Roman Emperor Julian attempted to institute pagan charities in an effort to match the Christians. Stating that pagans needed to equal the virtues of Christians, he complained that recent growth in the numbers of Christians was caused by "their moral character, even if pretended," and "by their benevolence toward strangers and care for the graves of the dead."<#>7

Tertullian, another early Christian leader, who was born of pagan parents in the latter half of the second century, wrote: "It is our care of the helpless, our practice of loving kindness that brands us in the eyes of many of our opponents. `Only look,' they say, `Look how they love one another!'"<#>8

The exercise of love and charity toward others, including those not of the household of faith, was and still is a central characteristic of Christian communities. The Prophet Joseph Smith understood this principle and taught it repeatedly. "Let the Saints remember that great things depend on their individual exertion, and that they are called to be co-workers with us and the Holy Spirit in accomplishing the great work of the last days; and in consideration of the extent, the blessings and glories of the same, let every selfish feeling be not only buried, but annihilated; and let love to God and man predominate, and reign triumphant in every mind, that their hearts may become like unto Enoch's of old."<#>9

On another occasion the Prophet Joseph spoke of the obligations of "a man of property" as follows: "He is to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to provide for the widow, to dry up the tear of the orphan, to comfort the afflicted, whether in this church, or in any other, or in no church at all, wherever he finds them."<#>10

Saints throughout the ages have followed the Savior's admonition to love one another, to appreciate and care for each other. No community can long exist without such feelings of love and charity, expressed through service to others. The example of love and mutual concern shown for each other by Latter-day Saint pioneer families inspires us all, points us to higher levels of personal performance, and helps us avoid the problems found in our deteriorating contemporary society. Consider the love shown in these extracts from the diary of Patience Loader, a young Englishwoman who traveled across the plains with family members as part of the Martin Handcart Company of 1856.<#>*

I remember on one occasion when we was camping on the Sweet Water [some] breathren came to our tent and ask us girls to go to there camp and sing for them again. My dear Mother told them she thought we had better not go to sing that night. It made us still more hungary to sing and we had nothing to eat after we came back to the tent. They fealt sorrey for us but thay could not give us anything for thay was short of provisions themselves untill thay got suplys from home. That night was a terrable cold night. The wind was blowing and the snow drifted into the tent onto our quilts. That morning we had nothing to eat if we got up not untill we could get our small quantity of flour. Poor Mother called to me come Patience get up and make us afiar. I told her that I did not feel like getting up it was so cold and I was not feeling very well. So she ask my sister Tamar to get up and she said she was not well and she could not get up. Then she sais come Maria you get up and she was feeling bad and said that she could not get up. With this Mother says come girls this will not do. I believe I will have to dance to you and try to make you feel better. Poor dear Mother. She started to sing and dance to us and she slipt down as the snow was frozen and in a moment we was all up to help our dear Mother up for we was afraid she was hurt. She laugh and said I thought I could soon make you all jump up if I danced to you. Then we found that she fell down purposely for she knew we would all get up to see if she was hurt. She said that she was afraid her girls was going to give out and get disscuraged and she said that would never do to give up. We none of us had ever fealt so weak as we did that morning. My dear Mother had kept up wonderfull all through the journey. Before she left England she had been in delicate health. For many years she had not been able to walk amile and after we started on our journey to Utah she was able to walk all across the plains only some times we put her on the hand cart to rest her alittle.

After We left the Sweet Water whare we campt for nine days she was able to ride in the wagon. We was so glad to get Mother in the wagon. If we girls could not ride it did us good to know that Mother could get arest and not have to walk in the snow any more.<#>11

Love, mutual concern, and compassion extended beyond the family circle in pioneer society. An episode that occurred in the journey of the first handcart company to arrive in Salt Lake City in 1856 tells us much of the sense of community, which was so strong among the pioneers. An entry in the diary of Archer Walters, an English carpenter, handcart repairman, and coffinmaker sets the stage for the story. It reads as follows: "July 2nd. Brother Parker's little boy, age six, was lost. The father went back to hunt him."<#>12

The story is elaborated in the history of the Parker family. Robert and Ann Parker were traveling in McArthur's handcart company with their four children: Max, twelve; Martha Alice, ten; Arthur, five; and Ada, one year old. One day, while the company was passing through a wooded area of Nebraska, little Arthur, fevered and ill, sat down to rest, unnoticed by the other children. A sudden storm came up and the company hurriedly made camp. After a time it was noticed that Arthur was not with the other children, and an organized search for him was begun with no success. The search continued a second day, still without success. The captain, who had no other choice, ordered the company to move on. Food was in short supply and not another day could be lost. Better to lose one than to risk losing many.

"Ann Parker pinned a bright shawl about the thin shoulders of her husband and sent him back alone on the trail to search again for their child. If he found him dead he was to wrap him in the shawl; if alive, the shawl would be a flag to signal her. Ann and her children took up their load and struggled on with the company, while Robert retraced the miles of forest trail, calling, and searching and praying for his helpless little son. At last he reached a mail and trading station where he learned that his child had been found and cared for by a woodsman and his wife. He had been ill from exposure and fright. God had heard the prayers of his people.

"Out on the trail each night Ann and her children kept watch and, when, on the third night the rays of the setting sun caught the glimmer of a bright red shawl, the brave little mother sank in a pitiful heap in the sand. Completely exhausted, Ann slept for the first time in six long days and nights."<#>13

In his diary, Archer Walters, the English carpenter previously mentioned, penned this poignant statement, "July 5. Brother Parker brings into camp his little boy that had been lost. Great joy through the camp. The mother's joy I can not describe."<#>14

How much emotion, how much heartfelt thanks to God, how much brotherly love and concern, how much sense of community are encompassed in that simple sentence: "Great joy through the camp."

The pioneers shared in each others' joys and sorrows. They wept and rejoiced together, sharing both the good and bad of life. Theirs was a brotherhood and sisterhood, a sense of community, that transcended ethnicity, age, or their mutual trials and suffering. In our world of transient relationships and too much concern about self to the exclusion of others, we would do well to learn from the pioneers' noble examples.

Shared Faith Springing from Deeply Held Religious Beliefs

William H. McNeill has pointed out: "Another advantage Christians enjoyed over pagans was that the teachings of their faith made life meaningful even amid sudden and surprising death. Release from suffering was, after all, much to be desired, in principle if not always in practice. Moreover, even a shattered remnant of survivors who had somehow made it through war or pestilence or both could find warm, immediate and healing consolation in the vision of a heavenly existence for those missing relatives and friends who had died as good Christians. God's omnipotence made life meaningful in time of disaster as well as in time of prosperity; indeed untoward and unexpected disaster, shattering pagan pride and undermining secular institutions, made God's hand more evident than it was in quiet times. Christianity was, therefore, a system of thought and feeling thoroughly adapted to a time of troubles in which hardship, disease, and violent death commonly prevailed."<#>15

Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, writing in 251 A.D. during a terrible plague, noted that tribulation and trials are a time of testing, of schooling for the soul. "How suitable, how necessary it is that this plague and pestilence which seems horrible and deadly, searches out the justice of each and every one and examines the minds of the human race; whether the well care for the sick, whether relatives dutifully love their kinsmen as they should, whether masters show compassion for their ailing slaves, whether physicians do not desert the afflicted. . . . Although this mortality has contributed nothing else, it has especially accomplished this for Christians and servants of God, that we have begun gladly to seek martyrdom while we are learning not to fear death. These are trying exercises for us, not deaths; they give to the mind the glory of fortitude; by contempt of death they prepare for the crown. . . . [O]ur brethren who have been freed from the world by the summons of the Lord should not be mourned, since we know that they are not lost but sent before; that in departing they lead the way; that as travellers, as voyagers are wont to be, they should be longed for, not lamented . . . and that no occasion should be given to pagans to censure us deservedly and justly, on the ground that we grieve for those who we say are living."<#>16

Based on their deep belief in Christ and his cause, the early Christians discovered a joy that is a thousand times better than any pleasure of this sinful world. They were despised and persecuted, but they cared not. Their faith sustained them, even unto death. That same view of life's trials as a test of discipleship and a measure of faith is shown in the lives of the early Mormon pioneers. Though many of those called by Church leaders to colonize remote regions of the Intermountain West were surprised, shocked or even thrown into momentary despair, they went anyway. Consider the experience of Robert Gardner, whose journal entry of 1861<#>* tells much of the man and his devotion:

"Sunday the Bishop of my ward Ruben Miller and this other counseler Bro. Alexander Hill (for I was one of his counselers) came to my place on a visit and I took them round my farm and place and the Bishop made the remark. I am glad to See you so[wel[l] recovered from being broke up. You[ar[e] nerly as well[of[f] as you was before you lost your property and went on your[mision[.] (He served a mission to Canada in 1857.) My reply was yes I was well[of[f] once and it all went[of[f] and I am[almos[t] afraid of another[call[.]

"Sure enough in a few hours some of my nabours who had been to meeting at Salt Lake, caled in and told me that my name was amongst a number of names who were caled today to go South on a mision to make a new Setelment and rase cotten and Start right away."

And then descriptively he recorded his reaction to the news:

"I looked and[Spit[,] took[of[f] my hat and Scratched and thought and. said[allright[.]

"Next day I went up to the city and Seen George A. Smith in the historians[office[.] He lafed when I went in and Said dont blame anyone but[me[.] The President told me to get up a list of names Sutable for that mission So I thought of you got one and thought you would be willing to go if[caled[.] So I put your name down."

But the door was left open for Gardner, who later became a bishop in St. George, to turn down the call. The colorful pioneer recorded the comments of Elder Smith, who later became a counselor to President Young: "But if you dont want to go Step to the Presidents office and ask him to take your name[of[f] the list and he will do it."

Brother Gardner replied, "I Said I expect he would but shant try him."<#>17

A People of One Heart and One Mind

Stark points out that "in uniting its empire, Rome created economic and political unity at the cost of cultural chaos. People of many cultures, speaking many languages, worshiping all manner of gods, had been dumped together helter-skelter. Christianity served as a revitalization movement that arose in response to the misery, chaos, fear and brutality of life in the urban Greco-Roman world. To cities filled with the homeless and impoverished, Christianity offered charity as well as hope. To cities filled with newcomers and strangers, Christianity offered an immediate basis for attachments. To cities filled with orphans and widows, Christianity provided a new and expanded sense of family. To cities torn by violent ethnic strife, Christianity offered a new basis for social solidarity. And to cities faced with epidemics, fires, and earthquakes, Christianity offered effective housing services."<#>18

Early Latter-day Saint pioneers also developed a distinctive culture by submerging their many ethnic and cultural differences into a broader, gospel-based world view. Elder Erastus Snow, whose Cotton Mission in St. George succeeded the Iron Mission in Parowan and Cedar City, noted: "We found a Scotch party, a Welch party, an English party, and an American party, and we turned Iron Masters and undertook to put all these parties through the furnace, and run out a party of Saints for building up the Kingdom of God."<#>19 As Noel B. Reynolds has pointed out: "The gospel is essentially subversive of the world views perpetuated by the cultures of man; for the gospel does have its own world view, teaching men that everything in this world was created by God, that men themselves are spiritual beings and spirit children of their Father in heaven, and that obedience to his commandments as received through personal revelation takes priority over any requirements of a traditional culture."<#>20

Close Attachments to Each Other

Early Christian communities grew rapidly, in part, so Stark notes,<#>21 because they spread through preexisting social networks. He believes that "typically, people do not seek a new religious faith; they encounter one through their ties to other people who already accept this faith. This pattern has the potential for much faster growth than the one-by-one conversion of social isolates."<#>22 Furthermore, "religious movements can grow because their members continue to form new relationships with outsiders."

Stark concludes that "the primary source of Mormon converts is along network lines. The average convert was preceded into the church by many friends and relatives. It is network growth that so distinguishes the Mormon rate of growth—meanwhile, other contemporary religious movements will count their growth in thousands, not millions, for lack of a network pattern of growth."

Interestingly, Stark believes that the early Christian church must have grown at the rate of about forty percent per decade for the first three-and-one-half centuries, in order for it to have succeeded as it did in becoming a world faith. This figure, he notes, is close to the average growth rate of forty-three percent per decade that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has maintained over the past century. My own calculations for the decade 1985-1995 indicate that the Church grew by an astounding fifty-eight percent during that ten-year period. I thank God that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has always been a missionary church, seeking to obey the Savior's admonition to go "into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature" (Mark 16:15).

I have come to understand that the benefits of missionary work come not only to those who are baptized by authority but also to those who are the baptizers. Missionary work is the lifeblood of the Church, not only because it provides a continual influx of new and enthusiastic converts but because it is essential for the continual spiritual growth of those already in the fold. Churches without a vibrant and growing missionary effort simply wither and die over time.

Close attachments to each other were particularly strong in pioneer Latter-day Saint communities in the Intermountain West. In contradiction to the usual pattern of settlement of the American West, generally speaking, Latter-day Saints congregated in villages, going out to their surrounding farms each day to work the land. Several hundred villages, each remarkably like the next one, were established in the first half century of Mormon colonization. They represented a fusion of congregation and community, a union of the sacred and the secular. In early days, as the Saints struggled to exist in a variety of hostile landscapes, the distinction between things secular and those sacred was necessarily blurred. The temporal and ecclesiastical affairs of the community were intermingled, and ward bishops often functioned both as secular and ecclesiastical leaders.

In our day the Mormon village has given way to the ward, as pointed out by Douglas Alder in his landmark study of the evolution and history of wards in the Church. Alder says: "The ward has become a less demanding but more expandable unit than the village. Instead of being agrarian like the village, the ward has become largely suburban as has the society in which it thrives. . . . Instead of promoting the organic unity of religion with economy, the ward is now the center of religious, social activities."

Alder's insightful comment that in the ward we see what Mormonism is bears repetition. In the ward, he says, "We will see a young person confessing sins in confidence to a bishop, youth leaders anguished about a rebellious youngster who defies principles—maybe even diverting a whole peer group—parents trying to moderate the competitiveness of a fourth grade age mate group, a teacher breaking through to a child where a parent cannot, adult loneliness crying out for someone to care, members of all ages giving talks—building fledgling confidence—councils and presidencies planning and worrying about members with personal difficulties, feelings of joy when someone makes solid decisions, gratefulness for life and for eternal purpose, a divorcee sitting with her four children and biting her lip through a Father's Day program, friends helping a mother cope with the shock when her child is born with imperfections, quorum members trying to help a father regain his church membership following transgression, vigils beside the dying, struggles for testimony, the exultant joy of belief, soul-searching before a mission call, concern about eternal progression, a couple trying to govern their courtship with traditional values, people struggling to pay tithing, newcomers who are anxious about acceptance when moving into the tight relationships of a new ward, temple attenders pondering the meaning of the endowment, a neighbor raising her hand to the square to support a ward division she really doesn't want, a mother deciding whether to accept an additional calling that seems to be one too many, members accepting the irritating personality of someone they would be tempted to ignore if he weren't a `brother.' It is experiencing love—together."<#>23

The sense of personal attachments to others remains a potent force in the Church today. No matter where one attends Church, whether in Logan, Lethbridge, Lagos, or London, it is a common experience to find someone at sacrament meeting, priesthood, or Relief Society whom we know, or who knows someone we know. With that sense of community, of belonging, comes a sense of caring for others and a commitment to them. I well recall when my wife and I and our two children, aged two years and six months, arrived in Ithaca, New York, in August 1953. We were recent converts to the Church. We knew no one in Ithaca, and we were in desperate need of a place to stay. We had almost no money. The local branch president and his wife welcomed us with open arms, provided us with a temporary place in their own home, and helped us to find more permanent quarters. A few years later, when our family, now grown to five children, arrived in Ottawa, Canada, we were invited to dinners, welcomed by branch leaders and members alike, and promptly called to Church positions where we could serve and learn with others.

We must not, however, be unaware of factors that in our day can tend to weaken the sense of community among the Saints. They include spiritual complacency in geographical areas of cultural homogeneity, a feeling that "all is well in Zion" and that "we have it made," the unwarranted notion that there is no urgency to reach out to others, particularly those not of our faith. With such complacency may come an unwillingness to accept people from other cultures, to consider them as "strangers and foreigners," rather than "fellowcitizens with the saints" (Eph. 2:19). Yet a third danger is the increasing secularization of our society, with the attendant pressures for individuals and families to participate in a broad variety of experiences, from ballet lessons to Little League baseball. These may not, in and of themselves, be undesirable, but their cumulative effect may weaken the ties that bind the Saints together.

Other Factors in Building a Community of Saints

What then is involved in building a true community of believers? The factors noted by Stark—love and charity toward others, a shared faith springing from deeply held religious beliefs, a sense of community with associated deep personal attachments to others—obviously are important. But there are others as well. They include the following:

A sufficient proximity of members so they can "meet together often" (D&C 20:55) and serve each other, formally and informally (see Moro. 6:5-6). Of course, the proximity of members to each other varies significantly from one part of the world to another. Many wards in the Intermountain West of the United States are comprised of only a few city blocks, but when we returned to Ottawa, Canada, in 1959, we lived nearly an hour by automobile from our meeting place, and the nearest Church member in the suburban area in which we lived was over three miles away.

The importance of proximity is, of course, conditioned by the availability of adequate means of transportation and of telephones, which help to link members together. In West Africa, where almost none of the members have automobiles and where public transportation, especially on Sundays, is either nonexistent or too expensive for a whole family to use, the vast majority walk to church. That in effect limits the size of a branch or ward to the distance people can walk, a few miles to and from church. The ready availability of automobiles and good roads on which to travel means that most North American members can travel farther to church and still make out all right. Many travel quite long distances, and count themselves blessed to do so. The stake in which we lived for several years in eastern Canada was then 250 miles long and 250 miles wide, and some home and visiting teaching routes involved round trips of nearly 100 miles. I served there as a branch, ward, district, or stake officer over some twenty-five years and often used to joke that I went to work on Monday morning to rest up after the weekend!

A sufficient number of members, beyond a family, to provide the "critical mass" needed to operate Church programs. The average size of a ward has waxed and waned over time. Though a careful and prayerful decision is made in each instance, wards in the United States and Canada generally are considered for division nowadays when there are more than about 600 members. If wards become too large it is difficult to maintain a keen sense of community or to provide every member an opportunity to be involved in meaningful service to others.

Although the ward is the primary unit of the Latter-day Saint community, much smaller groups can also provide that essential sense of belonging. Because of where we lived in eastern Canada, our children were almost always numbered among the only two or three Latter-day Saints in their high schools. Their early-morning seminary class provided a sense of community for them. Each member of the class cared for, watched over, and worried about the others. If someone missed a morning's attendance, perhaps because of illness, there would be a telephone call within the hour from one or more of the others. The sense of belonging and of community was both real and reassuring.

A sufficient number of shepherds to lead, care for, and watch over the flock. Since the responsibility to provide leadership falls particularly on the priesthood, it is especially important there be sufficient active and able priesthood brethren to fulfill essential responsibilities.

A genuine identification with each other and a willingness to be known as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to be "fellowcitizens with the saints" (Eph. 2:19), and "to be called [H]is people, [and be] willing to bear one another's burdens" (Mosiah 18:8).

A sufficient understanding of the gospel to comprehend the purpose of life. A community of believers can exist only if its members share an understanding of the doctrinal basis for their decisions and actions. These doctrines are found in the scriptures and in the teachings of the living prophets. They include faith in and a testimony of God the Eternal Father, in Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, and in the Holy Ghost, the testifier and Comforter; the plan of salvation, including the Atonement and Resurrection of Christ; priesthood and its keys; ordinances and covenants; continuing revelation; and the role of the prophet Joseph Smith in bringing to pass the purposes of God for His children. In the final analysis it is an agreement on doctrine that above all else provides the framework and basis for a solid, enduring community of believers.

A genuine determination to move steadily forward and to persevere regardless of external pressures, to endure to the end, to strive constantly to become of "one heart and one mind" (Moses 7:18), even the mind of Christ (see 1 Cor. 2:16).

Insistence on the maintenance of high standards by Church members, in matters of both doctrine and behavior.

In their insightful work on religion in America, Roger Finke and Rodney Stark have developed a compelling argument for the proposition that "religious organizations are stronger to the degree that they impose significant costs in terms of sacrifice and even stigma upon their members."<#>24 In other words, the more comfortable the pew, the quicker the slide downhill.

Why do increased costs strengthen a community of believers? Finke and Stark suggest the following reasons:

Â Prospective members are forced to choose whether they will participate fully or not at all. Potential members whose commitment and participation would otherwise be low are screened out. In Latter-day Saint parlance, members are required to put away "the natural man" and experience a "mighty change of heart" (see Mosiah 3:19; Alma 5:12-13).

Â The social and spiritual rewards for displaying high levels of commitment are substantially increased.

Â Success breeds success. Positive experiences in worship services increase to the degree that the church is full, members are enthusiastically participating, and the believers are giving a positive evaluation of what is going on.

How blessed we are that the Brethren stand as mighty watchmen on the tower, preaching both by precept and example the absolute need for all God's children to grow in faith, integrity, and righteousness. They call upon us to give away all of our sins, to overcome the natural man who is the enemy of God (see Alma 22:18), and to live all of Christ's commandments all of the time. Our willingness to do so is the measure of our devotion and commitment to Christ. These words of Jesus tell us of our duty, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John 14:21).

As the secular communities in which many of us live continue to flag and falter, the Saints must be prepared to speak up with regard to public matters that are moral in nature and to vote for men and women who reflect our values. Note this wise counsel from President Gordon B. Hinckley: "The building of public sentiment begins with a few earnest voices. I am not one to advocate shouting defiantly or shaking fists and issuing threats in the faces of legislators. But I am one who believes that we should earnestly and sincerely and positively express our convictions to those given the heavy responsibility of making and enforcing our laws. The sad fact is that the minority who call for greater liberalization, who peddle and devour pornography, who encourage and feed on licentious display make their voices heard until those in our legislatures may come to believe that what they say represents the will of the majority. We are not likely to get that which we do not speak up for."<#>25

It will often be wise for us to lift our voices with those of others who feel as we do, to make common cause with other men and women of good will and anxious hearts who are concerned as we are concerned with what is wrong. These words of Edmund Burke come to mind, "When bad men combine, the good must associate; else they will fall, one by one, an unpitied sacrifice in a contemptible struggle."<#>26

In addition to speaking up on moral issues, there is much more we can do, as citizens and as members of the community of Saints, to help make our neighborhoods better places in which to live. Service in the community might include working in such things as PTA, "Neighborhood Watch" programs, blood drives, Little League, etc. A few innovative examples of Christian service to others will illustrate the wide variety of other initiatives available to us as communities of Saints. They include the following:

♦ In an area of Salt Lake City where real poverty is not uncommon, a stake has embarked on an ambitious short-term plan to tutor junior high school students in English, science, and math. Their mid-range plan is to expand the tutoring to all students in need within the stake's boundaries, from kindergarten through high school. Long range, they intend to tutor the parents and family members of these students, with a special emphasis on basic literacy.

♦ Two different stakes in the Salt Lake City area approached their respective county commissioners and offered to build a public park; the Church would provide the labor if the municipalities would donate the land, provide heavy equipment, and commit to the aftercare. In one instance, a thirty-five-year rift between the stake and a neighboring congregation of another faith was healed as a consequence of the park project they worked on together. In the other instance, the stake and four non-LDS churches joined together to make the park a new community landmark.

♦ A student stake in Logan, Utah, laboriously tape records the contents of university textbooks each quarter so that disabled college students can study and perform their assignments.

With a little thought and a lot of effort, there is no end to what we can do to help strengthen our communities.

* The original spelling has been retained.

* Original spelling and punctuation retained.
