Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Introduction

For many, The Book of Mormon is a focal point of acceptance or rejection of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The book is held by the Church to be divine scripture, one of the four "Standard Works." A knowledge and understanding of the book and events and circumstances surrounding its coming forth is sought by every true Latter-day Saint. And while the authenticity of the book is not dependent upon such things as archaeology, geography, or textual criticism, still information or discoveries wich tend to add to our understanding and our appreciation for the book is of interest, and if properly interpreted and used, of value.

5Throughout the years, beginning with its first volume in 1897, The Improvement Era has published many articles on the Book of Mormon and closely related subjects. It has long been felt that gathering together into book form some of these writings, most of which are not now readily available to Church members, would make a valuable contribution to Book of Mormon literature.

5A Book of Mormon Treasury is such a collection. The eminent authors of these studies, many of whom were and are leaders of the Church, include two Presidents, Wilford Woodruff and Joseph F. Smith. Articles by such outstanding authors from the past as Orson F. Whitney, Melvin J. Ballard, B. H. Roberts, Seymour B. Young, and John A. Widtsoe, and the works of present-day scholars, including President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, are found in this treasury.

5We are pleased to help make these writings accessible through this book to all who are interested, realizing as we do so that the Book of Mormon carries its own evidences within its own pages. Indeed the words of Moroni form a directive for everyone who would know, the truth of The Book of Mormon:

5"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:4.)

5DOYLE L. GREEN MARBA C. JOSEPHSON
