Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Can We Believe the Witnesses to the Book of Mormon?

by John A. Widstoe

Three men, and later eight men, declared in two formal, signed testimonies that they saw, and handled the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated.

39The great importance of these statements in establishing faith in the divine mission of Joseph Smith the Prophet has been recognized by all students of the restored gospel. To Latter-day Saints these affidavits, published in every authorized edition of the Book of Mormon, have been and are a source of faith.

39Unbelievers in the divine origin of the Book of Mormon have been forced, on the other hand, to stand baffled and perplexed before the testimonies of these witnesses.

39The evidences for the truth of the witnesses are convincing. They cannot be denied. Here are some of these proofs:

39It is a remarkable fact that this prophecy was received by the Prophet in March, 1829, before the Book of Mormon had been translated. It reads in part as follows:

39Yea, they shall know of a surety that these things are true, for from heaven will I decare it unto them.

39I will give them power that they may behold and view these things as they are. (D&C 5:11-13.)

39The united testimony of the three witnesses is a literal fulfillment of this policy. It cannot be explained away, for the prophecy and its fulfilment actually occurred. It leads directly to the divine purpose to which the Prophet said he was called.

40Soon after the announcement, the three men who became the first group of witnesses - Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris - asked that they be selected to see the plates. While very different in temperament, they were alike in having minds of their own and doubts of their own. They wanted to make sure for themselves that Joseph's story was true.

40About two months later, in June, 1829, the plates were shown to the three witnesses. On the day set, Joseph Smith and the three witnesses, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, sought a secluded spot in the forest. After prayer by each one, when nothing happened, Martin Harris withdrew, feeling that his lack of faith was preventing the manifestation. After his withdrawal, a heavenly being stood before them in the midst of a bright light, with the plates in his hands. He turned the leaves, and spoke to the witnesses.

40Then they heard a voice declaring that

40These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear.

40Joseph then went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom he joined in prayer. To the great joy of Martin Harris, the same vision opened to him. Thus, the three witnesses had realized their desires. (See History of the Church 1:54-56.)

40True, the record of this event was written by Joseph Smith, but the witnesses were still living, and could have corrected any errors in the account. This they did not do.

40A derailed account of any event is always an evidence of its truth. Deceivers are careful to deal in few details and many generalities. The whole event occurred in full daylight. All of them were vigorous young men in good health.

40As if to make assurance doubly sure, the plates were later shown to eight other men. Whether all eight saw the plates at the same time is not known. However, the men, Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, unitedly signed the testimony in which they describe the plates and the engravings on them, and further declared that they actually handled and "hefted" the plates.

41Such corroboration of the testimony of the three, under different conditions, and at different times, certifies immeasurably to the truth of the events.

41Some of the witnesses left the Church, others were excommunicated, but their testimonies for the truth of the Book of Mormon remained unchanged,

41Of the three witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were excommunicated. Martin Harris drifted away; Cowdery, of undisputed high intelligence, and Harris, holding stubbornly to his views, both returned and were again baptized into the Church. Whitmer, hugging old grievances and remaining unaffiliated with the Church, bore frequent testimony to the truth of the translation of the Book of Mormon from the Nephite plates. Oliver Cowdery practiced law. Several tines, before the courts, his integrity was impugned because of his acceptance of the Book of Mormon. Each time he bore testimony to the truth of the Nephite record. Wherever he went, he was looked upon as a man of honor. He died with his testimony upon his lips.

41David Whitmer remained in Richmond, Missouri, to the end of his life. He lived to be a very old man. Many persons called on him to ask about his testimony to the Book of Mormon. Orson Pratt, Joseph F. Smith, James H. Moyle, and C. C. Richards were among these visitors. To each and all he reaffirmed his testimony. He died with his testimony upon his lips.

41Martin Harris, after various misadventures, remained for many years in the East near the Kirtland Temple. Visitors there would quiz him about his belief in the Book of Mormon. Among them were Edward Stevenson and W. H. Homer. His answer was invariable, that he was as certain of his testimony as he was of the sun in the high heavens. He finally settled, in his old age, in Clarkston, Utah. He died with his testimony upon his lips.

42The lives of the eight witnesses tell the same story. One of the witnesses, John Whitmer, was excommunicated from the Church. Two, Jacob Whitmer and Hiram Page, withdrew from the Church. The other five, Christian Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, remained faithful, useful members of the Church during their whole lives.

42All of the eight witnesses, whether in or out of the Church, maintained to their last breath that they saw and handled the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated.

42Every one of the eleven witnesses remained true to his testimony concerning the Book of Mormon plates.

42The facts connected with the Book of Mormon witnesses are so unanswerable that they have been disconcerting stumbling blocks to unbelievers. Unfriendly critics have usually tried to draw attention away from them, as being of little significance.

42More honest unbelievers have attempted two explanations, and two only.

42The first suggestion is that the witnesses were dishonest, and in collusion with the Prophet. That is, the whole story of seeing the plates was invented, and had no basis in fact. That explanation has long since fallen to the ground. This is admitted by most anti-Mormon writers. The well-attested life histories of the witnesses show every one of them to have been honest and honorable in his dealings with his fellow men. If their testimonies had been untrue, one or the other would have revealed his perfidy. Many opportunities were given them. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and John Whitmer were excommunicated from the Church, improperly, as they thought. They then soured upon the Prophet and the Church. That would have given them a chance to declare the whole thing a fraud. Instead they remained true to their testimony. Even anti-Mormons have conceded that collusion among Joseph Smith and the witnesses is most improbable.

43The second explanation, conceived in desperation by those who will not believe the truth, has been that Joseph Smith was endowed with great hypnotic power, which enabled him to make the eleven witnesses think they saw things which did not exist. This explanation is much like the drowning man clutching at a straw.

43This far-fetched explanation asks us to believe that eleven very dissimilar men, all of them questioning the claims of the Prophet, could be made to see, hear, and touch, alike, figments of nothingness. It is an absurd request to make of intelligent people. The testimonies of the witnesses rest upon three senses: seeing, hearing, touching. Even the confirmed believer in hypnotism would hardly dare cover so big a territory. Moreover, though it is conceded that the Prophet had a magnetic personality, there is nothing in his well-documented life to credit him with such, or any, hypnotic power.

43The more the witnesses are studied the more certain the student becomes that their testimonies are true and irrefutable.

43They were honest men, clearheaded, hardheaded, not easily influenced. They had seen and handled the Nephite plates. They had heard a voice from heaven, declaring the work to be true. They could do nothing else than to bear witness to their glorious experience. The testimonies of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon are an unanswerable proof of the divine mission of Joseph Smith the Prophet.
