Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Nine Generations of Spiritual Leaders

by Archibald F. Bennett

Qualities of great leadership are rarely transmitted from father to son in unbroken succession for generations. History does reveal such notable examples as that of the great English statesman, William Pitt the elder, and his equally famous son, William Pitt the younger; and of Lord Randolph Churchill and his son, Prime Minister Winston Churchill. In America we have the case of President John Adams, President John Quincy Adams, his son, the latter's son, Charles Francis Adams, author, statesman of repute and candidate for vice president, and Charles Francis Adams, author and publicist of the fourth generation.

99The religious field provides instances of families contributing several generations of prominent ministers. In the brief history of our own Church already we can cite four and five generations of general Church authorities in lineal succession; for example, the posterity of Asael Smith, a grand old pioneer who died in 1830, has furnished to the Church: Joseph Smith, Sr., Presiding Patriarch; Hyrum Smith, Counselor in the First Presidency and Presiding Patriarch; Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church; Hyrum M. Smith, an apostle; and Joseph F. Smith, former Patriarch to the Church. A brother of Joseph Smith, Sr. was Uncle John Smith, who also served for years as Presiding Patriarch. His son, George A. Smith, was an apostle , and a member of the First Presidency, as was also his son, John Henry Smith, father of George Albert Smith, President.

99Yet, with the single exception of the ten generations of ancient patriarchs from Adam to Noah who were all "preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied," the Book of Mormon presents a record of spiritual leadership that it is unique and without parallel in the annals of heredity.

99For nine generation, over a period of almost five hundred years - 173 B.C. to 321 A.D. - Alma the elder: Alma the younger; Helaman, son of Alma; Helaman, son of Helaman; Nephi, son of Helaman; Nephi, the disciple son of Nephi; Nephi, son of Nephi the disciple; Amos, son of last-named Nephi; and two sons of Amos, viz., Amos the younger and Ammaron, each in his generation stood as a leader in the Church of Christ in America and keeper of the sacred records. The story of their glorious ministry should be forever treasured in the hearts of the faithful.

1 . Alma the Elder

The first Alma, father of this long line, was born about 173 B.C., probably twelve or thirteen generations after his lineal ancestor, Nephi the son of Lehi, who came out of Jerusalem. He grew to young manhood among his people, the Nephites, in the city of Lehi-Nephi, which was completely surrounded by their enemies the Lamanites. Noah, king of the Nephites, was a wicked and grasping oppressor and gathered about him a circle of apostate priests who abandoned themselves to idolatry and riotous living. Alma became one of these priests.

100Wickedness became so widespread that the Lord sent the dauntless prophet Abinadi to rebuke the king and his priests. In the power of the Lord he told them of their misdeeds and called upon them to repent. King Noah, in anger, commanded his priests to seize the prophet and put him to death.

100But there was one among them whose name was Alma, he also being a descendant of Nephi. And he was a young man, and he believed the words which Abinadi had spoken, for he knew concerning the iniquity which Abinadi had testified against them; therefore he began to plead with the king that he would not be angry with Abinadi, but suffer that he might depart in peace.

100But the king was more wroth, and caused that Alma should he cast out from among them, and sent his servants after him that they might slay him.

100But he fled from before them and hid himself that they found him not. And he being concealed for many days did write all the words which Abinadi had spoken. (Mosiah 17:2-4.)

101The rest of the priests lifted up their voice against Abinadi, and they burned him at the stake.

101 Alma sincerely repented and taught the words of the martyr among the people secretly, baptizing many who received the truth and forming them into the Church of Christ, "having their hearts knit together in unity and love." They escaped the king's army sent to destroy them, by taking their tents and families and fleeing into the wilderness. After eight days they pitched their tents in a beautiful and pleasant land of pure water, where they built a city and established a new home. Alma refused to be made the king of his people, but he served faithfully as high priest and founder of their Church, watching over and nourishing them in righteousness.

101Later, the Lamanites subjected Alma and his people to bondage and bitter persecution, but Alma, under divine guidance, led his followers out of the clutches of their captors, until they arrived at the City of Zarahemla. There King Mosiah and the other Nephites received them with great joy, and Alma was given authority over the Church, as high priest. In this authority he conducted a vigorous reformation throughout the entire country and great numbers were baptized. "And the Lord did pour out his Spirit upon them, and they were blessed and prospered in the land."

As the years went by, the number of unbelievers increased, and they began to persecute the members of the Church.

101Now the sons of Mosiah were numbered among the unbelievers; and also one of the sons of Alma was numbered among them, he being called Alma, after his father; nevertheless, he became a very wicked and an idolatrous man. And he was a man of many words, and did speak much flattery to the people; therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities.

101And he became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God: stealing away the hearts of the people; causing much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power over them. (Mosiah 27:8-9.)

102As he and the sons of Mosiah went about secretly to destroy the Church, rebelling against God, the angel of the Lord descended upon them, speaking with a voice of thunder, and Alma and his associates fell in terror to the earth.

102Demanded the angel:

102Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning, thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth. (Mosiah 27:13-14.)

102He reminded Alma of the captivity and deliverance of his fathers, and commanded him to seek no more to destroy the Church. Alma, stricken dumb and helpless, was carried before his father, Alma, who rejoiced, knowing this was the power of God. The priests and the multitude fasted and prayed for two days and two nights, when Alma received his strength, and, arising, bade them be of good comfort,

102For, said he, I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit.

102Henceforth Alma the younger was a changed man, a most zealous champion of truth and righteousness. By his father he was appointed high priest and placed in charge of the Church in all the land; and by Mosiah, the king, he was named to be the secular ruler, the first chief judge under the revised form of government. As such, "he did judge righteous judgments; and there was continual peace through the land." (Mosiah 29:43.) Soon after, his father, Alma the elder, died at the age of eighty-two, having lived to fulfil the commandments God.

102 . . . and thus ended the days of Alma, who was the founder of their church. (Mosiah 29:45, 47.)

102Events crowding Alma's public ministry called for the highest type of courage and wisdom. The apostate Nehor slew the aged and faithful servant of God named Gideon. Alma, as chief judge, condemned him to die for this crime. Amlici, cunning and ambitious, sought to have himself proclaimed king, and when defeated led a rebellion. Alma, chief judge and governor, led his people and chief captains in the bloody battles which ensued, and slew Amlici in personal combat. As a man of God he continued to labor for the preservation of his people; and resigned the chief judgeship to devote his entire time to his responsibility as earthly head of the Church. This entailed extensive missionary tours, frequently among whole communities of most bitter opponents. His imprisonment with Amulek at Ammonihah and their miraculous deliverance, the punishment of the blasphemous Korihor who demanded a sign, the mission to the Zoramites which ended in partial failure owing to the waywardness of his son, Corianton, and Alma's inspired teachings to this son, now repentant, are classic and well-known examples of the highest type of leadership.

103Cried Alma in one self-revealing passage:

103O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!

103Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth. (Alma 29:1-2.)

103Toward the end of his life's mission Alma carefully questioned his eldest son, Helaman, as to the steadfastness of the latter's belief in Christ and in the sacredness of the records he was about to entrust to his care. Then he blessed Helaman, foretelling that in four hundred years from the time that Jesus Christ should manifest himself unto the Nephites they should dwindle in unbelief, and be almost entirely destroyed. Alma blessed this land for the sake of the righteous, but cursed it unto those who do wickedly.

103And when Alma had done this he departed out of the land of Zarahemla, as if to go into the land of Melek. And it came to pass that he was never heard of more; is to his death or burial we know not of.

104Behold, this we know, that he was a righteous man; and the saying went abroad in the church that he was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses. (Alma 45:18-19.)

3 . Helaman, Son of Alma

Helaman proved a worthy successor to a truly great father. As the new head of the Church, Helaman went forth preaching the word of God among all the people, perfecting and regulating their organizations in every city.

104But now a wicked dissenter, Amalickiah, a large and strong man, ambitious for power and seeking to become king, boldly spoke false and flattering words, leading away "the hearts of many people to do wickedly." Factions formed who would not give heed to the teachings of Helaman and Shiblon and Corianton and other faithful men of God. Others grew proud of their exceeding great riches, Amalickiah and his adherents finally determined to slay the righteous. He promised the lower judges who supported him to make them rulers over the people, and to destroy the foundation of liberty.

104Then it was that the valiant general, Moroni, raised his "title of liberty," summoning all who would be true to their God, their families, and their freedom, to dedicate their lives to this sacred cause. Outnumbered, Amalickiah and his followers fled to the Lamanites. By treachery, within a short time he made himself king of the Lamanites and led them in bitter warfare against his former people and kindred.

104 Helaman was likened by the chronicler to Moroni in faithfulness. While war clouds gathered, he and the high priests preached the word of God; the people humbled themselves; and again good order prevailed in the Church. Aiding him this missionary work were his brothers, Shiblon and Corianton, and the sons of the former King Mosiah-Ammon and his brethren. Never was there a happier time among the people of Nephi,

104As the Lamanite onslaught overran one after another of the great cities of the Nephites, the converted Lamanites, called the people of Ammon, felt they must take up arms again in bloodshed. Helaman persuaded them not to do so, but instead he enlisted two thousand of their young sons who had never taken the oath. They called upon their beloved high priest, Helaman, to be their leader, entering into a covenant to fight for their liberty and help protect the Nephites and themselves from bondage. So valiant were they that they proved a great support to the hard-pressed Nephites. Helaman loved them and called them his sons, and they addressed him as father. "Never," declared he, "have I seen so great courage!" They "fought as with the strength of God," with mighty power and miraculous strength. More than once their fearless attack turned defeat into victory, and when other veterans fled these remained firm and undaunted. In some bitterly-contested engagements every one of the two thousand was wounded with many wounds, but not one was slain.

105 Helaman proved to be a gifted and resourceful general, adept at stratagem in capturing strongly-fortified cities with small loss of life, and always displaying a sublime faith in God. When peace and victory came at the end of the long war, Helaman and his brethren resumed their preaching to re-establish the Church in all the land. He died in the thirty-fifth year of the reign of judges, B.C. 57.

105Shiblon, his brother, was given charge of the records and sacred things. He was a just man, walking uprightly and doing good continually, "and also did his brother," Corianton. At this time Hagoth built his ships to carry colonists to the land northward. Shiblon died, B.C. 53. Corianton having gone into the land northward in a ship, the records passed to Helaman, son of Helaman.

In his day a powerful Lamanite army captured the chief city of Zarahemla. Their leader, Coriantumr, impetuously pressed his attack into the center of the Nephite land, only to be slain and to bring disastrous defeat upon his army, who were forced to surrender. In the forty-first year of judges, Helaman was appointed chief judge by the voice of the people.

105Again conspiracy was formed, and the powerful Gadianton band was organized. One of their chieftains was Kishkumen, notorious for having already murdered the previous chief judge. Kishkumen now attempted to slay Helaman also. But one of Helaman's servants mingled among the conspirators as one of them, learned of their wicked plot, and, pretending to guide Kishkumen to where the chief judge was, stabbed Kishkumen and put an end to his murders. The rest of the Gadianton band fled.

106Again there were great migrations to the northland, and the new settlers in this time of expansion began to cover the face of the whole land, building many cities. This high tribute is paid to Helaman, high priest ,and chief judge:

106And it came to pass that he had two sons. He gave unto the eldest the name of Nephi, and unto the youngest the name of Lehi. And they began to grow up unto the Lord. (Hel. 3:20-21.)

106Years of peace followed, and tens of thousands joined the Church. So many blessings were poured out upon the Nephites that even the high priests and teachers were astonished, and there was continual rejoicing.

106One of the truly choice passages of the Book of Mormon relates Helaman's admonition to his sons, Nephi and Lehi:

106Behold, my sons, I desire that ye should remember to keep the commandments of God; and I would that ye should declare unto the people these words. Behold, I have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written, that they were good.

106Therefore, my sons, I would that ye should do that which is good, that it may be said of you, and also written, even as it has been said and written of them . . . .

106And they did remember his words; and therefore they went forth, keeping the commandments of God, to teach the word of God among all the people of Nephi. (Hel. 5:6-7,14

107Does not this eloquent and powerful appeal of a faithful father to his sons explain in large part this long succession of righteous men for nine generations?

107 Helaman died B.C. 39; and Nephi succeeded as Church leader and chief judge.

Nephi, eldest son of Helaman, filled

107 . . . the judgment-seat with justice and equity; yea, he did keep the commandments of God, and did walk in the ways of his father. (Hel. 3:37.)

107But the faith of Nephi was put to the severest kind of test. Dissension was followed by bloodshed, and, according to the now familiar pattern, the rebellious were driven to the Lamanites. The Lamanites invaded and captured Zarahemla the following year, and all Nephite possessions in the land southward. Never had such disaster as this befallen the Nephites, who seemed powerless to hurl their enemies back. Then it was that two righteous, humble men did more than all the Nephite armies could do.

107Weary because of the iniquity of his people, Nephi resigned the judgment seat, and

107took it upon him to preach the word of God all the remainder of his days, and his brother Lehi also, all the remainder of his days;

107For they remembered the words which their father, Helaman, spake unto them. (Hel. 5:4-5.)

107Nor was their message delivered to their own people among the cities of their enemies, the Lamanites. To the great astonishment of all, eight thousand Lamanites in captured Zarahemla and vicinity were baptized. Directing their steps next to the very heart of the Lamanite domain, they were seized by an army of Lamanites and cast into prison. When their captors came to put them to death, they saw Nephi and Lehi encircled by fire. The earth and the walls of the prison shook, and fear came upon their captors. A voice spoke, calling upon these savage folk to repent and serve the Lord; angels ministered to them; ,and upwards of three hundred were converted; and by the testimony of these converts a greater part of the Lamanites were convinced. Thus a most remarkable reformation was wrought. They laid down their arms, forsook their hatred for the Nephites and the traditions of their fathers, and even yielded up to the Nephites the cities they had wrested from them in battle. In a short time the situation was so reversed that Lamanites were sending missionaries to the Nephites, being more righteous than they.

108By B.C. 29 there was once more peace in all the land.

108This, however, did not long endure. Wickedness and the rise of the Gadianton band and the murder of the chief judge followed in fell sequence. Soon Nephi's prophetic words were rejected by all the people and there ensued a state of awful wickedness. The heart of this devoted servant of God "was swollen with sorrow within his breast."

108Few men in the history of this world have so proved their dependability that the Lord could entrust them with power to seal upon earth and it would be sealed in heaven. Nephi was one so entrusted. God gave him mighty power in word and deed. He foretold to an angry multitude the murder of their chief judge by the latter's own brother. He was commissioned to smite the earth with famine and pestilence, that the people might be brought to repentance and not perish in warfare. Thousands did die of the famine, but at last the people were humbled and repented, and swept the band of wicked Gadiantons from among them till the robbers became extinct. In this righteous state they esteemed Nephi a great prophet and man of God; and Lehi, his brother, was not behind him a whit in righteousness.

108Once more the downward trend of exceeding great peace was dissension, wickedness, robbery, and war, to darken the last days of this great prophet. Samuel, the Lamanite, came and uttered his memorable prophecy to unheeding ears. In this period of gathering gloom, Satan had once more great hold upon the people.

108In the ninety-first year of the judges, six hundred years after Lehi left Jerusalem, Nephi, the son of Helaman,

108departed out of the land of Zarahemla, giving charge unto his son Nephi, who was his eldest son, concerning the plates of brass, and all the records which had been kept, and all those things which had been kept sacred, from the departure of Lehi out of Jerusalem.

109Then he departed out of the land, and whither he went, no man knoweth; and his son Nephi did keep the records in his stead. (3 Ne. 1:2-3.)

Like his illustrious father, this younger Nephi was destined to be the leading spirit of his nation. In the very year of his father's departure he was in peril of his life. Enemies of the believers in the coming of Christ asserted that the time set for the sign to be given that the Savior was born had passed, and these unbelievers even set a day when all Christians should be put to death. Nephi, deeply sorrowful, bowed down in prayer, crying mightily unto the Lord, in behalf of his people, all the day long. Then the voice of the Lord spoke to Nephi, saying:

109Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world. (3 Ne. 1:13.)

109There was no darkness that night, but it continued light as midday; and a new star appeared. The unbelievers were frustrated and the Saints delivered. Most of the people were converted by these evidences and through the subsequent testimony and preaching of Nephi.

109Yet the rising generation among both Nephites and Lamanites proved wayward. Gadianton robbers became numerous and gained the upper hand, overthrowing the government, and wars threatened the utter destruction of the Nephites. Nephi had the sad duty of recording the dreary chronicle of a wicked people, with the all too brief period of repentance following each dire season of punishment. Laws were set at defiance, and prophets who warned the evildoers were put to death. In the midst of all this Nephi did his full duty as head of the Church.

109And Nephi did minister with power and with great authority.

109And it came to pass that they were angry with him, even because he had greater power than they, for it were not possible that they could disbelieve his words, for so great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto him daily.

110And in the name of Jesus did he cast out devils and unclean spirits; and even his brother did he raise from the dead, after he had been stoned and suffered death by the people. (3 Ne. 7:17-19.)

110At the time of the crucifixion of the Savior, great destruction visited this land, and the wicked were utterly destroyed. Afterwards the Savior appeared, and from among all the survivors he chose twelve apostles. Nephi was honored by being the first apostle chosen. The Lord called him to come forth from the midst of the multitude,

110And Nephi arose and went forth, and bowed himself before the Lord and did kiss his feet. (3 Ne. 11:19.)

110Among the others chosen were Nephi's brother, Timothy, whom he had raised from the dead, and also Nephi's son Jonas.

110From among this twelve, three requested permission of the Lord to remain on the earth to minister to the inhabitants and to bring souls unto Christ, never to endure the pains of death; but to be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality when the Savior shall come in glory to rule and reign. Mormon knew the names of these three Nephites, but was forbidden of the Lord to record their names. It is possible that one or more of the above-named disciples were included among these highly privileged ones. By the year 100 A.D. the rest of the disciples "had all gone to the paradise of God."

This son of one Apostle and brother of another was a witness to the Savior's ministry to the Nephites. He is the writer of the book known as 4 Nephi, which he began keeping in the thirty and fourth year A.D. Soon the people were all converted unto the Lord, both Nephites and Lamanites. The latter became white, and all distinction between the two groups was lost.

111and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every men did deal justly with one another.

111And they had all things in common among them; therefore they were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift. (4 Ne. 2, 3.)

111Lost cities were rebuilt, and in annals of happiness the years sped by, eventful only in the story of unbroken righteousness. Mighty miracles were wrought by the disciples of Jesus. There were no tumults nor contentions "because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people." Nephi had the blessed privilege of writing at his final testimony:

111surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

The above-named Nephi died A. D. 110, having kept the record seventy-six years. His son, Amos, kept it in his stead, for the long period of eighty-four years. It is evident that through righteousness the lives of these men were greatly prolonged. There was still peace in the land, save that in later years a small number of people revolted from the church, and resumed the name of Lamanites. Amos died A.D. 194.

Amos the younger succeeded his father as keeper of the sacred records. By this time the people had so multiplied that they had spread upon all the face if the land, and because of their prosperity in Christ were exceedingly rich. This left room for pride and worldliness, and no more were their goods held in common. Class sectionalism developed rapidly, other churches were organized, and the glorious harmony of their idyllic life was broken. Soon Satan had hold of their hearts, and it became fashionable to deny Christ, and to persecute and imprison and put to death his faithful followers. This dangerous trend continued until the death of Amos the younger A.D. 305, he having recorded events for the period of one hundred eleven years.

112Ammaron, his brother, now kept the record. He saw Gadianton robbers prevalent, wickedness everywhere, and all the evidences that the race was entering the violent rapids leading to their final destruction. There must have been very few righteous men to be found. In the year A.D. 321

112Ammaron, being constrained by the Holy Ghost, did hide up the records which were sacred-yea, even all the sacred records which had been handed down from generation to generation.

112Before he died there was yet one sacred obligation he must perform. From among the people he selected a lad of ten years of age, whose name was Mormon, the son of Mormon, and said unto him:

112I perceive that thou art a sober child, and art quick to observe;

112Therefore, when ye are about twenty and four years old I would that ye should remember the things that ye have observed concerning this people; and when ye are of that age go to the land Antum, unto a hill which shall be called Shim; and there have I deposited unto the Lord all the sacred engravings concerning this people.

112Mormon, like the previous record keepers, was a descendant of Nephi, and may well have been a descendant of Alma and some of the later leaders of this family. If so, that would extend the record of this remarkable lineage two more generations to Moroni, the last guardian of these priceless messages.

Their Worthy Contribution

From Alma to Ammaron! Nine generations of this notable family gave the world no fewer than fifteen faithful and mighty men of affairs, each under the Lord playing a decisive role in the great events of his day, shaping the destiny of his nation and influencing for righteousness the men and women of his time.

113What would the Book of Mormon be without the faithnourishing message of their lives and labors? What permanent loss the whole world would sustain-our own and every future generation - were there to he forever deleted from our sacred scriptures all mention of their marvelous ministry, their soul-inspiring teachings and even the very records written and preserved by the posterity of Alma!
