Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Is Book of Mormon Geography Known?

by John A. Widstoe

The actual geographical locations of Book of Mormon events and places have always intrigued students of the book. Several volumes and many articles on the subject have been published. [^1] The various writers so far have failed to agree. Often the suggested locations vary, with different authors, thousands of miles. An earnest, honest search is being continued by enthusiastic Book of Mormon students.

127The Book of Mormon was written centuries ago. Consequently, it makes no direct reference to modern, easily identifiable locations. Students must depend, chiefly, upon existing natural monuments, such as mountains, rivers, lakes, or ocean beaches, and try to identify them with similar places mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Ruins of early cities are also used as clues by the investigator. Usually, an ideal map is drawn based upon geographical facts mentioned in the book. Then a search is made for existing areas complying with the map. All studies are legitimate, but the conclusions drawn from them, though they may be corrects must at the best be held as intelligent conjectures.

127As far as can be learned, the Prophet Joseph Smith, translator of the book, did not say where, on the American continent, Book of Mormon activities occurred. Perhaps he did not know. However, certain facts and traditions of varying reliability are used as foundation guides by students of Book of Mormon geography.

127First, it is known by revelation that Adam, the father of the human race, lived in or near the territory now known as the state of Missouri. [^2] This has no bearing on Book of Mormon geography, since it decals with a period long before the coming of Book of Mormon people to America.

127Second, on the journey into northwestern Missouri, led by the Prophet, a scouting party uncovered the skeleton of a large man near the Illinois River. Joseph Smith said it was the remains of a white Lamanite named Zelph, a leader among this people. [^3] This is not of much value in Book of Mormon geographical studies, since Zelph probably dated from a later time when Nephites and Lamanites had been somewhat dispersed and had wandered over the country.

128Third, the hill from which the Book of Mormon plates were obtained by Joseph Smith is definitely known. In the days of the Prophet this hill was known among the people as Cumorah. [^4] This is a fixed point in Book of Mormon later history. There is a controversy, however, about the Hill Cumorah-not about the location where the Book of Mormon plates were found, but whether it is the hill under that name near which Nephite events took place. [^5] A name, says one, may be applied to more than one hill; and plates containing the records of a people, sacred things, could be moved from place to place by divine help.

128However, the hill known today as Cumorah in northern New York is a fixed, known point.

128Fourth, a statement in the Compendium has been very generally accepted by the Church. This book, published in 1882, dealing with the doctrines the gospel was compiled by Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little. Elder Richards was a member of the Council of the Twelve, and James A. Little a prominent and trusted elder in the Church. In the book is a section devoted to "Gems from the History of the Prophet Joseph Smith." The last of these "gems" reads as follows:

128"Lehi's Travels.- Revelation to Joseph the Seer. The course that and his company traveled from Jerusalem to the place of their destination: They traveled nearly a south, southeast direction until they came to the nineteenth degree of north latitude; then nearly east to the sea of Arabia, then sailed in a southeast direction, and landed on the continent of South America, in Chile, thirty degrees, south latitude." [^6]

128This, if correctly quoted would be another fixed, certain point in the study of Book of Mormon geography. Curiously enough, however, this statement is not found in the history of Joseph. Investigation points to a slip of paper in possession of the Church Historian said to have been the property of President Frederick G. Williams, one of Joseph's counselors. On the paper are notes pertaining to the doctrine and history of the Church. There also is found the above item relating to "Lehi's Travels." Much doubt has been cast upon the reliability of this statement, since diligent search has failed to trace it to the Prophet. It came into the possession of the Church Historian as a gift from Ezra G. Williams, son of Frederick G. Williams in 1864 twenty years after the Prophet's death, and was not published until thirty-eight years after the Prophet's death.

129Fifth, a statement from the days of Joseph Smith, seldom quoted, bears on this subject. In the Times and Seasons, 1842, Zarakemla, a great Book of Mormon city, is partly identified with the ruins of Quirigua, spoken of in Stephens' great book Incident of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan. [^7] The article in the Times and Seasons positively stated that Zarahemla, while not necessarily where the Quirigua ruins now stands, was in "this land". This seems to place many Book of Mormon activities in that region. The interesting fact in this connection is that the Prophet Joseph Smith at this time was editor of the Times and Seasons, and had announced his full editorial responsibility for the paper. [^8] This seems to give the subjoined article an authority it might not otherwise possess. The following is an excerpt from the editorial:

129"Since our 'Extract' was published from Mr. Stephens' 'Incident of Travel,'&c., we have found another important fact relating to the truth of the Book of Mormon. Central America, or Guatemala, is situated north of the Isthmus of Darien and once embraced several hundred miles of territory from north to south-The city of Zarahemla, burnt at the crucifixion of the Savior, and rebuilt afterwards, stood upon this land, as will be seen from the following words in the book of Alma: - 'And now it was only the distance of a day and a half's journey for a Nephite, on the line Bountiful, and the land Desolation, from the east to the west sea; and thus the land of Nephi, and the land of Zarahemla were nearly surrounded by water: there being a small neck of land between the land northward and land southward.'

129[See Book of Mormon 3rd edition 280-81.]

130"It is certainly a good thing for the excellency and veracity of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, that the ruins of Zarahemla have been found where the Nephites left them: and that a large stone with engraving upon it, as Mosiah said: and a 'large round stone, with the sides sculptured in hieroglyphics,' as Mr. Stephens has published, is also among the left remembrances of the (to him) lost and unknown. . . ." [^9]

130They who work on the geography of the Book of Mormon have little else than the preceding approaches with which to work, viz: that Nephites found their way into what is now the state of Illinois; that the plates of the Book of Mormon were found in a hill in northwestern New York State; that a statement exist of doubtful authenticity that Lehi and his party landed on the shore of the shore of the land now known as Chile; and that under the Prophet's editorship Central America was denominated as the region of Book of Mormon activities.

130Out of diligent , prayerful study, we may be led to a better understanding of times and places in the history of the people who move across the pages of the divinely given Book of Mormon.

Among them: J. A. & J. N. Washburn, An Approach to the Study of Book of Mormon Geography (Provo, Utah, 1939); T. S. Ferguson, Cumorah Where? (Independense, Mo. 1947); Joel Ricks, Geography of Book of Mormon Lands (1940); Orrin G. Wilde, Landmarks of Ancient American People (1947); Lynn C. Layton, "An Ideal Book of Mormon Geography" (The Improvement Era, 41:394, July 1938).

The Improvement Era 53:42 (January 1950).

History of the Church (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1902-1932) 2:79.

Ibid., 1:15

Morm. 6:2, 6; Morm. 8:2, Ether 15:11.

Compendium (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1886) 289.

John L. Stephens Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan, (New York 1841) Vol. 2, p. 118, ch 7.

Times and Seasons (Nauvoo, III., 1839-11846); 3:710. See also History of the Church (March 2, 1842) 4:524.

Times and Seasons 3:927(No. 23, October 1, 1842); Cumorah Where? p. 60.

---
Notas:
[^2] Alma the Younger
[^4] Helaman, Son of Helaman
[^5] Nephi, Son of Helaman
[^6] Nephi, the Disciple, Son of Nephi
[^7] Nephi, Son of Nephi the Disciple
[^8] Amos, Son of Nephi
[^9] Amos and Ammaron, Sons of Amos the Elder
