Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Were the Nephite Twelve Apostles?

by Joseph Fielding Smith

Question: "In the class in Sunday School the question was asked if the twelve chosen by the Savior among the Nephites were Apostles. At the same time the Apostles chosen by Jesus in Palestine were on the earth, the Lord chose those twelve also on the American continent whom he called disciples. I have felt that there could not be more than one set of Apostles on the earth at any given time, but some members of the class thought otherwise, and we have been confused."

152Answer: The twelve men chosen by our Savior among the Nephites are called disciples in the Book of Mormon. Nephi wrote of his vision given nearly six hundred years before the birth of the Lord as follows:

152And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the twelve disciples of the Lamb, who are chosen to minister unto thy seed.

152And he said unto me: Thou rememberest the twelve apostles of the Lamb? Behold they are they who shall judge the tribes of Israel; wherefore, the twelve ministers of thy seed shall be judged of them; for ye are of the house of Israel.

152And these twelve ministers whom thou beholdest shall judge thy seed. And, behold, they are righteous forever; for because of their faith in the Lamb of God their garments are made white in his blood. (1 Ne. 12:8-10.)

152In fulfilment of this prophesy, when the Savior came to the Nephites he chose twelve men and gave them authority to minister in his name among the Nephites on this American continent in all the ordinances essential to their salvation. These twelve went forth healing the sick and performing many miracles and administering the ordinances as they had been commanded to do. The fulness of the gospel with the power and the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood were given to the Nephites the same as they were to the Church in the Eastern Hemisphere. Moreover, the Lord informed them that the law that had been given to Moses, including the offering of sacrifices by the shedding of blood, had been done away in him.

153While in every instance the Nephite twelve are spoken of as disciples, the fact remains that they had been endowed with divine authority to be special witnesses for Christ among their own people. Therefore, they were virtually Apostles to the Nephite race, although their jurisdiction was, as revealed to Nephi, eventually to be subject to the authority and jurisdiction of Peter and the twelve chosen in Palestine. According to the definition prevailing in the world an Apostle is a witness for Christ, or one who evangelizes a certain nation or people; "a zealous advocate of a doctrine or cause." Therefore the Nephite twelve became Apostles, as special witnesses (See Doc. Hist of the Church, IV, 575.), just as did Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

153When the Savior taught the Nephites he informed them that he had "other sheep" which were not of the Nephites, neither of the land of Jerusalem, and these also were to hear his voice and be ministered to by him. It is reasonable for us to conclude that among these others who were hidden from the rest of the world, he likewise chose disciples-perhaps twelve-to perform like functions and minister unto their people with the same fulness of divine authority.
