Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Jaredite Barges

by A. L. Zobell, Sr.

The Jaredite method of ocean transport described in the Book of Mormon has been variously referred to as a submarine, a hollowed-out tree, and as a conical craft with a cylinder that revolved as the boat rolled on its journey to America. However, if we accept the account recorded in Ether 2:16, 17, and Moroni's subsequent notations (Ch. 6) wherein these vessels are described as barges, we must agree that their mode of transportation was in flat-bottomed surface craft.

167The text concerning these barges reads in substance: The brother of Jared built barges after a manner they had built before; that is, vessels they had used to transport them over "many waters" en route to the "great sea." They were built according to the instructions of the Lord, and were invulnerable against both air and water. Being tight "like a dish" and peaked at both ends, they held water both in and out and were light, compared to the "lightness of a fowl upon the water"; their length was that of a tree, and the door of entry, when closed, made an absolutely tight vessel.

167When Moroni was given, through the interpreters, a view of the barges, he beheld eight light craft buoyant upon the waves of the sea. Joseph Smith must have had the same prospect, for he used the same interpreters.

167If we were "to go to work and build a barge" after the above description, it would look much like a barge of today, except that it would be "peaked at both ends" and absolutely tight. We have no need to accept the "one tree idea" for the builders of these barges undoubtedly understood shipbuilding, being contemporary with their grandfather, Noah. They had seen his ark and had lived on the seashore many years where much shipping was done. They knew about boat construction long before they received the final command. Many tree lengths, fashioned into planks, fastened to the top, sides, and bottom of the hull, were used for their construction. After the building of these small air-tight barges, the builder noted deficiencies, and went to the Lord and complained:

168O Lord. . . I have made the barges according as thou hast directed me;. . . in them we cannot breathe, save it is the air which is in them. (Ether 2:18-19.)

168The Chief Architect then commanded:

168Thou shalt make a hole in the top, and also in the bottom, and when thou shall suffer for air thou shalt unstop the hole and receive air. (Ether 2:20.)

168The barges were of necessity tight, for they were to be buried "in the depths of the sea," and so a device was provided whereby air could enter to supply the inmates. The top hole supplied the answer to this emergency. The Lord commanded: "And also in the bottom." What? A hole in the bottom of a boat! "For what purpose?" ridicules the Revelation Alexander Campbell, as he queries: "To admit water?"

168This was seemingly rather a peculiar order. Let us discuss the question in this manner: After the hole is made it is seen that water will come into the boat. A tube is built from the bottom to the top of the barge, housing in both holes completely. Now we have a funnel right through the boat. Water can come into the tube as high as the water line of the vessel.

168The model of the barge we have built has a stop hole both in front and in back of the tube, just at the top of the second deck, the living quarters of man and animals. The hold, or bottom, is the place where food, water, and "seed of every kind" are stored. These stop holes can easily be opened or closed as needed.

168The purpose of the bottom hole is at least twofold: first, it acted as a stabilizer, to keep the barge at an even keel, second, it could be used to get rid of refuse; as a third function, it may also have aided in inducing the circulation of air when the barges were "tossed upon the waves," whereby air would be sucked in an forced out again through the tube.

168When the barges were ready for debarkation, all varieties of provisions were taken into them. They also had a cargo of all kinds of animals, fowls, seeds, and the "deseret." They also took fresh water. The record reports that they were "tight like a dish." In the center of the barges were provided several vats for the storage of water, which also acted as ballast, for the barges had to keep their equilibrium. When a vat was emptied for drinking purposes, it could be refilled with sea water.

169After they had "set forth into the sea" furious winds blew them toward the "land of promise" and they "were many times buried in the depths of the sea and were encompassed about by many waters" but were immediately "brought forth again upon the top of the water" through the cry of their faith and the "lightness" of their craft.

169It is easy to believe that boats of this size would be buried many times in the sea, for they were small, probably not more than a hundred feet long, with a cargo of between seventy and ninety tons, negotiating the Pacific Ocean with waves, at times, over fifty feet high.

169Their mode of travel from the shores of Asia was in barges "upon the waters," and their motivated power was furnished by "furious winds". Quite probably their route was in the Japan Current, which travels from east to west at a rate of between twelve and twenty-one miles a day, and if the Pacific is about seven thousand miles across, the "three hundred and forty and four days" that they were upon the water would be pretty well consumed. They disembarked near the land called Desolation by the Nephites, "it being the place of their first landing."
