Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

The Book of Mormon An Evidence in Itself of Its Divinity

by George H. Brimhall

When the sage declared the endlessness of the writing of books, he had no cause for complaint. For books are soul fruit, some bitter and some sweet, some poisonous, but many are wholesome. Books are subject to the great law "the fittest survive." And the fittest in a truth-seeking age is that which contains the most truth. The average volume is short-lived. It is common knowledge that books become out of date almost as quickly as clothes go out of style. There are some books, however, that have endured for ages, and interest in them has grown as time has passed. In this class we claim place for the Book of Mormon. Over a century has passed since the first edition was printed. Each edition of the Book of Mormon has received warmer welcome from the reading public than have the preceding ones.

206The history of the Book of Mormon has paralleled the history of Christianity in a most striking way! The coming forth of each was accomplished by the visitation of an angel.

206Each was compelled to meet attempts to destroy it in early life.

206The champions of each were put to death with the hope of terminating the cause of the conflict each occasioned.

206The early disciples of each sought refuge in the mountains.

206Each grew in influence, despite the almost superhuman opposition of enemies.

206Each, at this day, stands in almost identical position in the minds of honorable men of the earth who frankly admit their belief in the thing itself but candidly assert their disbelief in the miraculous origin of either Christianity or the Book of Mormon.

206One man of great wealth and business leadership, after reading the Book of Mormon at the request of a Mormon friend, declared his belief in the contents of the book, to the extent of expressing his conviction that the teachings thereof would, if applied to life, bring about conditions for universal happiness. "But," said he "I cannot accept the angel Moroni story of its origin." And that same man, no doubt, would say, "I believe in the peace-producing power of Christianity, but I can not accept the divinity and Fatherhood of Christ."

207The history of the book acclaims its greatness, but the book itself is the thing that defies all attempts to explain it away. No one can deny that as a book, true or false, it is a stupendous reality with a marvelous origin, a gripping power for good, and a wonderful history. Volumes have been written and much spoken in denial of its divine authenticity, but as yet nothing has been proved against its contents or miraculous coming forth. As time has passed, scientific discovery, instead of destroying faith in the book has wonderfully increased interest and confidence in it. And particularly important in this age of rapidly increasing skepticism, its harmony with the teachings of the Bible place it in the field of theology as veritably "A new witness for God."
