Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Attempts to Prove the Book of Mormon Man-Made

by Francis W. Kirkham

"The Book of Mormon has withstood a century of attempts to prove it man-made. Despite fierce and unending assaults it continues to challenge the attention and scrutiny of the world.

210"One result of this vigorous apposition has been the formation of a large Book of Mormon literature. Friend and foe have sought and sifted sources of evidences to support their views. Few books have been as thoroughly examined," writes Dr. John A. Widtsoe.

210"The Book of Mormon must be either true or false," wrote Orson Pratt, in 1840, an early convert to the Church. "If true, it is one of the most important messages sent from God to man. If false, it is one of the most cunning, wicked, bold deep-laid impositions ever palmed upon the world, calculated to deceive and ruin millions who will receive it as the word of God."

210On March 26, 1830, the Book of Mormon was announced for sale by the Wayne Sentinel at the village of Palmyra, New York. Joseph Smith had secured the copyright on June 11, 1829, and in keeping with the requirements of the law, had signed his name as author and proprietor. The manuscript was delivered by him to the printer, E. B. Grandin, Palmyra, New York, in August 1829, each night after the usual work of the day. The book was printed over a period of eight months each night after the usual working day until the book was offered for sale.

210The preface taken from the plates describes in part the Book of Mormon as an account written by the hand of Mormon upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi-"Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation-Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed-To come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof . . . And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations . . ."

211Joseph Smith declared this preface was not written by any man in his generation. It was taken from the plates.

211The Rochester Daily Advertiser of Rochester, New York, about twenty miles from Palmyra, published under date of April 2, 1830, only one week after its publication, the following:

211Blasphemy-Book of Mormon, alias the Golden Bible.

211The Book of Mormon has been placed in our hands. A viler imposition was never practiced. It is evidence of fraud, blasphemy, credulity, shocking both to Christians and moralists . . .

211It is an interesting and challenging study to discover and describe the many attempts to prove the Book of Mormon man-made.

211From the newspapers published at Palmyra, from books written by residents, from affidavits of citizens, it can be proved that the persons, places, events, and situations described by Joseph Smith concerning the "coming forth" of the book were common knowledge among the people of Palmyra. The historical events are conceded; the divine power in its writing, preservation, and translation is denied.

211Obediah Dogberry, editor of the Palmyra Reflector, asserts and aims to prove its human origin in six weekly articles beginning January 6, 1831.

211Alexander Campbell, the noted evangelist and founder of the "Church of Christ," also described the human origin of the book within a year of its publication. His statement, agreeing with Obediah Dogberry, was published first in The Millennial Harbinger, February 7, 1831, was reprinted in the Painesville Telegraph March 8 and March 15, 1831, Painesville, Ohio, and later was printed by Joshua Hines of Boston in 1832 under the title Delusions. This came to be the first universally accepted explanation of the origin of the Book of Mormon other than the one by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

212Alexander Campbell writes, "Every age of the world has produced impostors and delusions." He then follows with a long description of false prophets and false Christs. In one place he writes, "We have been thus particular in giving of the incidents of the life of this impostor, as a specimen of the others; and because of some remarkable analogies between him and the New York impostor, Joe Smith."

212Under the heading "Internal Evidence," he writes:

212It (the Book of Mormon) admits the Old and New Testaments to contain the revelations, institutions, and commandments of God . . . No man with his eyes open can admit both books to have come from God. Admitting the Bible now received to have come from God, it is impossible that the Book of Mormon came from the same author, for the following reasons:

212This ignorant and impudent liar, etc., . . . .

212Through nine reasons Campbell positively and definitely makes Joseph Smith the sole author and writer of the book.

212He makes the final summary with this remark:

212I will sum up the whole of the internal evidences which I deem worthy of remark in the following details:

212The Book of Mormon professes to be written at intervals and by different persons during the long period of 1,020 years. And yet for uniformity of style there never was a book more evidently written by one set of fingers, nor more certainly conceived in one cranium since the first book appeared in human language. If I could swear to any man's voice, face or person, assuming different names, I could swear that this book was written by one man. And as Joseph Smith is a very ignorant man and is called the author on the title page, I cannot doubt for a single moment that he is the sole author and proprietor of it . . .

212It is a certainly Smith's fabrication as Satan is the father of lies, or darkness the offspring of light. So much for the internal evidences of the Book of Mormon.

213About one month following the preceding explanation of the Book of Mormon by Alexander Campbell, the Evangelical Inquirer, a Campbellite publication at Dayton, Ohio, David I. Burnett, proprietor, published a complete number, March 7, 1831, to "Something new-The Golden Bible." This paper was reprinted from the Painesville Telegraph. The above quoted article by Alexander Campbell refers to the writings of Thomas Campbell, also a letter from the postmaster at Palmyra, and reaches the same conclusion that Joseph Smith, an ignorant and impudent knave, was the sole author of the Book of Mormon. (Original pages at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.)

213Within four years, another explanation for the Book of Mormon became imperative. The believers in its divine origin had gathered at Kirtland, Ohio, and in Missouri. They were Christian men and women of intelligence, character, and ability. Some were Protestant ministers. It was evident the book was not written by "ignorant Joe Smith."

213The explanation by the people of Palmyra at the time and place of its publication could not be true. Someone, "behind the scene," with religious training and ability had conceived a plan to deceive the ignorant and superstitious. Sidney Rigdon, more than ten years the senior of Joseph Smith, a Baptist preacher who joined the Church within a few weeks' time of his hearing the strange story, must be the man who planned the fraud and wrote the Book of Mormon.

213By searching, a manuscript was found which was claimed to give the historical background for the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith was selected to present the book as a divine record translated by the gift and power of God. He no longer deserved pity nor could he expect sympathy. He was in reality a vile deceiver, a public nuisance that should be eliminated.

213The authors of the book called Mormonism Unveiled, which set forth this new explanation, had in their possession a manuscript written by Solomon Spaulding, which they declared provided the historical parts of the Book of Mormon. For obvious reasons, they refused to print or reveal its contents.

214During the next fifty years, scores of books were written calling Joseph Smith a vile deceiver. He was building a church upon claimed revelations from God.

214Fortunately, in 1884, the Solomon Spaulding manuscript secured by the authors of Mormonism Unveiled in 1833 was found and published. It was evident that it had had no part in furnishing the contents of the Book of Mormon. Also, its author, who denied the divinity of the Christian scriptures, did not have the ability or character to contribute to the prophecies, religious teachings, and historical contents of the Book of Mormon.

214A different explanation was again made imperative to prove the Book of Mormon man-made. Enemies stated that it was a longer-lost manuscript written by Solomon Spaulding at a later date that was used by Sidney Rigdon when he wrote the Book of Mormon, not the one found and already published.

214With the turn of the century, and with a constantly growing better attitude toward the Latter-day Saints, many writers have made various attempts to prove the Book of Mormon man-made. Joseph Smith has been called an epileptic, a paranoid, a myth-maker of prodigious talents; a person with a dissociated personality. One writer declares: "The Book of Mormon reveals the background of western New York in the first decade of the nineteenth century, as distorted by an adolescent mind, and as recorded by that mind in an autistic state."

214More and more an effort is being made to trace the contents of the Book of Mormon to the social and religious environment in which Joseph Smith lived. Confusion is apparent among the writers. It becomes more and more difficult to declare Joseph an ignorant, deluded person, or assert he was a base deceiver. An unbiased writer in 1951 asserts: "No Vermont schoolboy wrote this [the Book of Mormon] and no Presbyterian preacher tinkered with these pages." [^1] He permits the believers in the divine origin of the book to make their own explanation, and leaves their claims to the truth-seeker.

214The Book of Mormon, because of its divine origin, is the greatest challenge of evidence of divine power since the death and resurrection of Christ. In a troubled and frightened world that recognizes the need of faith in God and a return in human life to the teachings of the Master, the Book of Mormon more and more challenges the sincere investigation of all people everywhere.

215This investigation will conclude the evidence of divine power in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the many changing attempts since its publication to prove it man-made.

The Mormon , p. 21, reprinted by Deseret Book Company from Faith and My Friends, Marcus Bach. Bobbs-Merill Company, Inc., 1951.
