Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Some Historical and Prophetic Phases of the Book of Mormon

by Orson F. Whitney

In the summer of 1914, it fell to my lot to visit some of the scenes made memorable by the early experiences of the Latter-day Saints. One object of surpassing interest was the Hill Cumorah, called "Mormon Hill" by the inhabitants of the region in which it is situated-namely, western New York state about midway between the towns of Palmyra and Manchester. Palmyra is where the first edition of the Book of Mormon was printed; and Manchester is the place nearest the rural home of Joseph Smith's parents, where he lived as a boy.

216I bore a letter of introduction to a prominent citizen of Palmyra, Mr. P, T. Sexton, a wealthy lawyer and banker who owned the Hill Cumorah and the old printing office in which the Book of Mormon went to press. Mr. Sexton received me courteously and showed me not only a copy of the first edition of the book but also the corrected proofs of that edition, kept by him in a glass case and treasured as a relic of great worth. The proofs, he told me, were originally the property of one Major Gilbert, printer for E. B. Grandin, who had the publishing contract from Joseph Smith and his associates. Gilbert had been a tenant of Sexton's and in his old age was unable to pay his rent. So he surrendered to his landlord these proofs in liquidation of the debt. At the close of a very pleasant interview with Mr. Sexton, he called for his car and directed the chauffeur to take me to the Hill Cumorah "and wherever else Mr. Whitney would like to go." This commission was faithfully executed.

216Two and a half miles south of Palmyra, we halted at the Smith Farm (then as now the property of the Church) and entered the Sacred Grove, the scene of the Prophet Joseph's First Vision. I also stepped inside the house, a comparatively new structure built upon the site of a humbler dwelling in which the youthful seer had his earliest interviews with the Angel Moroni. We then sped on to Mormon Hill.

217Before leaving my home among the towering mountains I had been told by friends who had seen the famous hill that it would disappoint me, being not much of a hill, after all. But I felt no disappointment on beholding it. Cumorah is not a mountain but it certainly is a hill, and the most considerable one in that beautiful rolling country. It is of the variety known as a glacial drumlin, the highest part being a bold bluff facing north rising abruptly from a lane, and gradually receding southward until lost in the more level plain beyond. I would say that the Hill Cumorah about equals in height the Salt Lake Assembly Hall, exclusive of the towers. A climb up the grassy eastern slope on a hot day was sufficient, I found, to start a healthy perspiration.

217On the west side, a little below the hilltop and overlooking the road running toward Manchester, grew a rosebush, planted by some unknown hand to mark the spot where the stone box was taken out one hundred years ago containing the record plates of the Book of Mormon.

217To be there upon that sacred summit was to dream of the past and ponder upon the future, as I do now, while preparing this sketch.

217It was early in the spring of 1820 that Joseph Smith, then a lad between fourteen and fifteen years of age, had his glorious vision of the Father and the Son; the first known instance of the exercise by the choice seer of his matchless gift. And it was three years and some months later, when during the night of September 21-22, he first beheld the angel messenger who revealed to him the existence of the golden plates.

217The angel gave his name as Moroni and stated that while in mortal life he had ministered as a prophet to an ancient people called Nephites, a branch of the house of Israel-not the Lost Tribes, as is frequently asserted by the uninformed, but a remnant of the tribe of Joseph mixed with a remnant of the tribe of Judah. The former had crossed over from Jerusalem about the year 600 B.C.; the others a few years afterward. These blended colonies had inhabited the Americas down to about the beginning of the fourth century of the Christian era, when the civilized but degenerate Nephites were destroyed by a savage faction known as Lamanites, ancestors of the present-day American Indians.

218The angel further stated that a record of the Nephites had been hidden in a hill not far from Joseph's home-a hill anciently called Cumorah; and upon that spot, four years later (September 22, 1827), Moroni delivered the record into his hands. It was a book of metallic plates having the appearance of gold, covered with strange characters, small and beautifully engraved-characters known to the Nephites as the reformed Egyptian. (Morm. 9:32.) By means of interpreters, discovered with the plates, and consisting of two stones in silver bows, the youth translated the unsealed portion of the record, and with the assistance of a few friends published to the world the Book of Mormon. It was so named for its compiler, the Nephite prophet Mormon, whose son and survivor, Moroni, had buried the plates where Joseph Smith found them.

218The Book of Mormon is a sacred history of prehistoric America, and a prophecy of the wondrous future of this chosen land. It tells not only of the Nephites and Lamanites but also of a more ancient people, the Jaredites, who came from the Tower of Babel at the time of the confusion of tongues. The Jaredites were succeeded by the Israelitish colony, led from Jerusalem by a prophet named Lehi, whose sons Nephi and Laman became, respectively, the heads of the two nations called after them. The Jewish remnant that mixed with the descendants of Lehi was headed by Mulek, one of the sons of Zedekiah, king of Judah, whom the Babylonian conqueror Nebuchadnezzar overthrew.

218The Jaredites, as well as the Nephites, had a knowledge of the Christ and of the principles of his gospel, revealed to them prior to his advent. To both these nations it was made known that America is the Land of Zion, the place for the New Jerusalem, a holy city to be built unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph. (2 Ne. 21:23-24; Ether 13:3-8.) Likewise it was shown to them that the Old Jerusalem would be rebuilt unto the house of Israel in the last days before the Savior's second coming.

219Among the many interesting features of the Book of Mormon is a prophecy relating to the discovery of America by Columbus; the migration of the Pilgrim Fathers and others to these western shores; the war for American Independence, and the founding of the republic of the United States, a nation destined long before its birth to play the part of nursing mother to the restored Church of Christ. (1 Ne. 13:10-19; 1 Ne. 22:7-8.)

219And here let me interject that whatever may be said of the persecutions suffered by the Latter-day Saints in various states of the Union--persecutions inflicted, not because of the Constitution or the genius of the American government, but in spite of it; persecutions by lawless force, mob violence, ever to be execrated and condemned by every true patriot-whatever may be said of such deplorable happenings, still must our noble nation be credited with what it has done in the direction of fulfilling its God-given mission. It is extremely doubtful that in any other land or any other nation upon this land, would the Lord's people have been treated with the same degree of consideration. In no other country on earth, without special divine interposition in its behalf, would this marvelous work and wonder have been permitted to come forth.

219America, according to Nephite prophecy based on divine revelation, is to be a land of liberty to the Gentiles-modern peoples not of Israel, now possessing it-provided they serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. So long as they shall follow righteousness and maintain the pure principles upon which this government was founded, just so long will they prosper and enjoy the favor of heaven. America, if true to her mission, is promised divine protection and will be invulnerable to every foe. God will fortify this land against all other nations, and they who fight against Zion shall perish. (2 Ne. 10:11-13.)

219If, however, the Gentiles lifted up in pride shall harden their hearts and reject the fulness of the gospel--liberty's perfect law--another destiny and a sad one awaits them. No king but Christ shall reign upon Zion's land. No people occupying it can practice evil with impunity. The nation fostered here must be a righteous nation, or like the Jaredites and the Nephites who perished because of their wickedness, it will be swept off the face of the land when the cup of its iniquity is full. So the God of heaven hath decreed. (Ether 2:8-12.)

220Another name for America authorized by the Book of Mormon is the land of Joseph, referred to by the Patriarch Jacob in blessing his twelve sons (Gen. 49:22-26) and by the Prophet Moses in his farewell benediction upon the twelve tribes of Israel. (Deut. 33:13-15.) Jacob's allusion to Joseph as a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches run over the wall, was fulfilled in the migration of Lehi and his companions from Asia to America over the Pacific Ocean. It is hardly necessary to add that one of the main features of these western continents is the mighty mountain ranges of the Andes and the Rockies, well termed by the Hebrew Patriarch the everlasting hills nature's depositories for the precious things of the earth--gold, silver, and other minerals--and for the precious things of heaven--the sacred records already discovered and others that are yet to come forth.

220The Book of Mormon has a divine mission in connection with the Hebrew Scriptures, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions. (2 Ne. 3:12.) It is the stick of Joseph mentioned by the Prophet Ezekiel, that was to be one with the stick of Judah in the hand of Ephraim. They (See Ezek. 37:16-20.) were also to be one in the hand of Jehovah, symbolizing the reunion of the two great branches of the Israelitish race after many centuries of separation. And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel, saith the Lord, and David my servant shall be king over them. (Ezek. 37:24.) The king here spoken of is not David, son of Jesse, but another by the name of David who is to be raised up out of his lineage (History of the Church, Vol. 6. p. 253.)

220David's empire which parted in twain forming the kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of Israel, may have been a foreshadowing of God's greater empire of the last days which will consist of two grand divisions-two in one. Here upon the land choice above all other lands (Ether 2:10.), the children of Joseph descended through Ephraim are even now assembling to prepare for the Messiah's advent. The Jews will greet him at Jerusalem. Christ's kingdom will have two capitals, one in the Old World, one in the New; one in Palestine, the other in America for out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. (Isa. 2:3.)

221The main fact for which the Book of Mormon stands is the visitation of the Savior after his resurrection at Jerusalem to the righteous remnant of the Nephites who had survived the awful cataclysm of destruction coincident with his crucifixion. Some might think the great wars of the Jaredites, Nephites, and Lamanites, with the mighty political changes and geographic convulsions preceding or succeeding the rise and downfall of cities and empires founded by those ancient peoples, whose wonderful civilizations are now the study of the archaeologist and the antiquarian-some might think these the more consequential features of the Book of Mormon. I did, when I was a boy and looked at all things through boyish eyes. When reading that sacred record-and I read it very early by the advice and persuasion of my mother-I would skip over the prophecies and preachings which meant little to me then, and feast upon battles, victories, and defeats, acts of courage and heroism, with which the book abounds; and which had for me, a romantic fascination.

221As I grew older and put away childish things, I became a devout student of the gospel and learned to appreciate the Sublime doctrines set forth in the Nephite record; for I had developed a testimony of the truth and as a young missionary was out preaching it to people in the world. Not until my mind was matured, however, did I grasp with anything like a full and clear comprehension the significance of the risen Savior's appearance upon the land of Zion-this land, where the new Jerusalem will yet rise, and the way be prepared for the glorious coming of the King of kings.
