Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

The Book of Mormon and National Prosperity

by William E. Berrett

By all known money standards the people of the United States should be living in plenty: a national production of goods valued at 328 billion dollars a year, [^1] phenomenal wages and salaries, a million machines doing the work of many, many millions of men, mountains of goods pouring off the production lines.

251But wait! Something is amiss. What of those people still living in the slums? What of those millions who are in debt? What of those tens of millions struggling to make ends meet, battling the wolf at the door? The financial figures are deceiving. The high wages buy little or nothing. The mountains of goods melt away before our very eyes. We think we are doing well, but are we? In desperation we seek higher wages only to find that in turn we are confronted with higher prices. We try again with the same result. It becomes a mad race and with what prospect of victory?

251What is happening to American production? We do not need to search far to find the answers.

251First, we must realize that the only true wealth is goods, and we are not producing so much as we should produce. There are four million of our potential producers under arms. Another three million are in non-productive federal jobs; another million are engaged in non-productive gambling, making, distributing, and manipulating gambling devices, bookmaking, and allied questionable pursuits. Some 250,000 are languishing in jail. Another million are recuperating in hospitals. Still other millions are idle from heterogeneous causes.

251But this is not the worst of the picture. That which is being produced is not being used to bless and beautify our homes.

251One-third part of our productive force is being used to carry on and prepare for war.

252One-sixth part is used for the preparation and dissemination of harmful foods and drinks.

252One-fifteenth part is used to protect property against criminals.

252Yes! We may produce greatly, but we may also dissipate the end product.

252Whether we realize it or not, the appalling cost of breaking the Ten Commandments is destroying our seeming prosperity:

252Sixty billions a year for war; twenty billions a year as the cost of crime; a tobacco and liquor bill of fifteen billion dollars--equal to the cost of all educational institutions of the nation; billions in organized gambling rackets--all of which could be saved by a generation that would obey the commandments of God!

252In this day when wealth slips out of our hands, we need to listen to the voice of a great book--the Book of Mormon. This book was written long ago, but it was written to us--to help us solve our problems and to lead us back to Christ. What does the book teach us about our economic problems? Listen to what the centuries are saying to the minutes!

252The Book of Mormon furnishes us with salient facts concerning the longest continuous experiment in human living that the world has known. It gives the story of the ups and downs of two great nations, one of which existed for nearly a two-thousand-year period and the other for some nine hundred and fifty years. The evaluations are made in each instance by a competent observer standing at the conclusion of the performance, having viewed, through the records, all the acts of the long and eventful drama. Perhaps no other historians have had such an array of unbroken records before them as had Mormon and Moroni when they summed up the causes of the rise and fall of the Nephite and Jaredite civilizations. What did they observe which contains a message for our day, and how might that message save our civilization?

252The over-all observation of these seers was that the economic welfare of a nation is linked inevitably with the spiritual level of the people. Nations become prosperous when the spiritual level remains high. They sink into decay with continued disregard of the word of God.

253In the Nephite account we see two parallel nations, the Nephites and the Lamanites, the one preserving the scriptures and the Church of Christ, the other generally neglecting spiritual matters. Other factors were relatively the same. They were of the same race, with a common social and cultural background. They were transplanted to the same goodly land. Both were free of outside pressures and influences, except as they rubbed elbows with each other. Yet the Nephite civilization rose to the heights while the Lamanites languished in near savagery. Only at wide intervals did the Lamanites develop a measure of civilizations, and these upsurges of culture seem closely connected with periods of missionary work among them by the Nephites. And when, at long last, the Nephite civilization sank to the level of the Lamanites and the remnants merged with them, the cause is clearly a national abandonment of the word of God.

253It is little wonder that the Nephite observers, standing at the close of this civilization, should record in their observations the warning of God given to the earlier nation, the Jaredites:

253And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

253And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or the shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

253For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.

253And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God-that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

254Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written. (Ether 2:8-12.)

254The reader of the Book of Mormon for the first time is likely to remember the accounts of armed conflict and the movements of peoples and quite overlook the long periods of peace and prosperity that are portrayed. Two of the longest periods of peace recorded in history are found in the Jaredite record. One of these lasted more than two hundred and fifty years. Beginning with the reign of one King Emer, the nation carefully obeyed the will of God, and . . . they became exceeding rich-- (See Ether 9:16-23.)

254This period of peace and prosperity, lasting over several generations, came to an end only when . . . an exceeding great wickedness spread over the face of the land. (Ether 9:26)

254A second long period of peace and prosperity began with the reign of King Levi and continued uninterrupted for five generations. Of each of the monarchs during that remarkable period Moroni states, . . . he did that which was good in the sight of the Lord. (Ether 10:16-17, 19.)

254And never could be a people more blessed than were they, and more prospered by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land that was choice above all lands, for the Lord had spoken it. (Ether 10:28.)

254Similar examples of the relationship of economic welfare to spirituality are found in the account of the Nephites.

254The great leader Nephi records:

254And all those who were with me did take upon them to call themselves the people of Nephi.

254And we did observe to keep the judgments, and the statutes, and the commandments of the Lord in all things, according to the law of Moses.

255And the Lord was with us; and we did prosper exceedingly; for we did sow seed, and we did reap again in abundance. And we began to raise flocks, and herds, and animals of every kind. (2 Ne. 5:9-11.)

255Of a part of the period of Alma, Mormon writes:

255And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began to be exceeding rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need-and abundance of flocks and herds, and fatlings of every kind, and also abundance of grain, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious things, and abundance of silk and fine, twined linen, and all manner of good homely cloth. (Alma 1:29.)

255Concerning the period near the close of Helaman's life, Mormon could again record:

255And the people of Nephi began to prosper again in the land, and began to multiply and to wax exceeding strong again in the land. And they began to grow exceeding rich.

255But notwithstanding their riches, or their strength, or their prosperity, they were not lifted up in the pride of their eyes; neither were they slow to remember the Lord their God; but they did humble themselves exceedingly before him. (Alma 62:48-49.)

255One of the greatest periods of prosperity recorded by man followed the advent of Christ to the American continent. His coming and his teachings turned a whole people into ways of righteousness and peace. The result was the golden era of Nephite civilization. We read:

255And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another. . . .

255And the Lord did prosper them exceedingly in the land; yea, insomuch that they did build cities again where there had been cities burned. . . .

255And now, behold, it came to pass that the people of Nephi did wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast, and became an exceedingly fair and delightsome people.

256And they were married, and given in marriage, and were blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord had made unto them.

256And they did now walk any more after the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses; but they did walk after the commandments, which they had received from their Lord and their God, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together of both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord.

256And it came to pass that there was no contention among all the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles wrought among the disciples of Jesus. . . .

256And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

256And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

256There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

256And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land. (4 Ne. 1:2, 7, 10-13, 15-18.)

256The reason why a nation existing on a high spiritual level prospers should be obvious: The wealth produced is used for beneficial things and not wasted and destroyed. The Prophet Alma makes an observation in his time that strikes at the heart of the matter:

256For those who did not belong to their church did indulge themselves in sorceries, and in idolatry or idleness, and in babblings, and in envyings and strife; wearing costly apparel; being lifted up in the pride of their own eyes; lying, thieving, robbing, committing whoredoms, and murdering, and all manner of wickedness. (Alma 1:32.)

257In the following account Enos shows what may happen to a nation that turns from God:

257And I bear record that the people of Nephi did seek diligently to restore the Lamanites unto the true faith in God. But our labors were vain; their hatred was fixed, and they were led by their evil nature that they became wild and ferocious, and a bloodthirsty people, full of idolatry and filthiness; feeding upon beasts of prey; dwelling in tents, and wandering about in the wilderness with a short skin girdle about their loins and their heads a short skin girdle about their loins and their heads shaven; and their skill was in the bow, and in the cimeter, and the ax. And many of them did eat nothing save it was raw meat; and they were continually seeking to destroy us. (Enos 20.)

257The distrust and insecurity that come to a nation that forgets God are observed by Moroni in his study of the Jaredite nation. The following observations of one period of the Jaredite history should be a warning to all nations of our time:

257And now there began to be a great curse upon all the land because of the iniquity of the people, in which, if a man should lay his tool or his sword upon his shelf, or upon the place whither he would keep it, behold, upon the morrow, he could not find it, so great was the curse upon the land.

257Wherefore every man did cleave unto that which was his own, with his hands, and would not borrow neither would he lend; and every man kept the hilt of his sword in his right hand, in the defense of his property and his own life and of his wives and children. (Ether 14:1-2.)

257We may not think that such a situation is possible in our fair land, but some of the front pages of our newspapers arouse dark forebodings.

257Contrary to the prevailing point of view, riches do not necessarily bring about spiritual decline. The nations of Europe impoverished by war have suffered a greater spiritual decline than have the nations which retained their prosperity. The Book of Mormon bears witness to the same thing. Consider the long periods of prosperity and righteousness referred to above. And listen to this observation of Mormon about the Nephites in the days of Alma:

258And thus, in their prosperous circumstances, they did not send away any who were naked, or that were hungry, or that were athirst, or that were sick, or that had not been nourished; and they did not set their hearts upon riches; therefore they were liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, whether out of the church or in the church, having no respect to persons as to those who stood in need.

258And thus they did prosper and become far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their church. (Alma 1:30-31.)

258Of a later period we read:

258But notwithstanding their riches, or their strength, or their prosperity, they were not lifted upon in the pride of their eyes; neither were they slow to remember the Lord their God; but they did humble themselves exceedingly before him. (Alma 62:49.)

258The Nephite prophets did not look upon wealth as a curse but as a blessing of God. In the hands of a spiritual man it opened the door of opportunity for spiritual expression. Consider the beauty of this philosophy:

258Think of your brethren like unto yourself, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you.

258But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

258And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good-to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. (Jacob 2:17-19.)

258King Benjamin advised those who could not exercise spiritually by actually giving to others, nevertheless to develop the right attitude,

258The nations upon the American continent have an abundance of resources before them. They occupy a goodly land. But they cannot become truly prosperous without love of God and fellow men which alone enables man to enjoy the fruits of his labors.

259Roger W. Babson recently made this pointed observation:

259But what causes these fluctuations in business and prices? Statistics show that crises are caused by spiritual causes than financial, and prosperity is the result of righteousness rather than of material things. These spiritual forces are the true fundamentals of prosperity. (Roger W. Babson, Fundamentals of Prosperity, p. 73.)

259The words of Mormon, who personally saw a civilization destroy itself, should be a constant warning:

259They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd; yea, they were led even by God the Father.

259But now, behold, they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they. (Morm. 5:17-17.)

Survey of Current Business U.S. Department of Commerce, November 1951.
