Various General Authorities, Book of Mormon Treasury: Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era ( 1959)

Some Thoughts on the Social Message of the Book of Mormon

by Jean Wunderlich

When Alma the younger began his missionary labors among the Zoramites, he found that they had not only perverted beyond recognition the religion of the Nephites, but that their hearts were set upon gold, silver, costly apparel, and the riches of the world. While they had built up an impressive material civilization, and while many enjoyed great prosperity, there was among them a numerous class of poor people who, because of their lowly station, were deprived of many prerogatives which the rich claimed exclusively for themselves. As is often the case in such communities, they were denied a share in the enjoyment of the very things which they had built with their won hands. This class distinction was accentuated by a spirit of disdain which the privileged displayed towards the more unfortunate members of their community.

268This social inequality had caused a strong resentment amount the poor. They were bewildered, unable to find a solution for the difficulties which, they imagined, had been placed in the path of their material and religious life. In their perplexity they were willing to listen to Alma and his missionary companions. Alma's answer to their question (Alma 32:8-33) is a panegyric on the spiritual advantages of poverty. Amulek's discourse (Alma 34), likewise, moves almost exclusively on a spiritual plane. Yet, in view of the natural bitterness of his listeners over their social position, Amulek deems it necessary to voice this admonition:

268And now my beloved brethren, I would exhort you to have patience, and that ye bear with all manner of afflictions; that ye do not revile against those who do cast you out because of your exceeding poverty, lest ye become sinners like unto them. (Alma 34:40.)

269Amulek's warning to be patient and to abstain from abuse and calumny under the circumstances is highly significant. According to his inspired view violence in the social struggles is bound to lead to sin and to release passions and restraints which every true follower of Christ should avoid.

269Of course, Amulek does not advocate non-resistance as a means for bringing about the instant amelioration of the condition of the poor. He deems their spiritual redemption to be of greater importance than their social liberation and as to the latter his immediate outlook is pessimistic. Hence his exhortation that his listeners should bear their tribulation "with the firm hope that" they "shall one day rest from all" their "afflictions." (Alma 34:41.)

269The rejection of violence as a principle of social action is, nevertheless, of political significance. History bears out the spirit of Amulek's view that social; justice should not be enforced at the point of the sword. When the trial balance of the accomplishments of revolutions is struck, the result is likely to preponderate in favor of social progress through peaceful means.

269The advice of Amulek embodies, however, a complete moral vindication of the cause of the oppressed. While the poor believer is admonished to abstain from force and abuse, the rich who entrench themselves in privilege created by their economically superior position and who consider "their brethren as dross," while their own hearts are set upon their riches, stand already condemned. Predatory practices such as those indulged in by the rich Zoramite, by which their fellows are reduced to abject poverty, make sinners of those who resort to them. Thus Amulek's warning to keep the social peace most assuredly provides no justification for a privileged position of the rich.

269In view of these obvious deductions from Amulek's formula for social action the problem arises: What social and economic condition does the Book of Mormon consider desirable?

269No categorical answer to that question is possible. For nearly two hundred years after the appearance of Christ on the American continent a "united order" prevailed as an economic system among the Nephites. For lack of a better name, this system may be characterized as a pure form of collective ownership. The details of its organization have not been preserved, except, perhaps, in a modified form practiced by the Mayas and Incas. We only know that during that time,

270every man did deal justly one with another.

270And they had all things in common amongst them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free. (4 Ne. 2-3; see also 2 Ne. 26:19.)

270This passage, incidentally, is proof that under proper conditions a community of worldly goods is a feasible economic system conducive to a condition of supreme human happiness.

270Even when this idea state did not prevail among the Nephites, the economic practices of the people claimed the earnest attention of the leaders of Book of Mormon times. Since they were observers of the law of Moses, their economic concepts were shaped largely by the ideals of distributive justice as revealed in the Old Testament. This influence of ancient scripture is clearly discernible, for instance, in the Nephite idea of equality before the law (Mosiah 29:32), in their idea of the characteristics of the ideal ruler (Mosiah 2:11-16), and in the Nephite monetary system. (Alma 11.) But one social thought recurs again and again in the teachings of the very man who headed the mission to the Zoramites: that is Alma's crusade against inequality.

270Today, leadership in the field of economic justice is a responsibility shunned by many churches, yet it is a responsibility the assumption of which is expected more and more of organized religion. Leadership in that field is not new among God's people. The Book of Mormon clearly warrants the conclusion that the Church may properly promulgate ideals of distributive justice and take steps to shape the economic morality of its members.

270At a time when Alma still occupied the political office of chief judge among the Nephites, he saw all their inequality and began to be very sorrowful. This condition, more explicitly described in Alma 4:12, was to him "a great source of lamentation," sufficiently great to induce him to resign his secular office and devote himself exclusively to the ministry. From that time on we encounter in his reform work a constant indictment of inequality.

271The lesson is evident. Glaring inequality among the people of God is not desirable under the divine plan. The prophets of old recognized more clearly than we are willing to admit today that liberty and equality are twins and that liberty cannot be fully realized without equality.

271Alma's example contains, however, this other equally important lesson: the avenue to equality is through the Church. Here again the proper approach to the problem is spiritual. Otherwise it would be paradoxical for Alma to resign political power at the very moment he desires to bring about a social reform. But Alma in the years of his political life has learned that

271the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just-yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them-therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God. (Alma 31:5.)

271Therefore, he does not rely on reform by law, nor on an enforced equality, but through the spiritual message of the Gospel he hopes to

271stir them up in remembrance of their duty, and that he might pull down, by the word of God, all the pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among his people, seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them. (Alma 4:19.)

271And thus we gather from the words and experience of Alma the inherent limitations of all law, and of all government.

271That the solution of social difficulties must be sought on the spiritual plane is evident from another problem on which the Book of Mormon touches-that of economic depressions. The Nephites were not immune to these recurring changes in their economic life, and this in spite of the fact that they appear to have had a commodity currency and free coinage of silver. (Alma 11:5-19.) Some of the causes assigned for depression today were not available as explanations for the had times of Book of Mormon history. There was, for instance, no problem of imports and exports, of tariffs, and of foreign exchange. There were, of course, such external causes as drought, poor crops, epidemics, and wars. Yet, throughout the Nephite record only one ultimate reason is given for changes in the business cycle, namely,

272And it came to pass that they did repent and inasmuch as they did repent they begin to prosper. (Hel. 4:15.)

272Just as in the case of social progress, the factors underlying economic conditions are spiritual. Even the unbeliever will concede that every explanation offered for our present economic ills may be reduced ultimately to a spiritual cause. In the end it is always the moral character of man that determines his economic behavior.

272The Nephites, therefore, knew and experienced again and again during their history that the way out of depression is a renewed interest in spiritual things.

272The theme need no elaboration. It is well summed up by one authority on business cycles:

272But what causes these fluctuations in business and prices? Statistics show that crises are caused by spiritual causes, rather than financial, and prosperity is the result of righteousness rather of material things. These spiritual forces are the true fundamentals of prosperity (Roger W. Babson, Fundamentals of Prosperity, p. 75.)

272Instances might be multiplied where the Book of Mormon, upon thoughtful study, yields a definite social or political message. Let us, however, consider but one more problem which it is instructive to contemplate in view of much present agitation about it. That is the question of the relative merits of the different forms of government.

272The Book of Mormon does not hold an inflexible brief for any for any form of government. From its pages many thoughts of a political nature may be gleaned. One of these is that a democracy, even though initiated by a holy man of God need not necessarily embody Montesquieu's doctrine of the separation of powers. Of that fact Mosiah's constitution for the Nephites and the entire book of Alma bear witness. Such lessons are gathered only in passing as we read the history of this dispersed branch of the House of Israel. A definite theory of government, however, is encountered in the glorious chapter 29 of the book of Mosiah. Apart from a skeleton constitution for the Nephites it embodies some general philosophy of government, commencing with this significant apology for democracy:

273 Mosiah puts great trust in the people. From the verse just quoted it seems that according to him the people should decide upon measures and policies. They should not merely elect men who will make the choice for them. Mosiah is confident that the people, knowing the issues and proposals, will, except in periods of great wickedness, make the correct choice. But, as a man who is coversant with the realities of human life, he reckons with the possibility that even the majority may desire unrighteousness. Therefore:

273Let us, however, not overlook the fact that Mosiah's democratic constitution is a compromise with the political corrugation of man. According to his view the ideal rule is far from democratic. In spite of his tirade against kings (Mosiah 29:13) he finds a monarchy to be the most effective and desirable form of government. The difficulty with it is principally one of personnel. Mosiah proceeds from the proposition that "the judgments of God are always just, but the judgments of men are not always just." (Mosiah 29:12.) If, therefore, there could always be just men who would be kings and who would establish the law of God,

274if this could always be the case, then it would be expedient that ye should always have kings to rule over you. (Mosiah 29:13.)

274Under such a king, efficient leadership would not be thwarted by the inherent limitations of the democratic process. Neither murder nor plundering nor stealing nor adultery nor any manner of wickedness would be tolerated, for the king himself would be the spiritual teacher of his people. He would be at once a king and a high priest. His people would be free, for he would not "suffer" that "they should be confined in dungeons" nor that they "should make slaves one of another:" (Mosiah 2:13.) Such a king would work with his own hands to ease the tax burden of the citizens. And at the end of his days he would consider the hours spent in the service of his people as spent in the service of his God. (Mosiah 2:16.)

274This is a glimpse of the social philosophy of the Book of Mormon. To the believer in the divinity of the book, it must speak with a voice of authority of many bewildering social problems of the day. But even to the skeptic it should be a significant, though hitherto neglected, contribution to American social thought.
