Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

Preface

The Doctrine and Covenants is a book of answers. As Elder John A. Widtsoe said: "The first thing to be remembered is that the revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants are answers to questions. If that is kept in mind it will help to a better understanding" (The Message of the Doctrine and Covenants [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], 4-5).

The Saints in the early days of this dispensation asked many questions about specific issues and situations. The answers to their questions came as revelations that they recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord encouraged his Saints to develop humility balanced with initiative and independence, and he tutored them as they engaged in the active process of inviting revelation on how best to establish the kingdom of God.

The Prophet Joseph learned early that the Lord responded when asked specific questions. His assignment to translate the Bible initiated many questions; others came from challenges faced by the young Church. Questions from the work of translation preceded such revelations as the visions of glory and the eternal nature of marriage and family. Questions arising from historical events resulted in revelations that defined the nature of priesthood service and the government of the Church. We can more fully appreciate the vitality and vision of the early Saints when we understand the questions that preceded the various revelations.

But the Doctrine and Covenants not only fosters insight into the questions and answers of the past but also gives answers to those who ask their own questions from their own experience.

Those who are searching for answers in the Doctrine and Covenants will find this Sperry Symposium volume a valuable resource in their study. Contributors provide assistance with methods of obtaining answers as well as guidelines in following the Spirit during the process. Some contributors discuss matters of Church government, principles of common consent, the value of trials in our lives, and the importance of marriage and family. Others focus on the answers found in understanding the historical context of the revelations as well as the vision of future events.

This collection encourages a careful study of the Doctrine and Covenants as a book of answers for contemporary questions. The authors have made an earnest effort to provide historical background and doctrinal insight to assist readers in their own pondering of the answers provided in the revelations. It is important to remember that individuals must first ask their own questions and then invite the Lord to assist them in finding answers. As a part of this process, the Doctrine and Covenants is a marvelous book of answers.

We would like to express our appreciation to Patty Smith of Religious Education's Faculty Support Center for her invaluable assistance in organizing and carrying out the symposium and in preparing the manuscript for publication.

Editors

Leon R. Hartshorn

Dennis A. Wright

Craig J. Ostler
