Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

Chapter One

"Read . . . One to Another"

Elaine L. Jack

Elaine L. Jack is general president of the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

How I love the words of the Lord. How I love this gospel, for it brings joy and peace to our lives and lifts us and sustains us as we progress along the path to eternal life.

The Lord commands in the Doctrine and Covenants: "Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). What does the Lord mean, "seek learning?" What are we to learn?

On most college and university campuses, scholarship is based on masterful texts and perceptive literature that heralds the study of science, art, philosophy, history, languages, and math. We appreciate these works that enlighten and enrich our lives. We are intrigued by the process of discovery and learning exhibited by research and brilliant minds.

We have covenanted to learn truths from the Author of all knowledge, who asks us to "learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward" (D&C 59:23); "learn to impart one to another as the gospel requires" (D&C 88:123); "learn obedience" (D&C 105:6); "let every man learn his duty" (D&C 107:99); "study and learn and become acquainted with all good books" (D&C 90:15); "learn my will" (D&C 105:1). And this most powerful command of all, "Learn of me" (D&C 19:23).

Our eternal progression is paced by how well, how quickly, and how completely we follow his commandment "Learn of me." With this gentle request, he is calling for us to grasp the dimensions of being a God, to realize "that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created" (D&C 76:24). He wants us to learn that we, too, can receive glory and exaltation and be like him "who made the heavens and all the hosts thereof, and by whom all things were made which live, and move, and have a being" (D&C 45:1).

Our efforts to become like God require both spiritual and secular learning. He has said, "Establish . . . a house of learning" (D&C 88:119), and he has promised "the saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him" (D&C 88:107).

Our spiritual knowledge is the base upon which we build all our learning. Elder L. Tom Perry makes this clear: "We are talking about a widening, not a narrowing, window of opportunity to learn if we attend to first things first." [^1]

The Lord has given us a curriculum to follow for his course on eternal life. It embraces truth and "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24). His syllabus makes it clear: "Study my word" (D&C 11:22); "give heed unto my word" (D&C 6:2); "search these commandments" (D&C 1:37); "let your time be devoted to the studying of the scriptures" (D&C 26:1); and this admonition, "I give unto you a commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written . . . by my power you can read them one to another" (D&C 18:3, 35).

Reading the scriptures one to another is what the Sperry Symposium is all about. That the scriptures in the Doctrine and Covenants were directed to leaders and members in this dispensation gives them particular significance. Indeed, we recognize that the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants cost "the best blood of the nineteenth century"—that of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum (D&C 135:6).

All of us share an earnest desire to learn and understand. But what if we were among the 950 million people in the world who can't begin to understand—because they can't read? In America alone the figure is staggering: one in five are unable to read. Though we don't have specific figures for the Church, we assume that our membership closely parallels the statistics of the broader population. That means that in the United States, twenty percent of the Church membership can't read. How can they follow the Lord's counsel to draw near unto him through his words or seek his spirit through his words—when those words are meaningless symbols on a page?

The issue of literacy is at the heart of spiritual progress. People who can't read often cannot write their names; they can't complete a tithing form, research their family history, or find a scripture reference in a Gospel Doctrine class—let alone read it aloud. Much of the power of the word is lost and with it the opportunity to grow in the gospel.

There is no question that to "give diligent heed to the words of eternal life" (D&C 84:43), we must be able to read them. To "do according to that which [he has] written" (D&C 84:57), we have to comprehend his words before we can act upon them.

What if Joseph Smith had not been able to read? The Prophet recorded in his history: "I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine" (Joseph Smith-History 1:11-12). Joseph Smith opened the door to this dispensation of the fulness of times—in part because he was able to read.

His example is significant for all who seek to gain a testimony, a knowledge "that he lives" (D&C 76:22). Said the Prophet Joseph: "Search the scriptures—search the revelations which we publish, and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God." [^2]

In 1992 President Gordon B. Hinckley announced a churchwide, ongoing, gospel literacy effort: "A great new project is to be undertaken. . . . its consequences will go on and on and be felt in the lives of generations yet to come. . . . It is designed to bring light into the lives of those who can neither read nor write. . . .

". . . Imagine, if you can, the potential of this inspired program. Who dare dream of its consequences?" [^3]

President Hinckley is right. Literacy brings light into people's lives: "For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ" (D&C 84:45).

In all corners of the world, Relief Societies are undertaking literacy programs because learning and education have always been a high priority of our organization. In the early days of settling Zion, the sisters gathered to learn from and to teach one another. Then they took the messages and inspiration home and taught their families. A century later a whole generation of women in the Church were enriched with poetry and prose in a series of lessons, "Out of the Best Books," that focused on great literature. In that course of study we were blessed with a whole new level of learning.

Now in Relief Society we are stressing literacy to help perfect the Saints. This is bold action we are taking, and we are seeing success, one person at a time.

Let me illustrate with a story. A Relief Society president in Blackfoot, Idaho, was the visiting teacher to a young mother of four. Barbara, the visiting teacher, and Kimmie, the young mother, were trying to put up a shelf. Then Barbara was called to the phone. She suggested to Kimmie that she read the instructions and do what came next. When Barbara returned, Kimmie was just sitting there. She hadn't done anything because she could barely read. It affected everything in her life. She was a Primary teacher in her ward—but not a very good one, she would be quick to tell you. After months of playing hangman on the board with the children, she asked to be released. She had bluffed her way through jobs, her GED, her IRS forms and other materials, but she didn't feel right about trying to bluff the Lord. Her visiting teacher, Barbara, offered to tutor her, and Kimmie learned to read.

Says Kimmie, "I am grateful that someone would share time with me to help me change my life. It has made a world of difference to me. I am now reading the scriptures every day and my spiritual strength is growing." [^4]

Literacy is a significant issue in the Church. Our current membership as of 1995 worldwide is recorded at 9.3 million. By the year 2000 that number is expected to reach 12 million; by 2020, statistics suggest 35 million; by 2050, approximately 157 million; and by 2080, an estimated 265 million.

The numbers are dramatic, but let's look at them another way. In 1960, 91 percent of the Church lived in the United States and Canada. In 1975 that number was 81 percent. In 1993 only 54 percent of the Church was living in the United States and Canada. By 2020, projections suggest our membership will look something like this: Mexico and Central and South America will account for 71 percent; Asia will contribute 13 percent; Africa, 3 percent; and the United States, Canada and Europe will total 11 percent of the membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

As I study these projections I recognize what a challenge we face to have all of us reading off the same page. This is a worldwide gospel, and with our growth as a church, we inherit many of the world's problems. One of the most critical is literacy in its many stages. Though we address literacy in more than one hundred languages, literacy hits all of us close to home. Most of us know someone who can't read or hasn't learned to capitalize upon the written word. Many have just learned to cover their inadequacy.

That was apparent to me when my son David, who is a physician, called to seek some advice on finding a support group for one of his patients. As he talked about the woman's difficulties, he explained that one of her biggest frustrations was that her husband couldn't read. Then he paused and said, "She's related to you." I was stunned. How could any of my relatives not be able to read? And then I look at the numbers: one in five.

The literacy effort instituted just four years ago as described in our Gospel Literacy Guidelines is twofold: first, to teach basic gospel literacy skills to those who cannot read or write, and second, to encourage Church members to study the gospel and improve themselves and their families throughout their lives.

The literacy effort doesn't come with a manual and list of specific things to do. The goal is to enhance reading, and if that skill is in place, then the next goal is to work to apply the principles more effectively in our daily lives. When you look at it this way, there are many layers of literacy. The literacy effort has prompted such responses as this one from a fifty-five-year-old man in Washington, "I have hope in the future for me." [^5]

In a branch in Seville, Spain, the level of education among the members is extremely low. Most of the women have had few opportunities for schooling. One sister in the ward wrote of the growing emphasis and success of their literacy effort. "Few sisters have gone on to the secondary schools," she says. "Only one has gone on to the university. She is the bishop's wife, and we are all so very proud of her. Some of the women have a difficult time when they are asked to read or write. But since we have become members of the Church our vision has changed . . . we all want to learn." [^6] That's the strength of the literacy effort: "We all want to learn."

The literacy effort is focused on developing or participating in a program to suit local literacy needs, but the Church has produced some teaching tools, including the manual, Ye Shall Have My Words. The course uses the scriptures as the text. Though many of us used McGuffey readers or "Run, Spot, Run" to learn to read, the Church's manual introduces reading concepts while at the same time teaching precious principles. "Love one another" and "Look unto God," "Beware of pride" and "Repent and be baptized" teach vowels and consonants and the coupling of words and phrases. As members' skills in reading increase, so does their personal understanding of the gospel. The power of the Lord is made known as we read: "Wherefore you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (D&C 18:36).

In the Dominican Republic, in Guatemala, in Korea and Singapore, in Canada and right here in Utah, Relief Societies are implementing and participating in programs to strengthen literacy. Some are simple; some are far more grand. Lives are changing as levels of reading and comprehension increase. We find women creating reading lists for children, tutoring in schools and juvenile detention centers, offering scripture-study classes for homemaking and great books classes for midweek activities. Hundreds of programs, each suited to the specific needs of the local unit, are being offered in scores of areas. The momentum is building, and the results are impressive. One by one, that light is beginning to shine.

The second stage of the literacy effort stresses reading with our families, encouraging reading in our wards, and enhancing opportunities to learn from the scriptures and the writings of latter-day prophets, using our skills and our spiritual understanding to gain secular knowledge.

"Learn of me" is not an intellectual exercise most effectively accomplished in a quiet carrel or office; it is a dynamic experience that requires action and effort as well as study and thought. It has been a priority in many dispensations. The Nephites and Jaredites produced "many books and many records of every kind" (Helaman 3:15). Nephi, the great prophet leader said, "I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father" (Nephi 1:1).

No matter our age or circumstance, our reading shapes our understanding of the Savior and his plan. The Lord admonished Emma Smith, "Lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better" (D&C 25:10).

How different are the words of the Lord compared with the messages scrawled on the side of a building claiming territory for a gang. Where are their mothers? I say to myself when I see this display of blatant disrespect for community and culture. Where are their fathers? And their sense of right and wrong? If they had learned to "study it out in [their] mind" (D&C 9:8), would they have been scrawling incomprehensible commentary on the signs and poles, walls and fences in every neighborhood? I don't think so. Had they learned to read and comprehend and communicate in words, would they be resorting to this display?

Closer to home, we may ask, Are we sending out young missionaries to preach and teach the gospel when they can't read? Or don't read? How can our young converts and our second-generation youth, even third- and fourth-generation, step forward and say, "Here am I, send me" (Abraham 3:27) when those words of Jesus Christ are not in their minds and hearts?

Society, the Church, the ward, the neighborhood, the family—all need the power of the word to give form to this mortal experience, to give meaning to life. Testimonies increase, commitment builds, families draw together, and missionary work surges forward when the word of the Lord, as given in his scriptures and through his prophets, is read, absorbed and honored.

At the BYU Women's Conference last year, Sister Karen Maxwell told of her stake's effort to improve literacy. Two wards in her stake instituted a mentor program in which Relief Society sisters helped encourage the Young Women to reach their goals in scripture reading. The women visited, called, wrote notes and cheered at the progress. One young woman and her Relief Society partner decided to test the thesis it takes just twenty-one days to develop a habit. The Relief Society mentor called the young woman every day for twenty-one days to remind her to stay with it. She did. In another ward, the Young Women make the calls to see if their mentors are keeping up with them in their scripture reading. Says Sister Maxwell, "The relationships developed and the habits thus formed are important elements of the gospel literacy effort." These women have put in practice the Lord's command, "You shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom" (D&C 88:77). [^7]

Why am I focusing on literacy at the Sperry Symposium, in which analysis of a phrase, a verse, or a pattern may be the rule? All of us can read; some better than others. All of us work to make sense of concepts and teachings and to apply that reasoning to every aspect of our daily lives. All of us take seriously the call to "seek learning." So why address literacy here?

Because literacy is more than being able to read; it is reading regularly, thoughtfully, and prayerfully. The Lord's repeated admonition to study, learn, seek, and ponder are guideposts for us to teach others "line upon line" the principles of the kingdom of God (D&C 98:12). They are guideposts for us to teach ourselves the doctrines of the kingdom and then to branch out to all knowledge, all the Lord has prepared for those that love him (D&C 46:9).

The gospel is a plan whereby we learn to become like God. We have textbooks that are divine and the Holy Spirit as our tutor. The intellect, like testimony, is not worn out when we use it. Engaged, it thrives on the stimulus of learning new and different things, analyzing, processing, storing, and recalling. "Let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds" (D&C 43:34) is a reminder to take seriously the opportunity to continue to learn and grow.

Literacy is the foundation of learning. There are layers of literacy that introduce the basics and then stretch us all the way to Joseph Smith's understanding, "Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity." [^8]

I love the breadth of the messages in the scriptures. In them we find guidance and focus for secular and spiritual learning.

The Doctrine and Covenants is an inspired resource. What a tool to bridge the Lord's teachings of old with those of this dispensation. And the lessons are the same. Times have always been hard for the righteous: ask Jeremiah or Paul or Jacob of their trials. And yet the Lord says, "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations" (D&C 115:5). He also says, "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers" (D&C 112:10).

In section 112 we find guidance appropriate for our discussion of literacy: "Therefore, gird up thy loins for the work. Let thy feet be shod also, for thou art chosen, and thy path lieth among the mountains, and among many nations" (D&C 112:7). Let's apply this to literacy.

It says, "Gird up thy loins," "Let thy feet be shod," or in other words, prepare yourself physically and spiritually "for the work." Why? So that you can be a servant of the Lord, ready to hear his call. And where does he ask you to serve? The familiar reference in Jacob is "the poorest spot in all the land of thy vineyard" (Jacob 5:21). But according to this modern-day admonition, "thy path lieth among the mountains" (D&C 112:7). These are hard places, steep, jagged, rough, and, at times, seemingly insurmountable. They aren't in your own backyard; they lie "among many nations" (D&C 112:7).

This passage from the Doctrine and Covenants takes on special significance when we reach for understanding of its context. What was going on at the time? Section 112 was given on the day that Heber C. Kimball began preaching the gospel in England. It was directed to Thomas Marsh, then president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Those were not easy times; financial troubles were plaguing the fledgling Church and its leaders. To say "gird up your loins" was to charge them with resolve and new commitment. "You can do this" was the message, and looking back in Church history, their efforts launched the exodus to Zion.

We hope for that same kind of energy in the literacy effort—at every layer. Your own path, no doubt, "lieth among the mountains." It is weaving among ranges of mountains, for there is so much to learn; and when you reach the top of one peak, you see another. Growth, effort, learning. These are the substance of literacy.

Once we have scriptures committed to our mind, they are ours to use, draw upon, work with, compare to, and expand from. Realizing that the scriptures apply beyond our spiritual framework, we begin to use them as the base or standard measure. We don't separate spiritual and secular learning. We recognize that they, too, are ordered. Spiritual understanding boosts and strengthens secular learning. But the reverse is not necessarily true. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God" (3 Nephi 13:33) helps us prioritize. Learning to give priority to learning is a layer of literacy.

We must be prepared if we are to become gods. We are counseled in Doctrine and Covenants 88 to learn about this world, its complexities, its beauty, and its vitality. We are to learn "of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms" (D&C 88:79).

Our time on earth is spent matching our choices to principles of righteousness and applying our minds to gaining knowledge. President Lorenzo Snow captured this concept in this remarkable couplet:

As man now is, God once was: As God now is, man may be. [^9]

Learning.

President Spencer W. Kimball said of the need to learn: "It is obvious that before one can take of the materials in existence and develop them into a world like our own, he must be master of geology, zoology, physiology, psychology, and all the others. It is obvious, also, that no soul can in his short mortal life acquire all this knowledge and master all these sciences, but he can make a beginning and with the foundation of spiritual life and controls and mastery, and with the authorities and powers received through the gospel of Christ, he is in a position to begin this almost limitless study of the secular." [^10]

I have always been drawn to Doctrine and Covenants 138, in which President Joseph F. Smith describes the process of receiving revelation through the scriptures: "I sat in my room pondering over the scriptures. . . . I opened the Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle of Peter, and . . . I read" (vv. 1, 6). President Smith taught us a valuable lesson in literacy when he described his pondering, letting his mind be filled with the Spirit of the Lord. "As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me" (v. 11). The road of eternal progression is a much faster track if you can read.

The Lord has promised: "And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

"Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

"And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

"For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will" (D&C 76:7-10).

May we learn of him, read his word, and share it with the world.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Cited by Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, October 1963, 17.
[^2] Living Church leaders provide valuable insights, particularly into how scriptural principles apply in today's world. The Lord affirmed that the words of those in authority, spoken "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation" (D&C 68:4). J. Reuben Clark Jr., Church News, 31 July 1954, 9, 10.
[^3] Personal revelation is the only way we can ultimately know the truth. Because the scriptures were written under the guidance of the Holy Ghost and because our inspired leaders speak by that same power, we must have the influence of the Spirit to truly understand them and appreciate the import of their words for us (D&C 18:34-36; 50:21-22). Joseph Young Sr., History of the Organization of the Seventies (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1878),1-2.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:95.
[^5] Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 196-97.
[^6] Noah Webster, American Dictionary of the English Language (New York: S. Converse, 1828; facsimile reprint, San Francisco: Foundation for American Christian Education, 1980), s.v. "ordain."
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1953), 1:126.
[^8] Webster's American Dictionary, s.v. "hardly."
[^9] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 2:342.
[^10] Cited in John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1937), 85-86.
