Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER TWO

How to Get Answers to Your Questions from the Doctrine and Covenants

Richard O. Cowan

Richard O. Cowan is professor of Church history and doctrine and chair of the Department of Church History and Doctrine at Brigham Young University.

As you search the scriptures, you will probably encounter some questions you cannot answer immediately. Rather than viewing them as obstacles in your study, you might well regard them as opportunities for gaining new understanding.

General Sources of Help

There are definite steps to follow in your quest for gospel understanding. Three particular sources of help will be vitally important to your progress:

1.The written scriptures set forth the basic principles of the gospel and are of divine origin. Peter testified that they came into being when "holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:21). We refer to these scriptures as the standard works because they provide the guidelines by which we can judge the correctness of any concept or idea.

Elder Brigham Young stressed the importance of living prophets. Referring to the written scriptures, he asserted that "when compared with the living oracles, those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books." The Prophet Joseph Smith then confirmed, "Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth." [^1]

We should recognize the special stewardship of certain leading General Authorities. President J. Reuben Clark Jr. clarified which Church leaders may add to the standard works: "Only the President of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, is sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the Church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church." No other person may do any of these things "unless he has special authorization from the President of the Church." President Clark explained that the counselors in the First Presidency and members of the Twelve are also "sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, which gives them a special spiritual endowment in connection with their teaching." [^2]

It is apparent that these channels of help are interrelated—the scriptures were given by personal revelation to living prophets, the teachings of today's prophets are understood within the context of the scriptures and confirmed for us by personal revelation, and we can check our own inspiration against teachings from the scriptures and the living prophets. All three should be employed as we seek our answers.

Some Specific Suggestions

Know the immediate setting of the scripture. Most of the standard works incorporate historical narrative along with inspired teachings. The Doctrine and Covenants, on the other hand, is a collection of revelations with little or no historical material as part of the text. Reading these revelations without background could be like listening to only one end of a telephone conversation. In most cases the needed historical perspective is provided in the section heading.

In section 19 the Lord strongly commanded Martin Harris to repent (vv. 13, 20). Without knowing the historical setting, we are left to wonder what Martin's problem really was. The situation was this: Egbert B. Grandin, who was printing the Book of Mormon at Palmyra, stopped work on the nearly completed project when a group of townspeople vowed that none of them would purchase the book. Anticipating such a crisis, Martin Harris had agreed to pay in advance the publication price of three thousand dollars. He apparently was now reluctant to pay that sum. Understanding this background gives meaning to the admonition that Martin Harris should not covet his property (vv. 25-26) and that he should even give up part of his land if necessary to pay the debt (vv. 34-35). This he did at great sacrifice.

Yet the Lord's revelations often go beyond merely responding to the immediate problem. Note how in section 19, for instance, verses 11 and 12 define "eternal punishment"; verses 16 through 18 shed light on Christ's atoning sacrifice; and verses 29 through 31 define gospel principles we should proclaim.

The composition of section 107 provides quite a different example of the advantage of knowing the historical context. In verse 58 the Lord refers to an earlier revelation. (Note how the next two verses constitute a typical introduction.) A manuscript copy of an earlier revelation, dated November 1831, roughly corresponds to verses 59 through 100 in section 107. This means that the material on the duties of quorum presidencies was made known as early as 1831 rather than 1835, when section 107 was given.

Similarly, verse 93 refers to a "vision showing the order of the Seventy." The precise content of this vision is not known, but it may have been alluded to in a history of the Seventy written by Joseph Young, the first senior president of that quorum. On Sunday, 8 February 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith invited Brigham and Joseph Young to meet with him privately. After describing a vision "of the state and condition of those men who died in Zion's Camp, in Missouri," the Prophet instructed Brigham Young to have the brethren assemble the following Saturday, when he would "appoint twelve special witnesses, to open the door of the gospel to foreign nations," indicating that Brigham would be one of them.

"He then turned to Elder Joseph Young with quite an earnestness, as though the vision of his mind was extended still further, and addressing him, said: 'Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies.'" [^3] The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was organized on 14 February 1835, and the Seventy were chosen two weeks later.

See each individual passage in the light of general principles taught throughout the scriptures. God is constant and consistent. He has been described as "the same yesterday, to day, and for ever" (Hebrews 13:8). Hence we need to understand any particular revelation in the broader context of everything else God has spoken.

For example, the command in Doctrine and Covenants 29:7 and 8 that the Saints "be gathered in unto one place" must be applied in the light of the Lord's later declaration that other places would be provided (D&C 101:20-22). Similarly, some individuals have been confused by the provision that the Word of Wisdom should be received "not by commandment or constraint" but rather as a revelation "showing forth the order and will of God" (D&C 89:2). This statement must be understood in the light of the Lord's command given only a few months before that we should "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (D&C 84:44).

A superficial reading of verse 26 of section 132 seems to suggest that a person married in the temple is guaranteed exaltation no matter what he or she does. This "is the most abused passage in any scripture," asserted President Joseph Fielding Smith. "The Lord has never promised any soul that he may be taken into exaltation without the spirit of repentance. While repentance is not stated in this passage, yet it is, and must be implied." [^4] In other words, verse 26 must be interpreted in the light of countless other scriptures that teach that forgiveness of sins comes only after repentance.

Read the scripture carefully. A thoughtful reading of Doctrine and Covenants 132:26 reveals that this verse itself specifies some rather significant requirements that must be met before one can qualify for exaltation. Not only must a couple be married in the temple by proper authority but they also must be "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise." That means they must have reached the point that they were judged worthy to receive the eternal blessings promised by this sacred ordinance. Obviously this blessing requires a degree of faithfulness far beyond even the high requirements to receive a temple recommend. Those who are to be exalted cannot "shed innocent blood" (D&C 132:27), or, in other words, crucify Christ "unto themselves and put him to an open shame" (D&C 76:35). Furthermore, those who have committed even lesser sins still must be "destroyed in the flesh" and "delivered unto the buffetings of Satan" (D&C 132:26). The exact nature of these sufferings may not be known but concerning their extent the Lord declared: "How sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not" (D&C 19:15).

From a casual reading of Doctrine and Covenants 1:19 we might gain the impression that we should never counsel one another. The next verse clarifies that the Lord is only excluding uninspired counsel because we should always "speak in the name of God" (D&C 1:20). Nephi likewise taught that those who rely on the ideas of men are cursed unless "their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 28:31).

A superficial reading of Doctrine and Covenants 42:43 may give the impression that those with sufficient faith do not need to take care of themselves. That, however, is not a conclusion that can logically be drawn from the Lord's instruction that those without faith should be "nourished with all tenderness." Some believe that verse 46 promises that the faithful will never die, but notice what the verse actually says: "And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it [death] shall be sweet unto them" (emphasis added).

Surrounding verses often provide important clues. Some have concluded that Doctrine and Covenants 76:84 teaches that the telestial kingdom is the same place as "hell." The following verse, however, clarifies that the people going to the telestial kingdom will be "redeemed from the devil" at the last resurrection (D&C 76:85). Some may wonder why followers of such great leaders as Paul, Cephas (Peter), and even Christ inherit only the telestial kingdom (D&C 76:99-100). A careful reading of this passage clarifies that it is speaking of those who merely "say" they are following Christ (v. 100) but are actually vile sinners (v. 103).

A thoughtful study of the scriptures may reveal deeper meanings that casual readers may easily miss. Section 76, verse 58, uses "gods" (a plural noun) whereas verse 59 employs "God's" (a possessive adjective). The first verse emphasizes that as children of our Heavenly Father, we all have the potential of becoming as he is. The second verse stresses that we must depend on and therefore are indebted to Christ, even as he depended on and therefore belongs to the Father.

Verse 43 of section 45 speaks of a gathering to "this place." But where is "this place"? This part of section 45 is a review of the prophecy Christ shared with his disciples on the Mount of Olives (compare the latter part of verse 16 with Matthew 24:1-3). Hence, "this place" refers to the Holy Land, in the Eastern Hemisphere. Knowing this background of section 45 also enables us to understand that "this chapter" in verse 60 refers to Matthew 24, in which the Savior's prophecy to his disciples anciently is recorded.

Many have assumed that the phrase "the glory of God is intelligence" (D&C 93:36) refers only to gaining an education. But "intelligence" can mean either our mental capacity or that part of our being that has existed from the beginning. Reading the context of verse 36 suggests that it is related more to the second of these meanings. Notice how verse 36 equates God's glory with "intelligence, . . . light and truth," and verse 29 indicates that these were attributes of man "in the beginning." The essential message of section 93 is that we had the same qualities that constitute God's glory but we had them only in a small degree, whereas he has them in full. By keeping God's commandments, we can receive truth and light until we have them in full and are glorified (vv. 20, 28). On the other hand, we are cautioned that Satan "taketh away light and truth through disobedience" (v. 39).

Even though section 93 describes a broad process of spiritual growth, seeking learning is an important part in the process. Truth, one of the key attributes of God's glory, is defined as a "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (v. 24). Hence, in an earlier revelation, the Master directed us to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:76-80, 118).

Some have used the promise in Doctrine and Covenants 124:59 to support the idea that Joseph Smith's descendants were to succeed him as president of the Church. This passage, however, merely considers the rights of those who invested in the construction of the Nauvoo House and has nothing to do with succession in the presidency. This verse simply affirms that Joseph Smith's heirs were to inherit his stock in the house, according to the pattern commonly followed in the world. Similar inheritances were promised to others (vv. 69, 74-75, 77).

Allusions to other scriptures may have hidden meanings. Labeling today's wicked world as "Babylon" (D&C 1:16) or "Idumea" (D&C 1:36) takes on added meaning when we know that these were ancient kingdoms noted for their hedonistic materialism. Reference in Doctrine and Covenants 117:11 to the abominations of the Nicolaitane band should be understood in the light of John's commending members in the ancient church at Ephesus for hating the deeds of this group (Revelation 2:6).

In Doctrine and Covenants 46 the Lord explained that spiritual gifts include knowing "the differences of administration" and "the diversities of operations" (v. 15-16). These phrases are also found in Paul's list of spiritual gifts (1 Corinthians 12:5-6). Hence, understanding what he meant by these phrases helps us better understand their significance. Sidney B. Sperry explained that the Greek text of Paul's words clarifies their meaning: "Apparently by 'differences of administration' is meant the distinctive varieties of service and ministration by which things are accomplished in the Church." Similarly, Dr. Sperry continued, "diversities of operations" refers to "the workings, results, or effects" of various spiritual gifts. "One who by the gift of the Holy Ghost has the gift of knowing the 'diversities of operation' is one who may correctly discern whether a given service is of God or not." [^5] Note that the Lord's revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 46 emphasizes that the gift is to "know," or understand, these things. Priesthood bearers represent the Lord Jesus Christ and so should seek his guidance in their service.

We must clearly understand the actual meaning of words used in the Doctrine and Covenants. In many cases meanings have changed since the days of Joseph Smith. For example, in Doctrine and Covenants 25:7, Emma Smith was told that she would be "ordained" to teach the Church and expound the scriptures. A dictionary published at the time of this revelation indicates that though the principal meaning of ordain is "to invest with a ministerial function or sacerdotal [priestly] power," the word also may mean "to set apart for an office; to appoint." [^6]

"The term 'ordain' was used generally in the early days of the Church in reference to both ordination and setting apart," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith. "Men holding the Priesthood were said to have been 'ordained' to preside over branches and to perform special work. Sisters also were said to have been 'ordained' when they were called to some special duty or responsibility. In later years we developed a distinction between ordain and setting apart." [^7]

The Lord has promised that "the Saints will . . . hardly escape" latter-day tribulations (D&C 63:34). Hardly meant "scarcely; barely; almost not," referring to something achieved only "with difficulty; with great labor." [^8] The Lord has promised that Zion and her stakes will be places of defense and refuge when the divine wrath will be "poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6). Still, the faithful will not be totally shielded from these difficulties, and great effort will be required to maintain the righteous conditions that will spare them (D&C 97:25-26).

Consider insights provided by our living prophets. The foregoing discussion has included examples of how the teachings of our Church leaders significantly clarify the meaning of scriptural passages. Two additional illustrations show how explanations by the Brethren sharpen our understanding of the scriptures. Elder Orson Pratt elucidated the meaning of "Son Ahman," a name used in Doctrine and Covenants 78:20. Ahman is the name of the Father in the pure language of Adam. Son Ahman is the name of the Son, and sons Ahman is the designation for the remainder of God's children. [^9] Nobody is in a better position to explain the meaning of the Lord's revelations than is the Prophet Joseph Smith, through whom they were given. He declared, for example, that "tea and coffee are what the Lord meant when he said 'hot drinks.'" [^10]

Nevertheless, Elder Dallin H. Oaks cautioned, "Commentaries are not a substitute for the scriptures any more than a good cookbook is a substitute for food." Elder Oaks pointed out that commentaries may "focus on only one meaning, to the exclusion of others. . . . Sometimes those other, less obvious, meanings can be the ones most valuable and useful to us as we seek to understand our own dispensation and to obtain answers to our personal questions. This is why the companionship of the Holy Ghost is a better guide to scriptural interpretation than even the best commentary." [^11]

We must "search" the scriptures. Speaking of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord commanded us to "search these commandments" (D&C 1:37). Searching the scriptures involves more than merely reading or even studying them. Reminding us that they were given by his Spirit, the Lord stressed that we must read them by his power to fully comprehend them. If we do that, he promised us that we could "testify that [we] have heard [his] voice, and know [his] words" (D&C 18:36). If we read the scriptures with the same Spirit by which they were given, we will truly understand them, be edified, and, therefore, can rejoice (D&C 50:21-22).

Searching the scriptures also involves pondering their significance and applying them in our daily lives. Nephi declared his intent was to "liken all scriptures unto us" (1 Nephi 19:23). King Benjamin concluded his great discourse with an admonition that certainly applies to our scripture study: "And now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them" (Mosiah 4:10). The Savior similarly warned that hearing his words and failing to live according to them is like building a house on the sand. Lacking a foundation on bedrock, we could fall when storms come (Matthew 7:24-27).

A Final Caution

Sometimes the best answer to our questions will be "I don't know." Because only the president of the Church, whom we sustain as a prophet, seer, and revelator, has the right to give authoritative interpretations of scripture, we must realize that this certainly is not part of our stewardship. It is far better to acknowledge our lack of understanding than to mislead others by presenting our unfounded opinions as though they were settled doctrine.

Still, there is much we can know. With more complete understanding, we are in a better position to teach the scriptures effectively. "Seek not to declare my word," the Master cautioned Hyrum Smith, "but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men" (D&C 11:21).

Let us all become scholars of the scriptures. Great satisfaction comes from understanding God's revelations (2 Nephi 4:15), and even greater joy from sharing them with others (D&C 18:15-16).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Also in Joseph Smith, The History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-52), 1:300.
[^2] Living Church leaders provide valuable insights, particularly into how scriptural principles apply in today's world. The Lord affirmed that the words of those in authority, spoken "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation" (D&C 68:4). J. Reuben Clark Jr., Church News, 31 July 1954, 9, 10.
[^3] Personal revelation is the only way we can ultimately know the truth. Because the scriptures were written under the guidance of the Holy Ghost and because our inspired leaders speak by that same power, we must have the influence of the Spirit to truly understand them and appreciate the import of their words for us (D&C 18:34-36; 50:21-22). Joseph Young Sr., History of the Organization of the Seventies (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1878),1-2.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:95.
[^5] Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 196-97.
[^6] Noah Webster, American Dictionary of the English Language (New York: S. Converse, 1828; facsimile reprint, San Francisco: Foundation for American Christian Education, 1980), s.v. "ordain."
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1953), 1:126.
[^8] Webster's American Dictionary, s.v. "hardly."
[^9] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 2:342.
[^10] Cited in John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1937), 85-86.
[^11] 11. Dallin H. Oaks, address given at the BYU Studies Academy, 29 January 1993, 7-8.
