Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER THREE

Doctrinal Connections with the Joseph Smith Translation

Robert J. Matthews

Robert J. Matthews is former dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University.

The Joseph Smith Translation is a fact of history. It occupied a great amount of the Prophet Joseph Smith's time and energy. But it appears to me that it has generally not been appreciated for what it is and for the influence it has had on Church scripture and doctrine. In reality it has largely been neglected and even ignored by historians and scriptorians. I suppose that because the Joseph Smith Translation is a version of the Bible, historians have not recognized its connections with latter-day revelation, scripture, and history. On the other hand, because the Joseph Smith Translation is not a translation of the Bible in the usual sense of ancient documents and languages, traditional textual enthusiasts have not regarded it as a serious biblical document.

The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible exerted a substantial influence on the content of the Doctrine and Covenants. The revelations that are now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants—particularly those given during the years 1830 through 1833—have a strong historical, textual, and subject-matter relationship to the Joseph Smith Translation. It has generally been the opinion of those historians who did notice this translation that Joseph Smith corrected the Bible by virtue of the revelations he had previously received and that he was somehow "Mormonizing" the Bible. The truth is, however, that often revelations of doctrinal significance first came to Joseph Smith during his labors with the translation and were thereafter added to the Doctrine and Covenants. This latter view shows the Joseph Smith Translation for what it really is, a preliminary source for many of the theological statements in the Doctrine and Covenants. Such a view adds dignity, grace, and stature to the extensive labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith in making this translation.

The Historical Situation

Among the obvious facts relating to the Joseph Smith Translation are that the persons, places, and dates associated with it are the same as those pertaining to the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and various events in early Church history. For example, the persons who worked on the translation include Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams. The places are Harmony, Pennsylvania; Fayette, New York; and Kirtland and Hiram, Ohio. The years when the brethren were working with the Bible in these places were 1830 to 1833. We soon become aware that the work on the translation of the Bible continued on a day-to-day basis, just as it did on the Doctrine and Covenants, as the Prophet sought divine help and received revelation. The kind of revelation we find in the Doctrine and Covenants is also found in the Joseph Smith Translation.

The Doctrine and Covenants contains regulatory and instructional information about the Joseph Smith Translation, giving direction about when to begin, when to pause, who is to be the scribe, and what parts of the Bible to translate next, as well as exhortation to move more rapidly and to make plans for publication. All of these items and more about the Joseph Smith Translation are contained in the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. An examination of the Doctrine and Covenants shows that as some early sections revolve around the translation and printing of the Book of Mormon (parts of sections 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 17), even so some later sections revolve around the translation and proposed printing of the Joseph Smith Translation (parts of sections 6, 8, 9, 29, 35, 37, 41, 42, 45, 47, 73, 74, 76, 77, 86, 91, 93, 94, 104, and 124). Many verses in the Doctrine and Covenants do not radiate their full meaning and are obscure to a modern reader until he learns that there is a connection to Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible; those passages can then be read in the historical context.

Translating Ancient Records

Following is a brief review of several passages in the Doctrine and Covenants that have a direct relationship to the Joseph Smith Translation. The first three were received close together at Harmony, Pennsylvania, in April 1829. All three refer to Oliver Cowdery, and they are best studied as a unit.

Doctrine and Covenants 6:26-27. The brethren had already commenced the translation of the Book of Mormon. In Doctrine and Covenants 6:26 and 27 the Lord speaks of records containing much of the gospel that have been kept back because of iniquity. Oliver Cowdery is promised that he can assist Joseph Smith to bring this hidden knowledge to light. At first it might seem that this passage is speaking only of the Book of Mormon, but subsequent revelations indicate that other records are also included.

Doctrine and Covenants 8:11. Again, allusion is made in Doctrine and Covenants 8:11 to ancient records that need to be translated and which will reveal sacred knowledge. Like the previous excerpt, if taken alone, this passage may seem to refer to the Book of Mormon only, and it is generally interpreted in that limited scope. Nevertheless, subsequent revelation provides a wider understanding and a larger view of what is meant.

Doctrine and Covenants 9:1-2. A short time before, the Lord had granted Oliver Cowdery the privilege of trying to use the Urim and Thummim to translate the gold plates of the Book of Mormon (D&C 6:25). Because Brother Cowdery had tried but did not succeed in this effort and had returned to writing as the Prophet Joseph translated, the Lord admonished him to remain as the scribe until the translation of the Book of Mormon was finished. The Lord then makes a direct statement about the "other records" he had alluded to in Doctrine and Covenants 6 and 8: "And then [after the Book of Mormon is finished], behold, other records have I, that I will give unto you power that you may assist to translate."

This forthright declaration leaves no doubt that it was the Lord's desire that after the Book of Mormon was translated there were "other records" he wanted the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery to translate. The footnote in current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants 9:2 states that this passage refers to the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible and also to the book of Abraham, in both of which Oliver Cowdery assisted the Prophet.

The Book of Mormon came from the press and the bindery the last week of March 1830. The Church was established on 6 April 1830, and the translation of the Bible was begun in June 1830. One event followed another in quick succession. Thus, within just a few weeks after completing the Book of Mormon, these same two brethren were at work in Harmony, making a translation of the Bible. Because hindsight is often clearer than foresight, it should not be difficult for modern readers to see that the Lord in his perfect knowledge had been preparing the Prophet Joseph and Oliver for their work with the Bible by showing them that they would be required to translate other records after the Book of Mormon was finished. Thus we see the direct relationship between passages in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation in the stream of history.

Parallel Processes

There is no mention in the Doctrine and Covenants of the exact day on which the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery began the translation of the Bible, but the manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation itself begins with the date of June 1830, and it is by this means that the date is established. The manuscript begins in Oliver's hand. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were living in Harmony, Pennsylvania, at the time. Joseph and Emma were living in a small wooden home not far from Emma's parents. This was the same home in which a little more than a year earlier the Prophet and Oliver had been engaged in the translation of the Book of Mormon. Because of persecutions in May 1829, the Prophet had moved from Harmony and sought seclusion in the Peter Whitmer Sr. home at Fayette, New York, to continue to translate the Book of Mormon. Now in 1830, having commenced the translation of the Bible in the same home in Harmony, with the same scribe, persecution arose; again the Prophet moved from Harmony and sought seclusion in the Peter Whitmer Sr. home in Fayette, this time to continue the translation of the Bible. This latter move was in August 1830, and the Prophet translated the Bible in the Whitmer home in Fayette through the summer and fall of 1830. After Oliver was called on a mission to Missouri (D&C 28:8; 32:1-3), John Whitmer became the scribe. Even a casual reader cannot miss the parallel circumstances between the translation of the Book of Mormon and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible.

In the case of the Book of Mormon, the Prophet used an ancient set of plates engraved in an unknown language, which he translated by means of the Urim and Thummim. In the case of the Bible, the Prophet had no ancient text. He used as a base an edition of the King James Version published in 1828 by H. and E. Phinney of Cooperstown, New York. Oliver Cowdery purchased this large, pulpit-sized Bible from the E. B. Grandin Bookstore in Palmyra, New York, on 8 October 1829, for $3.75. By reading the English text, the Prophet, without the aid of the Urim and Thummim, received revelation about the meaning of various passages and also the restoration of lost parts. He dictated these to a scribe. In this manner, a large collection of information was recorded on manuscript pages measuring 8 1/2 by 14 inches, commencing with an independent revelation once given to Moses that Latter-day Saints now know as Moses 1 and continuing with Genesis and eventually the remainder of the Bible.

At Harmony, Joseph Smith received and Oliver Cowdery recorded the vision to Moses. During the summer and early fall of 1830 the translation continued from Genesis 1:1 through approximately Genesis 4. This part of the translation makes up 9 1/4 pages of manuscript written by Oliver Cowdery between June and 21 October 1830. The handwriting then changes to that of John Whitmer on the manuscript dated 21 October, 30 November, and 1 December 1830. This material covers Genesis 5 and was evidently done in the Whitmer home at Fayette, New York, to which Joseph Smith had moved in the last week of August 1830, after Brother Cowdery had departed with others for his mission to the Lamanites in Missouri.

Doctrine and Covenants 29:31-42. Doctrine and Covenants 29 was received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in September 1830 at Fayette, New York. The immediate circumstances that prompted this revelation are not known, yet its content is highly doctrinal, with verses 31 through 42 clarifying the spiritual and temporal aspects of the Creation and also the cause and consequence of the fall of Adam.

It cannot be overlooked that Doctrine and Covenants 29 was received in the same time period during which the Prophet translated Genesis 1, 2, and 3, which also deal with the Creation and the Fall. It is significant that the particular doctrinal emphasis of Doctrine and Covenants 29:31-42 closely parallels the doctrinal emphasis of the Joseph Smith Translation that is not found in the King James Version in Genesis. This circumstance strongly suggests a historical connection between Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis 1-3 (Moses 2-4) and Doctrine and Covenants 29, especially when they were produced within days of each other.

Enoch and Zion

The missionaries to the Lamanites, under the direction of Oliver Cowdery, had stopped in the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio, and baptized a minister named Sidney Rigdon in November 1830. Brother Rigdon was so taken with the concept of the Restoration and the reality of a living prophet that he soon traveled from the Kirtland area to Fayette, New York, to meet the Prophet Joseph. He arrived in Fayette on 5 or 6 December 1830 and within a day or so received the revelation through Joseph Smith now known as Doctrine and Covenants 35, which was received about 7 December.

Doctrine and Covenants 35:20. At the time Brother Rigdon arrived in Fayette, Oliver Cowdery was well on his way to Missouri, and John Whitmer had been called by revelation to preach in Ohio. This left the Prophet Joseph without a full-time scribe. As pointed out in Doctrine and Covenants 35:20, Sidney Rigdon was then called to write for the Prophet, with the promise of the Lord that "the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine [the Lord's] own bosom." At this precise juncture, early in December 1830, the manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation begins showing the penmanship of Sidney Rigdon. We recall that John Whitmer was recording the manuscript as recently as 1 December 1830.

The place at which Brother Rigdon began to write is what we now know as JST Genesis 7:3 (Moses 7:2). This material records valuable information about the patriarch Enoch and his city of Zion, which "dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Moses 7:18). Enoch and his city, we learn from this part of the translation, were all translated and taken to heaven with the promise that in the last days the city would return to the earth and be joined to the New Jerusalem, which the Saints of the latter days would build upon the earth (Moses 7:20-64). None of this detailed information about Enoch—that he had a city or that it had a functioning economic order without any poor—is even hinted at in the King James Version, or in any other version, of the Bible. This information is unique to the Joseph Smith Translation and is of particular importance to the Doctrine and Covenants.

Doctrine and Covenants 37:1-4. Soon after he revealed the Enoch material and during the same month of December 1830, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith to pause in the translation and move the entire Church membership to Ohio. The promise was given a few days later, on 2 January 1831, that the Lord would reveal his "law" to the Church after they arrived in Ohio (D&C 38:32).

Doctrine and Covenants 38:4. The Lord, almost as an aside, refers here to the "Zion of Enoch" being taken into "mine own bosom." Because no Bible has this information but because that very information was revealed to the Prophet Joseph a few days earlier as part of the Joseph Smith Translation, it is evident that this allusion is to information known only through the Joseph Smith Translation.

Doctrine and Covenants 41:7. The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 41:7, given 4 February 1831, shortly after the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon arrived in Kirtland, indicates that Joseph Smith needs a house to live in where he can "translate." This revelation constitutes divine direction to recommence the translation. The Prophet and Emma were living with others in crowded conditions, which did not provide the serenity and quietness necessary to translate.

Doctrine and Covenants 42:1, 2, 30-55, 59. Five days later, the Lord instructed the Prophet concerning the "law." The law of teaching is stated, as well as other laws and principles pertaining to the kingdom. Of particular significance is the economic order, or law of property and stewardship, that is introduced in section 42. Consecration of property, the role of the bishop, the operation of the storehouse, and building the New Jerusalem are also discussed. This law regarding material properties would provide for the poor. It cannot be mere coincidence that it came so soon after the great revelation about Enoch, who had a society and a city in which there were no poor. Is it not significant that immediately after receiving the revelation about Enoch while making the translation, the Lord commanded the Prophet to cease translating temporarily, move to Ohio, and there receive the economic law preparatory to building the New Jerusalem in this dispensation? All of these things parallel what was revealed about Enoch, none of which survives in any Bible today.

The next twenty or so sections of the Doctrine and Covenants, after section 42, outline the principles and organizational plan of the consecration of property, which concept had been introduced to the Prophet Joseph while he was translating Genesis.

Doctrine and Covenants 42:56-58. As part of the instruction of the revelation received 9 February 1831 at Kirtland, the Prophet is admonished to "ask" and receive the scriptures, as the Lord has "appointed." The Lord promises that these scriptures would be preserved in safety. He cautions the Prophet not to advertise these new scriptures then but that the time would come when the work would be received "in full," and then they would be taught to all people. Without the background information that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were translating the Bible almost daily, the real significance of these verses in the Doctrine and Covenants would be lost to our generation. With the knowledge that these brethren were engaged at that very time in the translation of the Bible (Genesis at that date), this passage holds greater meaning and constitutes another admonition for the Prophet to recommence the translation that had been interrupted by the move from Fayette to Kirtland.

Doctrine and Covenants 45:11-12. The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 45 was received in Kirtland, Ohio, on 7 March 1831. Reference is again made to the great patriarch Enoch and his righteous city who were "separated from the earth" (translated) and "received unto" the Lord. Because neither the King James Version nor any other known Bible has the slightest reference to Enoch having a city or that such a city ever existed on earth or was translated, this passage is a direct reference to the revelation concerning Enoch that was received in December 1830 at Fayette as part of the Joseph Smith Translation.

New Testament Translation

Doctrine and Covenants 45:60-62. During the course of the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 45, the Lord reviewed scenes and teachings he had given to the Twelve on the Mount of Olives eighteen hundred years earlier, some of which are recorded in the New Testament. Until this date, 7 March 1831, the Prophet and his scribes had translated only from the early chapters of Genesis. In this revelation the Lord instructed them to begin to translate the New Testament. He gave them the promise that in it (the translation they would make of the New Testament) many important things would be made known to them. Thus we see that the process of translation was a learning and revelatory experience. There can be no mistaking these words: "Wherefore, I give unto you that ye may now translate it [the New Testament], that ye may be prepared for the things to come." The original draft of Joseph Smith's translation of the New Testament shows that the Prophet began translating the book of Matthew the next day, 8 March 1831. The handwriting is Sidney Rigdon's. The first sentence reads: "A translation of the New Testament translated by the power of God." The pages that follow have no chapters or verses and very little punctuation.

Doctrine and Covenants 47:1. On the same day that the translation of the New Testament was started, 8 March 1831, John Whitmer was appointed by revelation to write for the Prophet "in transcribing" all things given from the Lord. One early result of this calling is a manuscript of the New Testament dated 4 April 1831 at Kirtland, which consists of a rewriting of the first draft of the translation of Matthew, adding chapters, verses, and punctuation, as if for publication. This rewritten document is in the hand of John Whitmer, evidently in fulfillment of his duties.

Doctrine and Covenants 73:3-4. Because of persecution at Kirtland, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon and their families moved to Hiram, Ohio, on 12 September 1831. The Lord instructed the brethren on 1 December 1831 at Hiram to exert greater efforts in preaching and testifying to the people about the gospel and the Restoration (D&C 71). To fulfill this new assignment, they temporarily laid aside the work of translation for about six weeks. On 10 January 1832, as noted in Doctrine and Covenants 73:3-4, the Lord told the brethren that it was now "expedient to translate again" and to continue with the translation until it was finished.

Doctrine and Covenants 74 headnote. The Prophet recommenced the translation of the New Testament sometime between 10 and 25 January 1832. He also received an explanation, by revelation, of 1 Corinthians 7:14. That material does not appear in the Joseph Smith Translation manuscript, however. It is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 74.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:15-18. While living in the John Johnson home in Hiram, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were translating the book of John and came to 5:29, at which point they received the vision of the degrees of glory. Doctrine and Covenants 76:15 through 18 clearly relates this vision to the work of translation to which they had been divinely appointed. The vision was received on 16 February 1832. Most of the New Testament was translated while the Prophet was living in the Johnson home, where he received many other revelations as well.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:1-15. The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 77, dealing entirely with the book of Revelation, was received in March 1832 at Hiram, Ohio. The Prophet explained the circumstances: "In connection with the translation of the Scriptures, I received the following explanation of the Revelation of St. John" (D&C 77, headnote).

Finishing the Joseph Smith Translation

Doctrine and Covenants 86:1-7. After living in Hiram one year, the Prophet Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and their families returned to Kirtland in September 1832. The Prophet and his family moved into the upper story of the Whitney store, where one room was designated as the translating room. Many revelations were received there, and the work moved forward on the Joseph Smith Translation. Doctrine and Covenants 86:1 through 7 was received by revelation on 25 December 1832 while the First Presidency were reviewing and editing the New Testament manuscript for publication (D&C 86, headnote). [^1] The Old Testament was at that time unfinished, having been laid aside in March 1831 in favor of the New Testament as commanded of the Lord in Doctrine and Covenants 45:60-62.

Doctrine and Covenants 90:13. The New Testament having been translated, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon returned to Genesis and translated the remainder of the Old Testament. It is evident from Doctrine and Covenants 90:13 that they were by this time, 8 March 1833, working in the books of the prophets. The Lord admonishes them to continue the work until it is "finished," the translation even taking precedence over other Church responsibilities.

Doctrine and Covenants 91 headnote. The edition of the King James Version the Prophet was using contained the fourteen books commonly called the Old Testament Apocrypha. The Prophet asked the Lord whether he should translate that part of the Bible and received word that "it is not needful that it should be translated" (D&C 91:6).

Doctrine and Covenants 93:53. The revelation received 6 May 1833 at Kirtland, Ohio, now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 93, contains doctrinal statements of remarkable depth. At the end of it the Lord counsels the brethren to "hasten" to translate the scriptures. This commandment can only have reference to the translation of the Bible, because the Book of Mormon had been published more than three years earlier and the Egyptian papyrus from which the book of Abraham was obtained would not become available for more than two years.

Doctrine and Covenants 94:10. The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 94, dated 6 May 1833, instructs the brethren to erect a printing house in Kirtland for "the printing of the translation of my scriptures." Because the translation of the Bible was nearing completion, it follows that a printing shop would soon be the next order of business. We learn from the last page of the manuscript that the translation was finished on 2 July 1833.

Doctrine and Covenants 104:58-59. Doctrine and Covenants 104 was received at Kirtland, Ohio, on 23 April 1834. It deals with several economic problems that were troubling the Church. Because some of the material was of a nature that it needed to be kept from the enemies of the Church at that time, some names, places, and concepts were written in code when this revelation was first published. Because the crises and danger of that time have now passed, the code words are no longer used in the present edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. One important passage was eliminated from the printed revelation and has never been restored. The text is found on page 105 in a manuscript draft in the Church Historical Archives in a collection named the "Kirtland Revelation Book." The passage speaks of the importance of securing copyrights to the publications of Church literature. In addition to the Book of Mormon and the revelations (Doctrine and Covenants), specific mention is made of securing the copyright "of the new translation of the scriptures," which can only mean Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. The veiled manner in which this instruction has been presented in all printed editions of the Doctrine and Covenants is as follows: "I have commanded you . . . to print my words, the fulness of my scriptures, the revelations, which I have given unto you" (D&C 104:58). Such language prevented the enemies of the Church from knowing the full intent, and because the time is past, there is no real need to restore the entire passage today.

Doctrine and Covenants 124:89. The revelation received at Nauvoo, Illinois, 19 January 1841, and recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 124, specifically commands William Law to use his interest (money) to "publish the new translation of my holy word unto the inhabitants of the earth." Despite Brother Law's high office in the Church at that time, he did not obey the counsel. The passage also indicates the desire of the Lord that the translation be published.

The foregoing are the most prominent references in the Doctrine and Covenants that relate to the Joseph Smith Translation. Not only do many individual verses give regulatory instruction about the daily progress of the translation but whole sections of the Doctrine and Covenants came as a result of the translation.

The Influence of the Joseph Smith Translation on the Doctrine and Covenants

The foregoing evidences are probably sufficient to illustrate that the Joseph Smith Translation has had much influence not only in the text of the Doctrine and Covenants but also in the headnotes and the footnotes. It is also abundantly evident that the Prophet Joseph's work with the Bible has influenced the doctrinal content of the Doctrine and Covenants. Some items, such as the age of accountability and baptism of children, were made known in the Joseph Smith Translation (Genesis 17:1-11) several months earlier than they appear in the Doctrine and Covenants (68:25-27). Many other doctrinal connections also become evident in comparing the text of one with the text of the other. The dates on the manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation show that in some instances the doctrine in the Joseph Smith Translation was received at the earlier date. The Joseph Smith Translation was often the introductory experience that led to the other revelations and to the established order practiced in the Church.

Is the Joseph Smith Translation a Restoration or Only Inspired Commentary?

Scholars who have devoted a great amount of time and effort in studying the surviving biblical texts and languages sometimes hesitate to view the Joseph Smith Translation as even a partial restoration of what was written originally in the Bible. Because there are no known original documents of the Bible now available, there is no easy comparison.

Nevertheless, no one would say that the Lord could not reveal the original text. We learn from 1 Nephi 13:24 through 40 and from Moses 1:40 and 41 that plain and precious parts would be taken out, lost, held back, and removed from the biblical text—but that these things would be restored. These passages seem to speak not only of a loss of meaning but also of a loss of text (1 Nephi 13:28, 29, 32, 34, 40, and Moses 1:41). The language of these passages seems to mean that actual parts have been taken out of the book of the Jews, which is the Bible.

It is instructive to notice that part of Doctrine and Covenants 45 declares itself to be a repetition of a conversation that Jesus held with the Twelve on the Mount of Olives. Note these words of Jesus to Joseph Smith as recorded in verse 16: "And I will show it plainly as I showed it unto my disciples as I stood before them in the flesh, and spoke unto them, saying: As ye have asked me . . . " The tenor of these words leaves no doubt that Jesus Christ is telling Joseph Smith in the nineteenth century the same things he had told the earlier disciples in the first century—recreating the same scenes from the Mount of Olives, even to the same conversation. It isn't just a similar sermon; it is a reissue of a conversation held nineteen hundred years earlier (D&C 45:15-59).

If the Lord can and did restore one such event, he could and no doubt would do so with other events. Although not every word in the Joseph Smith Translation is necessarily restored text, yet we ought to allow for that kind of revelatory process and hold to the concept that the Joseph Smith Translation is at the least a restoration of original meaning, doctrinal content, and also of text if necessary.

Conclusion

It is evident that the Lord commanded the Prophet Joseph to translate the Bible. It is also evident that the Joseph Smith Translation and the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are not merely roots entwined but are in reality the same root, received from the same divine source. The Joseph Smith Translation is neither an orphan nor a stepchild.

The Prophet Joseph's work with the Bible is too important to the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the revelation of the doctrinal base of this dispensation to be ignored or lightly dismissed. Most of the doctrinal revelations that have guided the Church were received during the years 1830 through 1833, which is the period of time when the Prophet was engaged in translating the Bible. Even Doctrine and Covenants 107 and 132, which are dated later, are based on information revealed in 1831 (D&C 107, headnote; 132, headnote).

It is my experience that when seriously studied in its context, the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible conveys a wider and deeper appreciation for the history and doctrine of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Note

---
Notas:
[^1] "One cannot look at suffering, regardless of its causes or origins, without feeling pain and compassion. I can understand why someone who lacks an eternal perspective might see the horrifying news footage of starving children and man's inhumanity to man and shake a fist at the heavens and cry, 'If there is a God, how could he allow such things to happen?'" M. Russell Ballard, Ensign, May 1995, 23.
