Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER FOUR

Why Do Bad Things Happen to Good People?

Randy L. Bott

Randy L. Bott is assistant professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

One frequently asked question that, without the benefit of revelation, remains a mystery is, "Why do bad things happen to good people?" Often cast in the form of a bitter challenge, the question may be rephrased into an exclamation: If there were a God who really loved us and was involved with us, he wouldn't let such a tragedy take place! [^1] The sacred pages of the Doctrine and Covenants can help us to put trials, tribulations, afflictions, and suffering into a more correct, eternal perspective. Additional comments by prophets and apostles of this dispensation are included in the notes.

The Natural Consequences of Improper Priorities

When Joseph Smith wearied the Lord for permission to allow Martin Harris to take the 116 manuscript pages (the book of Lehi) to placate Harris's critics, the Lord warned the Prophet twice about the inadvisability of the proposal. Joseph, apparently not wanting to offend his friend, agreed to ask a third time. At that time the Lord seemed to say, "Joseph, there are lessons of life to learn. You may learn by precept or you may learn by sad experience, but learn you will."

After the pages were lost, the Lord revealed through the Urim and Thummim a necessary lesson for Joseph Smith and for all of us: "And behold, how oft you have transgressed the commandments and the laws of God, and have gone on in the persuasions of men.

"For, behold, you should not have feared man more than God. Although men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words—

"Yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have been with you in every time of trouble.

"Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall.

"But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work;

"Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift" (D&C 3:6-11).

Joseph Smith was not the only one who had to learn to put the Lord at the top of the priority list. David Whitmer received a stern chastisement concerning why he had lost the divine direction and was left to his own devices:

"Behold, I say unto you, David, that you have feared man and have not relied on me for strength as you ought.

"But your mind has been on the things of the earth more than on the things of me, your Maker, and the ministry whereunto you have been called; and you have not given heed unto my Spirit, and to those who were set over you, but have been persuaded by those whom I have not commanded.

"Wherefore, you are left to inquire for yourself at my hand, and ponder upon the things which you have received" (D&C 30:1-3).

The five mistakes David Whitmer had made are not difficult to translate into today's environment, almost without modification. They were (1) you have feared man (wanted to be socially acceptable); (2) you have not relied on the Lord for strength as you should have (strength received from peers is not nearly as effective as support from God); (3) your mind has been focused on the things of this world rather than on the eternal verities including your present Church calling; (4) you have not listened to the Spirit and those leaders whom the Lord has chosen to guide you; and (5) you have been persuaded by those who seem to know much but have no authority to receive revelations from the Lord for you.

Scattered throughout the Doctrine and Covenants are other warnings, suggesting that the early brethren struggled then as we do now to "Choose ye this day, to serve the Lord God who made you" (Moses 6:33). [^2]

Failure to Repent Results in Suffering

There seems to be an unwritten but painfully evident corollary to the Lord's instructions through Joseph: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). That corollary is implicit: There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all cursings are predicated—and when we suffer any cursing from God, it is because we have disobeyed the law and received the inescapable consequences of our disobedience. [^3] There are many reasons problems come; however, it would be a mistake not to believe that our disobedience is one reason problems come. [^4] The Savior sternly warned that persistence in a forbidden path would not be excused: "And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless. . . . "Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not.

"For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

"But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

"Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

"Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men.

"Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit" (D&C 19:4, 15-20).

One could hardly accuse the Lord of being unjust for allowing problems to come upon us when we openly defy him or disobey his commandments. [^5] In one of the bitterest learning experiences recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord revealed through the Prophet the reason for the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, Missouri: "I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions" (D&C 101:2).

A few verses later the Lord listed the "sins" that caused the Saints to "pollute" their inheritance and suffer indescribable deprivations: "There were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

"They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

"In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me.

"Verily I say unto you, notwithstanding their sins, my bowels are filled with compassion towards them. I will not utterly cast them off; and in the day of wrath I will remember mercy" (D&C 101:6-9).

We are left to ponder whether modern Saints are destined to repeat the mistakes of our forbears because of our casual approach to hearkening unto the voice our God.

Afflictions Help Us Learn Patience

We need but look at the conditions in the world to know that God has more patience than anyone could possibly believe. Because his stated objective is to help us become like him (Moses 1:39), it would seem apparent that trials, tribulations, and afflictions may come even though we are not breaking any divine laws or really deserve the problems (that is, as a consequence of disobedience). The Lord informed Joseph Smith very early in his ministry: "Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days" (D&C 24:8). Hardly a cheery thought, yet it proved to have been stated with godly accuracy.

The warning of tribulations was not reserved exclusively for the Prophet. Newel Knight received a similar injunction with an additional promise. The Lord said: "And again, be patient in tribulation until I come; and, behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, and they who have sought me early shall find rest to their souls" (D&C 54:10).

The tribulations will end with the second coming of the Lord. The rewards for enduring tribulations will not be postponed indefinitely. The rest to be found is the "fulness of his glory" (D&C 84:24). Each promise gives the sufferer sufficient hope to endure the trial (Mosiah 23:21-22). Perhaps as a final injunction the Lord again pleads: "Be patient in affliction" (D&C 66:9). Developing patience moves the suffering Saint closer to the eternal goal of personal perfection. [^6]

Afflictions Come from Various Sources

We might think that when every external, Satan-controlled factor is marshaled against us, that should suffice (D&C 76:28-29). The Savior consoled the early brethren: "Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail" (D&C 6:34). In other words, afflictions come from various sources but all of them can move us toward our eternal goal of becoming like God.

Then opposition can be expected from both our visible environment and the invisible dominions of darkness. Isn't that adequate to give us the experiences we need to progress toward becoming celestial people? [^7] Thomas B. Marsh was "privileged" to have another source of trouble—his own family. The Lord explained to him: "Behold, you have had many afflictions because of your family; nevertheless, I will bless you and your family, yea, your little ones; and the day cometh that they will believe and know the truth and be one with you in my church" (D&C 31:2).

How could family-generated afflictions possibly turn to his eternal benefit? The Lord continues his instruction to Brother Marsh by explaining: "Be patient in afflictions, revile not against those that revile. Govern your house in meekness, and be steadfast" (D&C 31:9). In other words, be patient with your family. Don't revert to the world's way of solving problems by using force against force. Use meekness and steadfastness in governing your home. As he followed those instructions, the Lord had held out the promise to Thomas Marsh, both in the second and fifth verses of section 31, that "your family shall live." It is not easy to keep serving and governing the house of God when a person's own household is in turmoil. Easy or not, there are lessons to learn that necessitate our complete trust in God's ability to fulfill the promise that one day our families will be "one with you in my church" (D&C 31:2). [^8]

It is a struggle to do everything the Lord reveals, yet the Lord desires a thorough devotion that includes a change of heart. In teaching the early Church members about forgiveness, the Lord said: "My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened. Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men. And ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds" (D&C 64:8-11).

Not only did the Lord inform his Latter-day Saints about the weaknesses of his former-day disciples but he also warned that they had been "afflicted and sorely chastened" because of their superficial forgiveness, without the requisite attendant change of heart. Apparently, in an attempt to help his Latter-day Saints avoid the same mistake, the Lord warned about the seriousness of withholding forgiveness with our very limited knowledge. In fact, he declared that he would forgive whomever he would, and failure on our part to extend forgiveness to all men would result in the greater sin being levied against us. Perhaps that greater sin is blasphemy, because an unforgiving person would be taking a position preeminent to God (John 10:33).

The Lord also clearly outlined the method of forgiving. Divine justice was not to be escaped by the unrepentant sinner. Judgment was to be left in the hands of God. "Let God judge between me and thee and reward thee according to thy deeds" (D&C 64:11)—as if he were saying, Leave it in my hands. Go on with life. Don't burden yourself by trying to magnify my office. Judgment is mine, and I will repay (see D&C 82:23). The world would have us continually dredge up past wrongs we have suffered. Using worldly philosophies to solve spiritual problems has never worked. The Lord instructs us simply to put the past behind us and surge on to eternal life. [^9]

Failure to Obey the Lord Results in Afflictions

The scriptures are replete with warnings of impending calamities if we fail to follow the Lord's directives. [^10] In unfolding to his Saints the definition of modern Zion, the Lord also foretold the calamities that await the wicked: "Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire" (D&C 97:25-26).

That conditional protection was reemphasized later when the Lord declared: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face. Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord. And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; first among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord" (D&C 112:23-26).

President Brigham Young clarified the conditions that would determine whether the Latter-day Saints escaped the prophesied calamities: "There is one principle I would like to have the Latter-day Saints perfectly understand—that is, of blessings and cursings. For instance, we read that war, pestilence, plagues, famine, etc., will be visited upon the inhabitants of the earth; but if distress through the judgments of God comes upon this people, it will be because the majority have turned away from the Lord. Let the majority of the people turn away from the Holy Commandments which the Lord has delivered to us, and cease to hold the balance of power in the Church, and we may expect the judgments of God to come upon us; but while six-tenths or three-fourths of this people will keep the commandments of God, the curse and judgments of the Almighty will never come upon them, though we will have trials of various kinds, and the elements to contend with—natural and spiritual elements. While this people will strive to serve God according to the best of their abilities, they will fare better, have more to eat and to wear, have better houses to live in, better associations, and enjoy themselves better than the wicked ever do or ever will do." [^11]

The mere reading and pondering of the desolations prophesied upon the heads of the wicked should be sufficient to motivate the Latter-day Saints to be more diligent in following all of the Lord's commandments. It is an interesting study to read the Doctrine and Covenants making a two-column list, one side enumerating the conditions prophesied among the wicked, and the other those promised among the Saints. It takes little discernment to determine in which camp we would prefer to be.

Learning to trust and obey the Lord seems a difficult thing to do in an anthropocentric world. That we must learn obedience is a given. The Lord revealed: "And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer" (D&C 105:6).

Tribulations Seem to Be the Forerunner of Blessings

Earth life was divinely designed to test us in all areas necessary for future exaltation (Abraham 3:25). Part of that testing is passing through trials and tribulations. The Lord explained: "For verily I say unto you, blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven. Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation. For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand" (D&C 58:2-4).

The implication of those verses is intriguing: Faithfulness in enduring tribulations results in greater rewards. Greater than what? Greater than if we are not faithful in tribulations. It seems we are destined to pass through trials and tribulations (John 16:33). The important factor is our faithfulness. The Lord said: "For after much tribulation, as I have said unto you in a former commandment, cometh the blessing. Behold, this is the blessing which I have promised after your tribulations, and the tribulations of your brethren—your redemption, and the redemption of your brethren, even their restoration to the land of Zion, to be established, no more to be thrown down" (D&C 103:12-13).

Tribulations seem to be in part the necessary prerequisites to receiving blessings our Heavenly Father desires to bestow on us. [^12] If we accept his declaration, our outlook on trials could be brought into alignment with our understanding. Failing to learn this vital principle has resulted in many people becoming embittered against God and (temporarily, at least) losing their faith.

Trials Prepare Us for Sanctification

As difficult as it may be for the veiled mind of man to comprehend, a sanctifying effect is associated with trials. Referring in a sobering way to a biblical story of long ago, the Lord continues to enlarge our understanding of trials: "Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son. For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified" (D&C 101:4-5).

Can the Lord really be intimating that we will all be asked to sacrifice our children as he commanded Abraham? No, but the principles behind the test of Abraham are very applicable to us. Divorcing ourselves from the actual experience and looking for elements with broader application, we see at least three principles: (1) Abraham was asked to give up something he loved very much; (2) Abraham was asked to do something he really did not want to do; and (3) Abraham was instructed to do something he really did not completely understand.

Every son or daughter of God in that select group who will make up "my jewels" (D&C 101:3) will be required to endure (maybe many more times than once!) the chastening tests of Abraham. Why would a loving Father require such things of his children? President George Q. Cannon gave a convincing explanation: "Here comes the command of God to this man (Abraham) who has been taught so scrupulously about the sinfulness of murder and human sacrifice, to do these very things. Now, why did the Lord ask such things of Abraham? Because, knowing what his future would be and that he would be the father of an innumerable posterity, he was determined to test him. God did not do this for His own sake; for He knew by His foreknowledge what Abraham would do (Abraham 1:22-23); but the purpose was to impress upon Abraham a lesson, and to enable him to attain unto knowledge that he could not obtain in any other way. That is why God tries all of us. It is not for His own knowledge for He knows all things beforehand. He knows all your lives and everything you will do. But He tries us for our own good, that we may know ourselves, for it is most important that a man should know himself. He required Abraham to submit to this trial because He intended to give him glory, exaltation and honor; He intended to make him a king and a priest, to share with Himself the glory, power and dominion which He exercised." [^13]

Some of the most difficult tests given to the faithful Saints in the early days of this dispensation surround the events of the Prophet's incarceration during the winter of 1838-39. After many months of suffering beyond imagination, the Prophet complained to the Lord. The Lord's explanation is at once consoling and instructive: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but for a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes" (D&C 121:7-8).

Interestingly, the Lord did not promise Joseph that he would be immediately liberated or that the trials would stop. He just focused the Prophet's attention on the results that were apparently forgotten amidst the suffering. He had previously revealed that there is purpose in trials. He said: "And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and cleave unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth forth out of the mouth of God. For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith. And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal. Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me" (D&C 98:11-15).

Later, in the revelatory letter written from the Liberty jail, Joseph's perspective was again enlarged. He was not the first nor would he be the last to suffer. Nevertheless, the Lord explained: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee; for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:7-9).

There is purpose in suffering that will eventually prove to our eternal benefit. [^14] The Savior is aware of all of our suffering, having suffered greater and more than any man has ever suffered. The bounds of our suffering are set, as are the bounds of the persecutors. Said another way, God is in control. Nothing will happen to us that will be to our eternal detriment. We have been allotted a certain time here, and—given our best efforts—our days will not be shortened (D&C 121:25). Even though it may not always be apparent, God's help will be with us in those times of darkest trials.

Afflictions May Be Necessary before Blessings Can Come

As Latter-day Saints we sometimes become rather self-assured that we are right and the rest of mankind is wrong. In our desire never to be wrong, we may be oblivious to the promptings of the Spirit that are trying to refocus our thinking. If ease is long-lasting, it is easy to become too casual in our remembrance of the Lord. [^15] The Lord has a solution for those of us who require such stern correction. Speaking to the Twelve, but with broad application, the Lord said: "And after their temptations, and much tribulation, behold, I the Lord, will feel after them, and if they harden not their hearts, and stiffen not their necks against me, they shall be converted, and I will heal them. Now, I say unto you, and what I say unto you, I say unto all the Twelve: Arise and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my sheep. Exalt not yourselves; rebel not against my servant Joseph; for verily I say unto you, I am with him, and my hand shall be over him; and the keys which I have given unto him, and also to youward, shall not be taken from him till I come" (D&C 112:13-15).

Meat for a long session of meditation and pondering might be the question: How many of the trials, tribulations, and afflictions that I am experiencing are the result of my stiff neck and unyielding spirit? Could I escape some of those trials if I were more teachable? [^16]

Trials Help Us Learn to Look for the Good in All Things

Many scriptures include the promise that "all these things shall be for thy good." In one grand summary statement, the Lord helps us realize how truly childlike we are in our understanding of him and his marvelous plan for us. He said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye are little children, and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours. And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more" (D&C 78:17-19).

Perhaps with all that has been said, we are constrained to say in the end that we do not understand all things. Motivated with an unshakable faith that the Lord is in control, we move forward one step at a time, enduring one trial at a time. Although trials may come in multiples and even though we often fall short of taking full advantage of the test, we are commanded, "Nevertheless, be of good cheer." Our faltering footsteps do not disqualify us from receiving his promised guidance—"for I will lead you along." Mistakes have been and will be made by even the most diligent. The archenemy would have us believe that the promised goal of exaltation has been forfeited by the mistakes we have made. The Lord reassures: "The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours."

Although it may require almost superhuman effort, we are enjoined to "receive all things with thankfulness." Said another way: Look for the good in everything. Those leaders of the Jews who seemed bent on finding sin in the sinless One found that which was not there (Matthew 12:24; Mark 3:22; Luke 11:15-19). Perhaps the Lord is trying to teach us a vital lesson: You'll find in life exactly what you look for. How disappointing to approach the judgment bar to discover that we really did get just what we looked for. Even before the Church was restored, the Lord promised, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me so it shall be unto you" (D&C 6:8; see also 11:8).

It will require an Omnipotent Being to fulfill the promise that follows the injunction made in Doctrine and Covenants 98:1-3: "Verily I say unto you my friends, fear not, let your hearts be comforted; yea, rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks; waiting patiently on the Lord, for your prayers have entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, and are recorded with this seal and testament—the Lord hath sworn and decreed that they shall be granted. Therefore, he giveth this promise unto you, with an immutable covenant that they shall be fulfilled; and all things wherewith you have been afflicted shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory, saith the Lord."

Trials Result in Exaltation for the Faithful

The final concept in trying to make sense out of otherwise senseless suffering is perhaps the umbrella encompassing all other concepts. The Lord's desire to provide experiences that will eventually exalt us is paramount: "And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory. Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full. Therefore, care not for the body, neither the life of the body; but care for the soul, and for the life of the soul. And seek the face of the Lord always, that in patience ye may possess your souls, and ye shall have eternal life" (D&C 101:35-38).

When we read the Doctrine and Covenants looking for a specific theme or thread to answer the question, Why suffering? it becomes apparent that the Lord knew and sanctioned the suffering that his Saints would be called upon to endure. Through the Prophet Joseph's successor, Brigham Young, the Lord continued his instruction: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom. Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear; for my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly" (D&C 136:31-33).

If we would enlarge our understanding of Why suffering? we must be humble enough to be taught from on high. [^17] When our understanding becomes one with God's, we will be constrained to admit that "all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Nephi 2:24). Although incomplete, the points enumerated above serve as a place to begin to understand the "hidden mysteries of my kingdom" (D&C 76:7), which God promised to make known to those who "fear me, and serve me in righteousness and truth unto the end" (D&C 76:5).

Notes

"'And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him' (Hebrews 5:8-9). . . .

"On the other hand, these things can crush us with their mighty impact if we yield to weakness, complaining, and criticism. 'No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude and humility. All that we suffer and all that we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our characters, purifies our hearts, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, . . . and it is through sorrow and suffering, toil and tribulation, that we gain the education that we come here to acquire and which will make us more like our Father and Mother in heaven. . . .' (Orson F. Whitney)." Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 98.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation: Sermons and Writings of Joseph Fielding Smith, comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), 1:210.
[^2] Ibid., 211.
[^3] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), 139.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Ibid., 141.
[^6] Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 1:10; see also D&C 6:37.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:32-33.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1946), 1:48.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1986, 78.
[^10] Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:49.
[^11] See James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1949), 304.
[^12] Joseph Fielding McConkie, "The Principle of Revelation," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), 82.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1977, 78; emphasis added.
[^14] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, April 1964, 125.
[^15] Wilford Woodruff, in Conference Report, October 1897, 22-23.
[^16] Remarks of President Brigham Young, at the Semi-Annual Conference, Great Salt Lake City, 8 October 1866, reported by G. D. Watt; typescript in author's possession; spelling modernized.
[^17] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, sel. Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987), 252.
