Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER FIVE

Oliver Cowdery, Second Witness of Translation and Revelation

Keith W. Perkins

Keith W. Perkins is professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

One important doctrine in the Church is the divine law of witnesses. This law is stated very plainly several times in scripture. "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1; see also Matthew 18:15-16; Deuteronomy 19:15; D&C 6:28). Joseph Fielding Smith taught the importance of this law as it relates to the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Every time that the heavens were opened and keys had to be restored what happened? We have two witnesses. Joseph Smith was not alone. He was alone in the first vision, alone when Moroni brought the message to him, alone when he received the plates; but after that he was not alone. The Lord called other witnesses." [^1]

The divine law of witnesses required Joseph Smith to have a companion who had the same experiences. This law is seen in force in the experiences Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had together in receiving priesthood keys from John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John. In commenting on the experiences Oliver and Joseph shared, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "It was Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith who received the keys in the Kirtland Temple on the 3rd of April, 1836, when Christ appeared, when Moses appeared, when Elias appeared, when Elijah appeared. And every time when the keys of a dispensation were bestowed it was to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery—not Joseph Smith alone. Why? Just because of what the Savior said: 'If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true' (John 5:31)." [^2]

Two types of witnesses can come to an individual—spiritual and physical. We see the Lord giving both types of witnesses to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon, for example. The Three Witnesses heard the voice of God and saw the angel, the plates, and other sacred objects. The Eight Witnesses were able to handle the plates of the Book of Mormon.

Doctrine and Covenants 6 through 9 show us another aspect of the importance of witnesses and Oliver's role as a witness. Not only was he to be one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon but he was a witness of the gift of translation. He became the second witness of the Restoration and the assistant president of the Church, holding all the keys that Joseph Smith held (D&C 124:94-96).

Historical Background

Oliver Cowdery's role as the second witness of the Book of Mormon came about in an interesting way. In the winter of 1829 Oliver Cowdery taught school in the Manchester area of New York and boarded for a time with Joseph Smith's parents. The Smiths told him about events surrounding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and Oliver gained a testimony of the truth of the work: "The subject . . . seems working in my very bones, and I cannot, for a moment, get it out of my mind." [^3] He resolved he would go with Samuel Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet, to Pennsylvania to spend the spring with Joseph. He stated that he had made it a matter of prayer and firmly believed that it was the will of the Lord that he should go. "If there is a work for me to do in this thing," Oliver stated, "I am determined to attend to it." [^4] Oliver was not the only one praying about this work; Joseph Smith was praying for someone to assist him in the work of translation. The Lord told Joseph that assistance would be coming in a few days. Three days later, on 5 April 1829, Oliver arrived. [^5] He had decided to assist Joseph in the work because he had gained a testimony of the Book of Mormon when the Lord appeared to him and showed him the gold plates in a vision. [^6]

How grateful Joseph must have been to have help again in the important work of translating the Book of Mormon after Martin Harris lost the 116 manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon. This gratitude is expressed in the Prophet's history: "Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 7th of April) I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me, which having continued for some time, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained the following: [D&C 6]." [^7]

The Second Witness of the Gift of Translation

It is impossible to fully understand sections 6 through 9 of the Doctrine and Covenants unless we understand clearly the importance of the divine law of witnesses. It is not a coincidence that Joseph Smith received four revelations within one month of the arrival of Oliver Cowdery. It shows us something of the nature of Oliver Cowdery. He had a very questioning mind and needed answers. It also demonstrates the importance of witnesses in his kingdom.

In the first revelation given to Oliver Cowdery through Joseph Smith, the Lord begins to lay out the pattern for the law of witnesses. The Lord informed Oliver that he had a gift that was "sacred and cometh from above" (D&C 6:10). He then told Oliver that when he exercised this gift he would "know mysteries which are great and marvelous" (D&C 6:11).

Oliver was promised by the Lord that if he desired, the Lord would grant to him the gift of translation, "even as my servant Joseph" (D&C 6:25). The purpose of this gift was to bring forth records which "contain much of my gospel, which have been kept back because of the wickedness of the people" (D&C 6:26). Oliver was promised the same keys of the gift of translation that Joseph held; he would then be the second witness of this gift. That would allow him to assist in bringing to light "those parts of my scriptures which have been hidden because of iniquity" (D&C 6:27-28).

I believe it is not a coincidence that Doctrine and Covenants 7 was the next revelation given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. The Lord had told Oliver in the previous revelation that he would assist in bringing forth, with his newly acquired gift, hidden scriptures held back because of iniquity. Section 7 is an example of a translation of an ancient scriptural record that had been hidden (the parchment of John).

In the next revelation, section 8, the Lord grants Oliver permission to use his gift of translation. Oliver was told that he would receive knowledge of "the engravings of old records, which are ancient" (D&C 8:1). This gift was made possible because of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of revelation. He was warned that his gift, like all other spiritual gifts, could not be exercised without faith, and he must not doubt or he would be unable to do anything (D&C 8:8, 10). Finally, he was told to "translate and receive knowledge from all those ancient records which have been hid up, that are sacred; and according to your faith shall it be done unto you" (D&C 8:11).

Doctrine and Covenants 9 describes Oliver's success and failure in the translation process. Apparently he did begin to translate (D&C 9:5), but he did not continue; therefore the Lord took the privilege away from him (D&C 9:5). Oliver appears to have made two mistakes. First, he did not understand the process of translation and revelation. He mistakenly assumed that all he had to do to translate was simply to ask (D&C 9:7). But such revelation does not come without effort on the part of the recipient as he seeks divine assistance (D&C 9:8). Second, he forgot the Lord's warning about doubt and fear. Peter, the ancient apostle, had commenced to walk to Him on the water of the Sea of Galilee, but fear caused him to sink. In his failure the Lord asked him, "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" (Matthew 14:31).

Oliver was like Peter. When we think of Peter trying to walk on water, we focus on his failure. Jesus had to rescue him. We must never forget that Peter did walk on water (Matthew 14:29). The Savior told him that he failed after he commenced to walk on water because of his doubt and lack of faith (see Matthew 14:31). So it was with Oliver Cowdery. When he gave in to his fears, his efforts at translation faltered. We focus on Oliver's failure to translate when he did translate for a time (D&C 9:5); but, like Peter, he failed to accomplish his desire (D&C 9:1) because he feared (D&C 9:11). Yet Oliver translated enough to qualify him as the second witness of the gift of translation, thus fulfilling the divine law of witnesses (D&C 6:28). Further research on the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon may show that Joseph Smith acted as scribe for Oliver Cowdery when Oliver translated a portion of the Book of Mormon.

Oliver was informed by the Lord that having failed to "continue as you commenced" in the translation of the Book of Mormon, his assignment now reverted to his previous one, that of being a scribe for Joseph Smith, until the translation of the Book of Mormon was finished (D&C 9:5). He was not to be discouraged, though, because there were "other records" that the Lord would "give unto you power that you may assist to translate" (D&C 9:2). The full extent of Oliver's work is not clear, but it was fulfilled in part as Oliver acted as scribe for Joseph Smith for some of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible and the book of Abraham. Why did we not get other records? Perhaps because the Latter-day Saints neglected the Book of Mormon, as the Lord warned us in Doctrine and Covenants 84:54 through 57.

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained that "these records [D&C 9:2] of ancient inhabitants on this American continent were not translated. It is possible that some of them might have been translated had the people received the Book of Mormon with full purpose of heart and had been faithful to its teachings." [^8] The Lord had promised Mormon he would try the faith of the people and when they were willing to accept the "lesser part," the Book of Mormon, then He would make known to them the "greater things" (3 Nephi 26:9). President Smith said it is obvious we have not passed the test outlined by Mormon, for we have not received the "greater things" the Lord has in store for us. President Ezra Taft Benson told us: "The Lord has revealed the need to reemphasize the Book of Mormon to get the Church and all the children of Zion out from under condemnation—the scourge and judgment (see D&C 84:54-58)." [^9] Oliver Cowdery was a party to this failure, President Smith explained, when he turned away from the Church when his service was desperately needed: "He therefore lost his privilege to translate through his own disobedience, and the people have lost the privilege of receiving the 'greater things' spoken of by the Lord." [^10]

From this experience Oliver Cowdery learned a great deal about revelation—what it is, how to receive it, and the active role that we must play in receiving it.

The Spirit of Revelation

Doctrine and Covenants 6, 8, and 9 describe, define, and explain the spirit of revelation. We learn from these and other revelations that the life-giving force in the Church is revelation. The Lord states that this is the only "true and living church" (D&C 1:30). It is living because it is guided by continuing revelation through the Holy Ghost. [^11]

In these revelations, which Joseph Smith received at the request of Oliver Cowdery, Oliver was told that he had already been receiving revelation. The Lord told him that if he asked and knocked, he would receive (D&C 6:5). Oliver was reminded that he had a gift that was sacred and that if he inquired of the Lord, he would know "mysteries which are great and marvelous" (D&C 6:10-11). He was further told that in the past when he inquired of the Lord he had received answers—that was the reason he had come to Pennsylvania to find Joseph (D&C 6:14).

Revelation comes when the Lord enlightens our mind; that enlightenment is "the Spirit of truth" (D&C 6:15). A number of things are essential if we expect to receive revelation: desire, treasuring up the word of God, faithfulness, and diligence in keeping the commandments of God (D&C 6:20).

The Lord reminded Oliver of the time He had given him a marvelous revelation in the Manchester, New York, area. Oliver had cried unto the Lord to know if the things he had heard about the coming forth of the Book of Mormon were true. In response to this prayer, the Lord spoke peace to his mind. Joseph Fielding McConkie explained the meaning of the word peace in this context: "As Oliver grew into his understanding of the spirit of revelation, the first great lesson he had to learn was the unobtrusive, quiet nature of that Spirit. The witness of the Spirit always involves feelings, and chief among those feelings is that of peace. No other word is as consistently used in scriptural descriptions of the presence of angels, the Lord, or his Spirit, than 'peace.' It was also important for Oliver to learn how easily the spirit of revelation can be overlooked or missed if we do not learn to pay attention to it. Oliver was being prompted, directed, and enlightened, without even being conscious of it. These quiet operations of the Spirit provide a marked contrast with the feelings of spiritual ecstasy so often professed in spiritual counterfeits." [^12]

Because the Lord didn't answer in a dramatic form of revelation, Oliver, like so many of us, didn't realize the significance of the revelation he had received. We are often like the Lamanites when the Holy Ghost fell upon them and "they knew it not" (3 Nephi 9:20). As President Spencer W. Kimball taught us: "In our day, as in times past, many people expect that if there be revelation it will come with awe-inspiring, earth-shaking display. For many it is hard to accept as revelation those numerous ones in Moses' time, in Joseph's time, and in our own year—those revelations which come to prophets as deep, unassailable impressions settling down on the prophet's mind and heart as dew from heaven or as the dawn dissipates the darkness of night.

"Expecting the spectacular, one may not be fully alerted to the constant flow of revealed communication. I say, in the deepest of humility, but also by the power and force of a burning testimony in my soul, that from the prophet of the Restoration to the prophet of our own year, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous, and light, brilliant and penetrating continues to shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord is a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal. For nearly a century and a half there has been no interruption." [^13]

Revelation comes to us by the Holy Spirit speaking to our mind and heart. By this same type of revelation Moses led the children of Israel out of Egypt and through the Red Sea (D&C 8:1-3).

Elder Marion G. Romney explained the importance of revelation as discussed in Doctrine and Covenants 9:6 through 9: "This is the kind of revelation we can all live by. One need not make serious mistakes in life. Such can be avoided by following this formula. It will guide us in all our activities, if we will become sensitive to it." [^14]

Revelation, Living Prophets, and Scripture

We are not dependent for guidance only upon revelations recorded in the scriptures. Church leaders have emphasized this truth from the beginning of this dispensation. President Wilford Woodruff recalled a meeting he had attended: "Brother Brigham took the stand, and he took the Bible and laid it down; he took the Book of Mormon, and laid it down: and he took the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and laid it down before him, and he said, 'There is the written word of God to us, concerning the work of God from the beginning of the world, almost, to our day.' 'And now,' said he 'when compared with the living oracles, those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books.' That was the course he pursued. When he was through, Brother Joseph said to the congregation: 'Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth.'" [^15]

Brigham Young gave us even more detail of that meeting in Nauvoo: "At this meeting in Joseph's house Hyrum worked hard. He took the bible, the Book of Mormon, and the book of doctrine and covenants, and said he, that is the law which god has given us by which to build up his Church and Kingdom in the last days, and anything more than these is of man, and is not of God. When he sat, Joseph, with his hands still over his face, and nudging me with his elbow, said, 'brother Brigham, now, come, get up.' I got up, and previous to getting up I had become pretty well charged with plenty of powder and ball, and my lungs were not so weak as they are now. I could talk then so as to be heard a mile. I felt like a thousand lions. I took the books, and laid them down one by one, beginning with the bible, and said 'there lies the bible, the book of Mormon, and the book of Doctrine and Covenants, the revelations God has given through Joseph for the salvation of the people in the 19th Century, yet I would not give the ashes of a rye straw for these three books, so far as they are efficacious for the salvation of any man, that lives without the living oracles of God. That was my text, and I think that before we got through the congregation was perfectly satisfied. I showed them that if we did not have the living oracles we were no better than the sectarian Churches of the world. After I got through, Hyrum arose and made a handsome apology, and confessed his wrong which he had committed in his excess of zeal, and asked pardon." [^16]

This doctrine was also confirmed by President George Q. Cannon, who said, "We have the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; but all these books, without the living oracles and a constant stream of revelation from the Lord, would not lead any people into the Celestial Kingdom." [^17]

Most Revelation Comes as Confirmation

The Lord teaches us that most revelation comes as confirmation; that is, we first study the problem out in our mind, and then we counsel with the Lord and ask him if the decision is right. If it is, the confirmation comes by a quiet burning within our bosom—essentially a feeling (see 1 Nephi 17:45). If we have made an incorrect decision, instead of a quiet assurance in our heart, we will have a stupor of thought (D&C 9:8-9).

We often ask how to know when we have received revelation. Joseph Smith described it this way: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.,) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." [^18]

President Harold B. Lee stated the same principle this way: "When there come to you things that your mind does not know, when you have a sudden thought that comes to your mind, if you will learn to give heed to these things that come from the Lord, you will learn to walk by the spirit of revelation." [^19] On another occasion he stated: "When your heart tells you things that your mind does not know, then the Spirit is guiding you." [^20]

Conclusion

We have seen the role Oliver Cowdery played in the beginning of the Church and his role in the work of translating the Book of Mormon and learning more about the process of revelation. He had been sustained and ordained second elder of the Church on 6 April 1830. After the First Presidency was organized, it became necessary to clarify his ecclesiastical position; therefore, he was ordained as assistant or associate president of the Church on 5 December 1834. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained that the purpose of this office was to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven and to act as spokesman to the Church the same as Aaron. [^21]

Unfortunately Oliver fell from his position as associate president of the Church, and Hyrum Smith was called to that position (D&C 124:94-95). The divine law of witnesses was again fulfilled when the second elder, or associate president, of the Church sealed his testimony with his blood in Carthage Jail, along with the president of the Church (D&C 135:1, 3). Had Oliver remained faithful, perhaps he would have been the one to have had that great honor. [^22]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] J. Reuben Clark Jr., in Conference Report, April 1940, 73.
[^2] Harold B. Lee, "The Place of the Living Prophet, Seer, and Revelator," Charge to Religious Educators, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), 105.
[^3] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965), 131-32.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, Common Consent (Salt Lake City: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, n.d.), 4.
[^5] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980), 1:61.
[^6] Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, October 1930, 45.
[^7] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century One, 6 vols. (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 1:196.
[^8] The first revelation concerning proper authority was revealed in September 1830 and is recorded in D&C 28. At the time, Hiram Page professed to receive through a stone revelation concerning the order of Church and thereby deceived many members. Section 28 established the order of revelation for the Church. Later, in February 1831, a Mrs. Hubble went to Kirtland, claiming to receive revelation, and confused many of the newly converted Saints. The Lord again reminded the Saints of the proper order of revelation for the Church (D&C 43). Both incidents of deception were preceded by revelations to the Prophet of the proper procedure and the role of common consent regarding revelation and authority (D&C 26; 42).
[^9] J. Reuben Clark Jr., in Conference Report, April 1940, 71-72.
[^10] Elder Bruce R. McConkie described "casting lots" as "sustaining votes." See Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971), 2:32.
[^11] Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, April 1983, 66.
[^12] Joseph Fielding McConkie, "The Principle of Revelation," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), 82.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1977, 78; emphasis added.
[^14] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, April 1964, 125.
[^15] Wilford Woodruff, in Conference Report, October 1897, 22-23.
[^16] Remarks of President Brigham Young, at the Semi-Annual Conference, Great Salt Lake City, 8 October 1866, reported by G. D. Watt; typescript in author's possession; spelling modernized.
[^17] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, sel. Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987), 252.
[^18] 18. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 151.
[^19] 19. Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, Mexico City Area Conference 1972, 49.
[^20] 20. Harold B. Lee, The Teachings of Harold B. Lee, ed. Clyde J. Williams (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996), 509.
[^21] 21. Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:212.
[^22] 22. Ibid., 1:221-22.
