Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

Chapter SEVEN

The Hiram Page Stone: A Lesson in Church Government

Dennis A. Wright

Dennis A. Wright is associate professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

It began with a curious, small, flat stone that Hiram Page wore on a chain around his neck. He believed that the stone held special powers and used it to seek inspiration. Foolish as the practice may now seem, Hiram lived at a time when many devout Christians believed in the use of such objects as rocks and tree branches to divine hidden truths or to learn the will of God. [^1] Folk superstition supported Hiram's claim to have a spiritual gift that enabled him to use his stone for inspiration, causing some to comment on his supposed gifts. [^2]

Hiram Page spent his early years learning folk medicine in preparation for a career as a physician. His travels took him to Fayette, New York, where he met the Peter Whitmer Sr. family. In November 1825 he married Peter's daughter Catherine and made his new home with the Whitmers. Through his association with the Whitmer family he met Oliver Cowdery and the Prophet Joseph Smith. Hiram became an avid supporter of the young Prophet and was invited to be one of the Eight Witnesses of the gold plates. For the rest of his life he testified that he had actually seen the plates from which Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon. [^3]

Hiram learned of the Urim and Thummim and the part it played in the translation of the Book of Mormon. He knew that Joseph possessed a seerstone and used it in his prophetic calling. [^4] Hiram assumed that his own gift of seership, exercised through the stone he wore around his neck, was of divine origin. He continued to use his stone as a source of "inspiration," even after he joined the Church.

Before the September 1830 conference of the Church, Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers became interested in Hiram's supposed spiritual gift and encouraged him to use his stone to seek information about Zion and the government of the Church. [^5] Teachings in the Book of Mormon prompted Oliver, the Whitmer family, and other members to consider the establishment of Zion in the latter days (3 Nephi 16; 21; Ether 13). Their interest in Church government developed from their apparent misunderstanding of the prophet's role. The acceptance of Hiram's revelations by Oliver and the Whitmers fostered considerable discussion among Church members.

Joseph Smith recognized in Hiram Page's revelations a threat to the already revealed principles of Church government. [^6] Members of the Church had first accepted those principles in the 6 April 1830 organizational meeting by voting to accept Joseph and Oliver as their "teachers in the things of the Kingdom of God." [^7] During that meeting Joseph received a revelation emphasizing the unique role of the prophet as a "seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church" (D&C 21:1). The revelation counseled those present to "give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, . . . for his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth" (D&C 21:4-5). In accepting this word, the members received a promise that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you . . . and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you" (D&C 21:6). The revealed government of the new Church placed the prophet at the head as the authorized spokesman in matters of revelation and divine guidance.

At the June 1830 conference Joseph formalized the events of the April meeting by presenting revelations entitled "Articles and Covenants." The members voted unanimously to accept the revelations as the constitution of the Church. [^8] That document, now sections 20 and 22 in the Doctrine and Covenants, identifies the unique role of the prophet as the first elder in matters related to revelation and Church government.

Although the members agreed in principle to the revealed doctrine, some misunderstood the unique role of the prophet. Shortly after the conference, Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers "began to conceive of themselves as independent authorities with the right to correct Joseph and receive revelation." [^9] In July Oliver wrote Joseph and commanded him "in the name of God" to change the word works in a revelation (D&C 20:37) to faith, so that priestcraft might not be part of the Church. [^10] Apparently Oliver and the Whitmers felt it their responsibility to question Joseph on certain matters. The Prophet spent considerable effort persuading those involved that the wording should remain as it was first revealed. [^11] David Whitmer described a decline of confidence in Joseph's seership when the Prophet announced that he would no longer use the Urim and Thummin or the seerstone in the revelation process. Some felt that without the Urim and Thummin or the seerstone Joseph would experience a diminished power of seership. [^12] Oliver and the Whitmers felt justified in acting counter to the revealed order of the Church by challenging the Prophet's role as the only spokesman for the Lord. [^13] This feeling contributed to an acceptance of Hiram Page's seership and his revelations regarding Zion and the government of the Church as it showed their belief that the keys of revelation for the Church did not reside solely with the prophet. Support for this view came from others who opposed an authoritarian ministry. In this way, the matter became more than belief in false revelation, for it struck at the foundation of the revealed order of the Church and the unique role of the prophet.

Joseph Smith recognized Hiram Page's revelations as a more serious challenge than simple differences of opinion or fascination with false revelation. For the Church to remain true to founding principles, the keys of revelation and Church government needed to remain with those who were called and ordained. The apparent failure of some to understand this principle greatly concerned Joseph. But because of the emotions surrounding the situation, Joseph "thought it wisdom not to do much more than to converse with the brethren on the subject." [^14] Nevertheless, this strategy did not prove adequate, and as support for Hiram's revelations grew, Joseph felt prompted to inquire of the Lord.

Newel Knight recorded the anguish the Prophet felt: "Joseph was perplexed and scarcely knew how to meet this new exigency," he wrote. "That night I occupied the same room that he did and the greater part of the night was spent in prayer and supplication." [^15] Later, Joseph spoke with those involved and labored to convince them of their error. Newel Knight recorded: "They were convinced of their error, and confessed the same, renouncing the revelations as not being of God, but acknowledged that Satan had conspired to overthrow their belief in the true plan of salvation." [^16] During this time Joseph received the revelation now known as Doctrine and Covenants 28. The revelation confirmed the false nature of Hiram Page's revelations and reinforced the role of the prophet in the revealed government of the Church.

Doctrine and Covenants 28 addressed Oliver Cowdery and reminded him of his role as the second presiding elder. Because of his prominent role in encouraging Hiram Page to seek revelations, the Lord gave Oliver the responsibility to restore confidence in revealed principles of Church government. By accepting the Lord's revelation, Oliver became part of the solution rather than remaining part of the problem.

The Lord instructed Oliver in three areas: the unique role of a prophet, his mission call to the land of Zion, and the nature of Hiram Page's error. As the second elder of the Church, Oliver had great responsibility to defend the revealed truths of the gospel, but his acceptance of the Page revelations manifested his lack of understanding. Doctrine and Covenants 28 gave Oliver sufficient instruction to correct his error and to help restore harmony in the Church.

The Lord reminded Oliver that "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith" (D&C 28:2). Oliver was authorized not to receive revelation but rather to teach the revealed truths. [^17] Like Aaron of old, his authority included being "heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the Comforter, concerning the revelations" (D&C 28:1). As a modern Aaron, Oliver could "declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations, with power and authority unto the church," doing so "by wisdom" as directed by the Spirit and not "by way of commandment" (D&C 28:3, 5). Finally the Lord reproved Oliver for his attempts to correct the Prophet and encouraging others to receive revelations: "Thou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church; for I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed" (D&C 28:6-7). In his calling as second elder, Oliver was to use his influence to correct misunderstanding among Church members. [^18]

After reproving him, the Lord gave him a great opportunity: "I say unto you that you shall go unto the Lamanites and preach my gospel" (D&C 28:9). This mission had special implications for Oliver because of his interest in the false revelations Hiram Page received about the location of the city of Zion. The Lord's revelation reminded Oliver of Hiram Page's error by saying, "No man knoweth where the city Zion shall be built" (D&C 28:8). In correcting the speculations, the revelation identified the location of the city of Zion as being "on the borders by the Lamanites" (D&C 28:9). Perhaps the contrast between the reality of the Lamanite mission and the speculations of Hiram Page enabled Oliver to regain his focus as second elder.

The Lord next instructed Oliver to inform his friend Hiram Page "that those things which he hath written from that stone are not of me and that Satan deceiveth him" (D&C 28:11). The results of Hiram's deception had encouraged some to question the order of the Church, and because of his involvement in the deception, Oliver needed to act in his office to help Hiram understand the deception.

The September 1830 conference proved most important in the development of the Church. During the conference Joseph raised the matter of Hiram Page's revelations and found that some still did not understand how revelation comes to the Church. [^19] Those present discussed the matter at length as the Prophet taught how the "Articles and Covenants" (now D&C 20 and 22), accepted at the June conference, applied to this situation. He referred to the revelation received before the September conference (D&C 28) and taught the danger of conflicting revelations. Joseph treated the matter as a principle of Church government and in doing so emphasized that "all things must be done in order, and by common consent in the church, by the prayer of faith" (D&C 28:13). Newel Knight recorded, "It was wonderful to witness the wisdom that Joseph displayed on this occasion, for truly God gave unto him great wisdom and power, and . . . none who saw him administer righteousness under such trying circumstances, could doubt that the Lord was with him, as he acted—not with the wisdom of man, but with the wisdom of God. The Holy Ghost came upon us and filled our hearts with unspeakable joy." [^20] After the discussion, "Brother Page, as well as the whole Church who were present, renounced the said stone, and all things connected therewith." [^21] Those present then partook of the sacrament and participated in confirmations and ordinations with a spirit of charity and peace. The minutes of the meeting simply record: "Brother Joseph Smith, Jr. was appointed by the voice of the Conference to receive and write Revelations & Commandments for this Church." [^22]

The experience with the Hiram Page revelations marked an important point in the doctrinal development of the Church. The issue was one of Church government because the false revelations challenged the unique role of the anointed prophet. The conference established a clear precedent in defining the process of revelation and the central role of the prophet as the one "given . . . the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations" (D&C 28:7). From that time forth this principle has remained central in the governing principles of the Church. Of this matter the Prophet later said, "I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves . . . for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom." [^23]

Even after several generations, the Hiram Page incident remains a landmark example of an important principle in Church government. In the October 1972 general conference, President Harold B. Lee read from a 1913 letter by the First Presidency: "From the days of Hiram Page . . . at different periods there have been manifestations from delusive spirits to members of the Church. . . .

"When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or an extraordinary gift of inspiration convey something out of harmony with the accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear." [^24]

The Hiram Page experience prepared Church members for the coming revelations that would require them to leave their homes in New York and participate in the gathering in Ohio. Joined by a growing number of converts, the faithful gave heed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and worked to build a community of Saints and to raise a temple in expectation of a divine endowment. Led by the Prophet, the Saints overcame great adversity as they learned the lessons about building Zion. Their faith in receiving the Lord's word through Joseph Smith, "as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith," enabled many to receive the promised blessing that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory" (D&C 21:4-6).

Hiram Page accepted the Lord's revelation and the Prophet's counsel and responded obediently to the call to move first to Kirtland and then to Missouri. He suffered the expulsion from Missouri and worked to resettle in Clay County. [^25] During that time he became disappointed with the Saints' failure to establish Zion and, with Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers, began to question the Prophet's leadership. Improper handling of Church lands and funds led to the excommunication of Oliver and the Whitmers. At that time Hiram chose to denounce the Church and the Prophet. [^26] He moved to Ray County, Missouri, and lived there until his death in 1852. Yet even after his dissociation from the Church, Hiram Page continued to testify of the reality of the gold plates and the divinity of the Book of Mormon.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Millennial Star 45 (18 June 1883): 389.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965), 247-48.
[^3] Ibid., 248.
[^4] Random House College Dictionary (New York: Random House, 1990), 424.
[^5] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:109-10.
[^6] Ibid., 1:110.
[^7] Ibid., 1:77.
[^8] Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., Far West Record (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 1.
[^9] Richard L. Bushman, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1984), 166. See also A. Gary Anderson, "The Prophet, Seer, and Revelator," in Robert L. Millett and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), 148-151.
[^10] Smith, History of the Church, 1:105.
[^11] Ibid., 1:105.
[^12] For comment on the reaction of some to Joseph's decision to refrain from using his seerstone, see David Whitmer, An Address to All Believers in Christ, by a Witness to the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon (Richmond, Mo.: David Whitmer, 1887; photo reprint, Concord, Calif.: Pacific Publishing, 1959), 32.
[^13] It is important to understand that although a difference of perspective existed, Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers did not lose their affection and respect for the Prophet Joseph. During the Hiram Page affair they invited the Prophet to move to the Whitmer home to continue his work. The Whitmer family supported his work, and welcomed him with great joy. Newel Knight commented on the feelings of good will that all expressed when Joseph arrived in Fayette. "Newel Knight's Journal," in "Scraps of Biography," Classic Experiences and Adventures (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), 63-67.
[^14] Smith, History of the Church, 1:110.
[^15] Knight, "Journal," 65.
[^16] Ibid., 65.
[^17] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 141.
[^18] Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 131.
[^19] Although some suggest that the meeting was a "stormy affair" that resulted in a confidence crisis settled only by a vote of the members (see Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon [Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1977], 117), that opinion stands in marked contrast to the observations of Newel Knight, a participant in the conference (see Knight, "Journal," 65).
[^20] Knight, "Journal," 65.
[^21] Smith, History of the Church, 1:115.
[^22] Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 3. For further discussion, see Larry C. Porter, "A Study of the Origins of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the States of New York and Pennsylvania, 1816-1831" (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1971), 273-76.
[^23] 23. Smith, History of the Church, 1:338.
[^24] 24. Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1972, 125-26.
[^25] 25. Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia, 278.
[^26] 26. Stewart, "Hiram Page," 152-54.
