Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Power to Prevent Deception

H. Dean Garrett

H. Dean Garrett is professor and associate chair of the Department of Church History and Doctrine at Brigham Young University.

From the very beginning of the Church, the Saints struggled with the problem of being deceived by false spirits, impostors, doctrines of the devil, and doctrines of men. The Lord supplied many revelations and insights through the Prophet Joseph Smith to assist the Saints in their efforts to avoid being deceived. The Lord emphasized following the living prophets as well as understanding the gifts of the Spirit and the doctrines of the gospel to equip an individual to prevent deception. These helps, combined with understanding the edification that comes from God and the pattern given to judge righteousness, protect the Saints just as much today as during the time of Joseph Smith.

Follow the Living Prophet

On 6 April 1830, the day the Church was formally organized, the Lord gave the Saints directions that would prevent anyone from being deceived by false prophets or false revelations. The Lord explained to them the relationship the members of the Church should have with the prophet of God. The Lord called Joseph Smith a "seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church" (D&C 21:1). The members of the Church were commanded to "give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me" (D&C 21:4).

The most vital step in preventing deception is to follow the prophet of God. Note that a member is to give heed to "all" the words the prophet gives and do so by walking in all holiness before the Lord. The Lord understood that this was not an easy commandment. He gave each of us the ability to think for ourselves and the agency to act on our thoughts. He understood that we would need "patience and faith" (D&C 21:5). It is not always easy to follow the Lord's chosen mouthpiece. Sometimes his counsel is contrary to our desires or way of thinking. Sometimes it goes against professional training or philosophy we hold dear. It is easy to follow the prophet when we agree with him, but it becomes a real challenge to "give heed to all his words" when we disagree with him (emphasis added). Moreover, our obedience most often does not produce immediate results. It takes patience and faith to follow prophets of God. It always has, and it always will.

But the Lord blesses those who are faithful in following the counsels of his prophets. The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 21 states three promises for those who are obedient: the gates of hell shall not prevail against them, the Lord will disperse the powers of darkness from before them, and the Lord will cause the heavens to shake for their good and his name's glory (D&C 21:6). These promises are long-term and sometimes hard to recognize. Consequently, it really does take faith and patience to follow the prophets.

The early Saints had a difficult time staying focused on Joseph Smith and refusing to heed the counsel of others who claimed to have had revelation. The first such challenge came while the Prophet Joseph Smith was visiting family members in Harmony, Pennsylvania. Oliver Cowdery, the second elder of the Church (D&C 20:2), was staying in Fayette, New York, with the Whitmer family. One of the Whitmers' sons-in-law, Hiram Page, had a peep stone through which he claimed to have received revelations concerning the future Zion. Oliver and other associates believed the revelations. When Joseph returned to Fayette, he was faced with the question of who was entitled to receive revelation for the Church. The Lord revealed that "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses" (D&C 28:2). The Lord again instructed the members to focus on his called prophet to protect them from deception.

Six months later, shortly after the Saints arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, they had problems again discerning the truth. A woman by the name of Hubble claimed to have received revelations, which she began to preach to members of the Church. Little is known about these revelations other than that some of the members began to believe and preach them. The Lord reminded the Saints that Joseph was "appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken if he abide in me" (D&C 43:3). Sister Hubble was not the one appointed by the Lord to receive revelation for the Church, and her revelations were not acceptable.

The Lord will always have only one person in the Church called and designated to be his spokesman. Through that spokesman, the Lord will reveal his will for the Church. This principle prevents confusion among the Saints about whom they should follow and helps to avoid a Tower of Babel effect, with many speaking by different languages of revelation. The Church has only one language of revelation, spoken through God's prophet. Therefore, to prevent deception, we must follow the living prophet and those who are called to assist him. The Millennial Star records how we can tell who these leaders are: "The Prophet [Joseph Smith] declare[d] to the people how they might always know where to find the true church. He gave it as a guide for them ever afterwards and said the day would come when they would need it. He said: 'Factions and parties will arise out of this Church, and apostates will lead away many. But in the midst of all this, keep with the majority, for the true leaders of God's people will always be able to have a majority, and the records of the Church will be with them.'" [^1]

Gifts of the Spirit

Not only did those claiming to receive revelation confuse some of the early Saints but so did those who claimed to have the gifts of the Spirit. The Lord warned against evil spirits and the doctrine of men, "for some are of men, and others of devils" (D&C 46:7). To assist the Saints, the Lord taught that the gifts of the Spirit are given for the "benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do" (D&C 46:9). He reminded the Saints that the gifts of the Spirit were not to be used as a sign nor to add to one's lust (D&C 46:9). Everyone has at least one gift so that the whole Church can benefit (vv. 10-11).

The many different gifts listed in Doctrine and Covenants 46 range from the gift of administration to the gift of speaking in tongues, thus showing the diversity of the gifts of the Spirit. The gift of speaking in tongues is one gift in which deception is easily possible. The Prophet Joseph Smith warned about the use of the gift of tongues: "Be not so curious about tongues, do not speak in tongues except there be an interpreter present; the ultimate design of tongues is to speak to foreigners, and if persons are very anxious to display their intelligence, let them speak to such in their own tongues." [^2] The purpose of speaking in tongues is to interpret or speak another language in order to help others understand the gospel message. The Prophet Joseph Smith warned: "The gifts of God are all useful in their place, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare and a curse instead of a blessing." [^3] Consequently, to the bishop is given the gift "to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God" (D&C 46:27). Thus, there is safety and protection for the Saints in that a bishop can declare whether an apparent expression of the Spirit is of God, of man, or of the devil.

The Doctrine of the Gospel

Just as the misuse of gifts of the Spirit can mislead the Saints, so can the misunderstanding or misuse of the doctrines of the gospel. The Lord's warning about the doctrines of men was addressed when the Saints began to interact with the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, more commonly known as the Shakers. The Shakers held unique doctrines concerning God and the Second Coming. They believed that "Christ's second coming had already occurred and he had appeared in the form of a woman, Ann Lee; baptism by water was not considered essential; the eating of pork was specifically forbidden, and many did not eat any meat; and a celibate life was considered higher than marriage" (D&C 49, headnote). Leman Copley, a convert from the Shakers, wanted to return and visit them. The Lord warned him that he was not to be taught by them but rather was to teach the gospel as it had been revealed and as he had been taught by the servants of the Lord (D&C 49:1-4). The Lord then revealed through his prophet the true doctrine concerning the Second Coming, ordinances of the gospel, the eating of meat, and the ordinance of marriage.

The safety of the Saints lies in following the prophets for protection not only from false revelations but also from false doctrines of the devil and the doctrines of men. In all aspects of our lives, we are faced with discussions and intellectual challenges that seem to contradict the principles of the gospel as we understand them. The key is not to compromise the doctrine but to keep our eyes on the standard works, the First Presidency, and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles as they exercise their keys to declare the doctrines of the kingdom (D&C 124:126). The Lord counsels us through the example of Leman Copley that we should not take our teaching from men nor accept their doctrine but rather take our doctrine from him and his servants (D&C 49:4).

Edification from God

Just as some false ideas and concepts are hard to detect, so is the misuse of truth. In fact, truths can be misused and misunderstood to such a degree that deception takes place. The Lord declared that truth had to be taught by the Spirit of truth if it was of him. If it is taught in any other way, it is not of him. The process of teaching and learning truth is very simple. To prevent deception, we must teach and receive the truth by the Spirit of truth (D&C 50:17-20). By this method both the teacher and learner "understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22).

The Lord gave the early Saints another key to prevent deception: "And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:23-24). The word edify means "to instruct or benefit, esp. morally or spiritually." [^4] So we should ask, Does this material instruct me or make me better morally? Note that the issue is not whether it is truth, for truth can be used in many ways, including ways that take a person away from God. Instead, the issue is whether or not I feel edified. Satan's work will never benefit us spiritually. Whereas Satan's work feels like darkness because of lack of spiritual and moral light, God's work is uplifting and leads to joy. Thus, the fruits of the truth and the actions encouraged by the use of that truth are more important than the truth itself.

The Pattern to Judge

Often the early Saints were dealing not with philosophical ideas and truths but with individuals and their personalities. Despite their efforts, some Saints were still deceived by individuals who appeared to be righteous and acceptable to the Lord when in reality they were wicked and not accepted by him. The Lord warned that in the Church there were deceivers and hypocrites "which [had] given the adversary power" (D&C 50:7). The Lord gave a pattern to prevent individuals from being deceived by such persons, "for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations" (D&C 52:14). This pattern is used to compare an individual's personality and behavior with a standard or outline, as when a pattern is used to cut a piece of cloth to fit a certain size. In this case, the Saints had to judge the person to determine if that person was a hypocrite or deceiver. Therefore, the pattern given by the Lord as a set of criteria should be used to judge individuals.

The Lord's pattern involved five questions to be used to detect a deceiver or hypocrite. The first question is, Does the individual pray? (D&C 52:15). An individual who presents himself as a righteous person and yet does not pray to the God of Israel is not righteous. Consistently throughout the Doctrine and Covenants the command is given to pray vocally and in secret. That is such an important part of a person's spiritual growth that the Lord decreed: "He that observeth not his prayers before the Lord in the season thereof, let him be had in remembrance before the judge of my people" (D&C 68:33). Furthermore, even if a person prays, what kind of prayer does he or she offer? A person can learn a lot about another individual's spirituality by listening to his or her prayers.

The next question in the pattern asks, Is the person's spirit contrite? (D&C 52:15). A person with a contrite spirit is humble and dependent upon God. Such a person shows godly sorrow for sins and has a deep appreciation and understanding of the Atonement. Having a contrite spirit allows one to seek a closeness to God and to understand that with him, nothing is impossible. Above all, a person whose spirit is contrite will do whatever the Lord commands him or her to do.

The third question in the pattern is, Is the person obedient to the ordinances of God? The answer to this question appears to be a critical part of the pattern because it is referred to twice, in verses 15 and 16. The attitude a person has towards making and keeping covenants is an important barometer of that person's spiritual strength. Anyone who is casual in obeying the conditions of the ordinances is usually also casual in developing spiritual goals and reaching them, no matter how spiritual that person may appear on the surface to be. A classic example is the way a person feels, talks, and acts concerning the sacred clothing that is worn after having participated in the endowment of the temple. If a person is casual about wearing sacred clothing, that person probably is also casual about living and obeying other commandments of God.

The fourth question the pattern asks is, Is the individual's language meek and edifying? (D&C 52:16). For language to "edify," it must instruct and improve the listener morally. Thus we should ask, Is there lowliness of heart and humility in this person's attitude and life? Do I feel good about myself after conversing with this person? One's language is often a window to the soul.

The fifth question is, Does the person tremble under the power of God? (D&C 52:17). How does a person tremble under the power of God? The answer may be hard to determine. Every individual has developed a feeling towards our Father in Heaven. If a person sees the hand of God in all aspects of his or her life (D&C 59:21), that person will understand the power and love of God in everyone's life. That will create a feeling of awe and trembling as that person contemplates his or her own total dependence upon God. The Lord makes a promise associated with this characteristic: a person will "be made strong, and shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and truths which I have given you" (D&C 52:17). The Lord declared that anyone who is "overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even according to this pattern, is not of me. Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under the whole heavens" (D&C 52:18-19).

Conclusion

The Lord knew when we came to this earth that we would face the challenges of devils and men before we could return to him. He has not left us alone in that process of striving to follow truth. He gave us not only scriptures but also prophets and apostles to guide us in the decision-making processes of our lives. Also, the Lord bestows gifts of the Spirit to assist us in developing our own spiritual strength and calls leaders to guide us in the proper use of those gifts. Moreover, he has given us the Spirit of truth to assist in determining the proper use of truth. A divine pattern has also been revealed whereby we can judge ourselves and others to determine proper use of truth and the spiritual intent and strength of the individuals with whom we are dealing. Thus, we are not left alone and are without excuse in our quest for exaltation. As much as Satan would like to deceive us and misguide us, he cannot—as long as we are faithful to the guidelines God has given. As we study the revelations of the Lord found in the Doctrine and Covenants, we can learn not only how these guidelines were used and misused by the early Saints but also how we must use them in our own lives to prevent our being deceived.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:77.
[^2] David O. McKay, "That You May Instruct More Perfectly," Improvement Era, August 1956, 59, 557.
[^3] Harold B. Lee, The Teachings of Harold B. Lee, comp. Clyde J. Williams (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996), 456.
[^4] Heber J. Grant, in Conference Report, April 1938, 15.
