Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER NINE

Teaching by the Power of the Spirit

Richard R Sudweeks

Richard R Sudweeks is associate professor of instructional science at Brigham Young University.

Teaching has been part of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since the day it was organized in April 1830. The individuals present on that occasion voted to accept Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as "their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God." [^1] Less than a year later, in February 1831, the Lord commanded the members of the Church that when they assembled together they should "instruct and edify each other" (D&C 43:8). The Lord reiterated that charge in December 1832, when he commanded the members of the Church to "teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom" (D&C 88:77).

Teaching has become a pervasive activity in the Church as the members attempt to "instruct and edify each other" (D&C 43:8). A large proportion of the active, adult men and women in the Church have accepted callings to serve as teachers in a priesthood quorum or auxiliary organization. They serve as scoutmasters, den mothers, MIA Maid advisors, and Gospel Doctrine instructors and in a host of other teaching roles. Members called to serve in such leadership positions as quorum presidents, Primary presidents, Relief Society presidents, bishops, stake presidents, mission presidents, area authorities, and general authorities are also called upon to teach others. In addition, there are tens of thousands of missionaries and hundreds of thousands of home teachers and visiting teachers called to teach families or individuals in less formal settings. Parents too are charged with the responsibility of teaching their children the basic principles of the gospel (D&C 68:25-28). As President David O. McKay stated, "We are a Church of teachers." [^2]

Much of the teaching done by Church leaders is in the form of speeches delivered in large meetings. Most teaching and public speaking in the Church is done live by persons on site, but there is an increasing use of recorded speeches by Church leaders and scripted instruction in various formats, especially videotapes.

Church members called to serve in teaching and leadership positions generally have little, if any, formal training in the art of teaching or the art of public speaking. So President McKay's statement could reasonably be extended to say, "We are a Church of teachers, but we rely upon lay members who lack formal training to do the teaching and expect them to succeed."

An examination of the scriptures in the Doctrine and Covenants will help us gain a better understanding of what it means to teach by the power of the Holy Ghost and to identify actions that individual teachers can take so that their teaching can be enhanced by that power.

The Teacher's Responsibility

An assignment to teach the gospel is a serious responsibility. Evidence of the seriousness of this responsibility is given in Doctrine and Covenants 42:12-14, in which the Lord directs the elders, priests, and teachers of the Church that their teaching should be "directed by the Spirit" (v. 13). The Lord promises them that "the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith" (v. 14). Then he warns, "If ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (v. 14). This warning may be read as a declaration meaning that a person who attempts to teach without the power of the Spirit will be ineffective and unsuccessful.

Inspiration and confirmation. The Holy Ghost is a revelator. To teach by the power of the Holy Ghost is to teach by revelation. The teaching process includes two different forms of revelation. First, the teacher or speaker must receive revelation to know what message the Lord would have him or her teach on that occasion to the particular person or audience at hand. Second, the message must be accompanied by a confirming witness revealed to the recipient (D&C 18:2; 2 Nephi 33:1). For the sake of distinguishing between these two forms of revelation, we will label the first as inspiration and the second as confirmation. The main point is that teaching by the Spirit is a communicative process between a sender and a receiver that involves both inspiration and confirmation.

To the degree that a teacher or speaker receives inspiration, he or she will be guided by the Holy Ghost in deciding what ideas to teach and how to present these ideas in ways that will be meaningful and instructive to the intended learners. The teacher or speaker may also be prompted with new insights about the meaning of relevant scriptural passages or incidents in his or her own experience. The Holy Ghost may dictate the very words to be used, or the inspiration may consist of thoughts placed in the mind of the teacher or speaker by the Holy Ghost that are subsequently expressed in the individual's own words.

The recipients' response. Because the Lord usually does not impose knowledge of truth on individuals, the message sent by an inspired teacher may be recognized and accepted by some of the intended recipients and not by others. Hence, whether an individual receives a manifestation confirming the truthfulness of a teacher's message depends upon the hearer's receptiveness to the influence of the Holy Ghost (2 Nephi 33:2). When the teaching process is successful, the truthfulness of the sender's message is manifest to the recipient by the power of the Holy Ghost (Moroni 10:5).

Teaching by the Spirit is a collaborative and synergistic endeavor that occurs when both the sender (the teacher or speaker) and the receiver (the student or hearer) are influenced by the Holy Ghost. When the teacher is inspired and the learner is receptive to the confirming witness manifest by the Holy Ghost, then "he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:21-22). Note the result. Not only do the teacher and learner communicate well enough that they understand one another but both are edified. The use of the verb edified implies that the teacher and the learner are mutually uplifted and that the faith of each is strengthened.

Prepare to Receive the Guidance of the Spirit

Before a teacher can receive revelation from the Holy Ghost to enhance teaching, he or she must prepare to receive this blessing. The Doctrine and Covenants identifies at least four different characteristics that an individual should possess to be prepared: personal purity, humility, scripture knowledge, and faithful obedience.

Personal purity. The Doctrine and Covenants is consistent with the other standard works in teaching the need for repentance and personal purity before an individual may qualify to receive inspiration from the Holy Ghost continually (D&C 1:31-33; 76:52). The need for purity is emphasized in section 76, which states that God bestows the Holy Spirit "on those who love him, and purify themselves before him" (D&C 76:116).

A recurring warning in the Doctrine and Covenants is that the privilege of enjoying the guidance of the Holy Ghost is a conditional blessing that can be withdrawn (D&C 1:33; 70:14; 121:37; 130:23). The Lord taught Martin Harris that lesson when He withdrew His Spirit from him (D&C 19:20). A person who desires to enjoy the inspiration of the Holy Ghost continually must live worthy of this blessing continually.

Humility. Individuals cannot be taught by the Spirit unless they are humble. Evidence of the need for humility as a prerequisite to being taught by the Spirit is given in Doctrine and Covenants 136:32-33: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear; for my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly." "Ignorant" individuals are those who, regardless of how much schooling they have completed, are ignorant of the limits of their knowledge and lack of wisdom regarding spiritual matters. Before such individuals can "learn wisdom," they must humble themselves through prayer so that their spiritual blindness and deafness can be healed and they can perceive the things of the Spirit. Arrogance, conceit, and haughtiness are all forms of pride, which lessens an individual's sensitivity to promptings of the Spirit and can cause the Spirit to withdraw. For example, in Doctrine and Covenants 63:55 we read that Sidney Rigdon "grieved" the Spirit because "he exalted himself in his heart."

The Lord specifically instructed Thomas B. Marsh, the first president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the other apostles not to exalt themselves (D&C 112:14-15). The Lord's promise to Thomas in verse 10 of section 112 also illustrates the need for humility as a prerequisite to receiving inspiration. We often quote or refer to this beautiful passage without thinking of the conditional nature of the promise given. I have paraphrased this passage to emphasize the "if . . . , then . . ." nature of this promise.

Doctrine and Covenants 112:10 (quoted version): "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers."

Doctrine and Covenants 112:10 (paraphrased version): "If you will humble yourself, then I will guide you and give you answers to the matters you have prayed about."

Knowledge of the scriptures. A person who desires to be enlightened by the Spirit must first prepare by studying and pondering the truths of the gospel that the Lord has already revealed in available scripture. This principle is clearly taught in the revelation given to Hyrum Smith and recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 11. Late in May 1829 Hyrum traveled to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to visit his younger brother Joseph and Oliver Cowdery, who were engaged in translating the Book of Mormon. Hyrum wanted to find out how he could assist in the Lord's work—before the translation was completed and more than ten months before the organization of the Church. He was apparently very anxious to assist in the Restoration by preaching the gospel. In this revelation, Hyrum was commanded that he should not suppose that he had been called to preach until he was actually called. Further, he was directed to "wait" (v. 16), to "hold your peace" (v. 18), and to "be patient" (v. 19). In addition, he was told what he should do to prepare himself to assist in the work: "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men. But now hold your peace; study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men, and also study my word which shall come forth among the children of men, or that which is now translating" (D&C 11:21-22).

Hyrum was specifically told that before he made any attempt to teach the gospel, he should first seek to "obtain" the Lord's word by studying the Bible (the word that had already gone forth) and the Book of Mormon (the word that would come forth but was still being translated). Verse 21 describes the Lord's twofold promise to Hyrum. First, his tongue would be "loosed," suggesting that his ability to express himself orally would be enhanced. Second, "then if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men." The word "yea" performs an important function in this sentence: it introduces an emphatic phrase that reaffirms and amplifies the meaning of the preceding statement. In this context, "yea" means indeed or not only this but even. Hence, Hyrum was promised that he would be blessed not only with the Lord's "Spirit" and his "word" but also with "the power of God unto the convincing of men."

The Lord's advice to Hyrum should be instructive to all of us. If we desire to teach with the Spirit and have the power of God unto the convincing of others, we must first acquire an understanding of the gospel through thoughtful, persistent study of the scriptures.

Faithful obedience. When the Lord counseled "the elders, priests, and teachers of this church" in Doctrine and Covenants 42:12-14 about the need to teach by the Spirit, he included this charge in verse 13: "And they shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them." President Harold B. Lee stressed the verb do in this verse as a way of emphasizing that teachers or speakers who desire to have the influence of the Spirit accompany their teachings must first be obedient to the principle they are attempting to teach. [^3]

President Heber J. Grant was even more emphatic regarding the need to live the gospel in one's personal life as a prerequisite to having the influence of the Holy Ghost guide and enhance one's teaching: "No man can teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ under the inspiration of the living God and with power from on high unless he is living it." [^4]

Preparing the Message to Be Presented

Impromptu versus prayerfully planned messages. One issue that a teacher or speaker must consider when preparing to fulfill a teaching or speaking assignment is to what extent to plan the message. The pivotal scripture in the Doctrine and Covenants related to this issue comes from the revelation on priesthood to Joseph Smith in Kirtland in September 1832: "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man" (D&C 84:85).

One way to interpret this verse is to conclude that teachers and others who speak in the Church should avoid planning what message they will present and how they will present it. Instead of preparing a specific message, they should focus their attention on studying the scriptures and then rely upon the Holy Ghost to direct their thoughts and give them ideas to present in an impromptu speech or lesson.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has suggested a more correct interpretation. He explained that preparation is necessary and that the Holy Ghost influences teachers and speakers during their preparation as they compose their thoughts and organize their presentation: "When we speak about teaching by the Spirit it is not about a mystical process which removes responsibility from the missionary or teacher for prayerful and pondering preparation. Teaching by the Spirit is not the lazy equivalent of going on 'automatic pilot.' We still need a carefully worked out 'flight plan.'" [^5]

Treasure up the words of life. Doctrine and Covenants 84:85 directs the Saints to "treasure up in your minds continually the words of life." We typically think of the word treasure as being a noun, but in verse 85 it is used as a transitive verb. The verb treasure up has two meanings. In one sense, it means to collect objects of value and store them up for future use. In the other sense, it means to value, cherish, or prize an object. To "treasure up . . . the words of life" means more than just to stockpile information from the scriptures. To "treasure up" suggests the need to be discerning and to exercise judgment in distinguishing between trivial tidbits and more significant ideas. This appraisal process involves prayerfully pondering ideas we encounter as we study the standard works and the teachings of the modern prophets to gain an understanding of their meaning and to assess their significance.

Pondering should not be confused with daydreaming. Productive pondering is a focused and directed activity. President Joseph F. Smith's description of the activities he engaged before receiving the vision of the redemption of the dead recorded in section 138 illustrates what focused pondering includes. Notice the verbs used by President Smith to describe his experience. In the first three verses, he tells us that while he sat in his room "pondering over the scriptures," he reflected upon "the great atoning sacrifice that was made by the Son of God" and the love manifest by Christ's coming into the world. Then according to verse 5, his mind reverted to two scriptural passages he had previously read in 1 Peter. In an attempt to further understand these two passages, he opened his Bible and read each of them again. Although he had previously studied both of these passages, on this occasion, "[he] was greatly impressed, more than [he] had ever been before" with their contents (emphasis added).

Why was he so impressed? Apparently because he gained new insights into the meaning and significance of the two passages. But whatever new insights he had acquired from this rereading of the scriptures was just the beginning of what was to come, because in verse 11 he states that while he was engaged in this process of pondering, "the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great." This experience of President Joseph F. Smith illustrates that productive pondering is an active search process aimed at discovering meaning or resolving some puzzling issue and that such pondering is an essential part of what it means to "treasure up . . . the words of life."

Contrast the active mental effort needed to conduct this search process with Oliver Cowdery's cursory attempt to receive inspiration as described in Doctrine and Covenants 9. After Oliver unsuccessfully attempted to translate, the Lord told him that the privilege of translating would be taken from him because he "feared" (v. 11) and "did not continue as [he] commenced" (v. 5). Then the Lord explained that he had not understood what he must do to receive inspiration: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right" (D&C 9:7-8).

Study it out in the mind. According to Elder Neal A. Maxwell, the process of thoughtfully preparing to teach a lesson or present a talk is an invitation to the Holy Ghost to guide one's thinking. Elder Maxwell said further that the enlightened mind that results from having studied out an issue or topic is better prepared to receive additional insights when the talk or lesson is presented: "Studying out something in one's own mind is, in itself, an invitation to the Spirit in our preparations as well as in our presentations. We must not err, like Oliver Cowdery, by taking no thought except to ask God for his Spirit (D&C 9:7). The Lord is especially willing to take the lead of an already informed mind in which things have been 'studied out.' Additionally, if we already care about those to be taught, the Lord can inspire us with any customized counsel or emphasis which may be needed." [^6]

Because inspiration typically comes piecemeal, inspired insights are often not fully developed or clearly articulated when they first come to mind. Instead, they emerge gradually, "line upon line, precept upon precept" (D&C 98:12) and "revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge" (D&C 42:61). Emerging insights typically need to be studied out.

Prayer is a necessary part of the process of eliciting this developing knowledge, but the Lord's message to Oliver Cowdery indicates that prayer by itself is insufficient. One further way to study out a topic in preparation for a teaching or speaking assignment is for the teacher or speaker to write about what it means to him or her personally. The act of writing is a process of discovery that enables the writer to ponder on paper or on the screen of a computer terminal. Writing displays the writer's thoughts so they can be seen and evaluated. The process of reviewing one's writing stimulates the writer to think further. This process is generative, because it leads the writer to elaborate the emerging idea and to develop other, related ideas. The process of trying to articulate one's ideas and feelings in written words and sentences reveals one's thoughts in a manner that permits one to see them, to evaluate them, and to refine them. Donald Murray described the advantages of writing as a way of thinking: "Writing, in fact, is the most disciplined form of thinking. It allows us to be precise, to stand back and examine what we have thought, to see what our words really mean, to see if they stand up to our own critical eye, make sense, and will be understood by someone else." [^7]

Thus, the process of writing about ideas that emerge as teachers and speakers attempt to study out an issue or a topic enables them to engage in disciplined pondering. Disciplined pondering is not only focused and directed but more precise and more productive of significant insights. When I prepare a lesson or a speech, I frequently write about some parts of the subject to better understand it and to find out what the Lord wants me to say. I may set aside the manuscript when I present the lesson or talk, but having written about the subject helps me speak with greater clarity and with increased confidence.

Disciplined pondering can help teachers acquire the understanding needed to speak with conviction and assurance. The disciplined pondering that results from writing about the subject is one especially helpful way to "treasure up . . . the words of life" (D&C 84:85).

Seek confirmation. Frequent prayer should be part of the process of "studying out" a subject or principle that the teacher or speaker is preparing to teach or speak about. The procedure that the Lord outlined for Oliver Cowdery includes two steps: "You must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right" (D&C 9:8). The pronoun it in the first clause refers to the subject or principle that the teacher or speaker needs to study. The it in the second clause refers to the plan that the teacher has tentatively decided on. The process is not complete until the teacher has tested the proposed plan by taking it to the Lord and inquiring if "it be right." The Lord specified to Oliver Cowdery the criteria for understanding the Lord's answer in such a case: "And if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me" (D&C 9:8-9).

Attempting to resolve a problem or issue by studying it out in one's mind is a process of reasoning. Based on the Lord's response to Oliver Cowdery in Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9, Elder Dallin H. Oaks has suggested two general principles about the relationship between reason and revelation. First, he declares, "That relationship is sequential. Study and reason come first. Revelation comes second" (emphasis in original). [^8] Then he explains that reason without revelation is insufficient. Although study and reason may lead to a correct solution, only revelation can confirm it. Hence, reason and revelation are both necessary. [^9] Oliver failed because "he took no thought" (v. 7) except to ask for revelation. He could not receive confirmation, because he had neglected first to study the prolem out in his mind and then to develop a proposed solution.

Focus on an edifying message. According to the late Lowell Bennion, a good lesson is focused on one main idea or a single controlling purpose. [^10] Emerson Roy West claims that a good speech is similarly focused and uses an interesting analogy to illustrate this point. He suggests that speakers who have trouble focusing on a particular topic are "like a disorganized gardener[:] they pull out a few radishes, then some carrots, and then start picking beans, never completing any one task." [^11]

Speeches and lessons that lack focus tend to ramble. Rather than concentrating on a focal idea and developing it, the teacher or speaker glosses over a series of ideas without adequately developing any of them. Consequently, the presentation tends to be filled with clichÃ©s or half-baked abstractions that lack substance and concreteness.

The key question the teacher or speaker needs to answer is, To what extent is the message edifying? A speaker or teacher who desires to teach by the power of the Spirit must focus on a message that will "edify" the audience and strengthen their commitment to live the gospel; the Lord made this point very clear in Doctrine and Covenants 50:23: "And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness."

The best way for a teacher to ensure that the message is edifying is to focus on basic principles taught in the standard works and in the writings of the modern prophets. Scriptural principles may be illustrated with inspirational examples from other good literature or from personal experience, but the focus should be on the scriptural principle and examples should be spiritually uplifting rather than just emotionally appealing. To ensure that the message is edifying, a teacher or speaker should avoid speculating about esoteric questions or dwelling on fringe topics.

Presenting the Message by the Power of the Spirit

Improvise as moved upon by the Spirit. Before teachers or speakers begin to present the message, they should pray in faith that the guidance of the Holy Ghost will be present throughout the duration of their lesson or speech (D&C 19:38; 42:14). The teacher or speaker might ask the Lord specifically for help in identifying and responding to the needs of the class or audience and then be flexible and willing to improvise as guided by the Spirit. This responsiveness to the Spirit might mean departing from the planned presentation by skipping some parts, by making impromptu substitutions, or by elaborating on some points with new insights that come at the moment (D&C 100:6). This Spirit-guided spontaneity is a distinguishing characteristic of what it means to speak as one is "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 68:3). Such spontaneity helps the teacher provide the "customized counsel or emphasis" to which Elder Maxwell referred. [^12]

Pray for utterance. Teachers and speakers should humbly pray for the Holy Ghost to inspire their thinking and give them utterance. The Lord's promise to David Whitmer recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 14:8 is applicable in this situation: "If you shall ask the Father in my name, in faith believing, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance, that you may stand as a witness of the things of which you shall both hear and see and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation." This promise is based on the condition that David Whitmer ask for the Lord's help in a prayer of faith. If he does so, he is promised that he will receive the Holy Ghost, "which giveth utterance." Utterance is the ability to articulate thoughts and to express feelings in words and sentences that communicate clearly and effectively. This expressive ability is a blessing which comes from the Holy Ghost and is given in answer to prayer.

Avoid pedantry. The Lord's injunction that "every man [should] esteem his brother as himself" (D&C 38:24) applies to teachers just as much as it does to other members of the Church. Consequently, teachers and speakers should avoid using the opportunity to teach as a means of parading their knowledge. Arrogance hinders learning. The Lord warned against using position as a means of gratifying one's own pride or vain ambitions (D&C 121:36-37). Persons who desire to teach by the Spirit must avoid the intellectual smugness that sometimes leads teachers or speakers to respond in a disdainful or condescending manner to students or members of the audience they consider to be less knowledgeable than themselves. Such put-downs offend learners and cause the Spirit of the Lord to withdraw.

Testify. When called upon to teach a lesson or present a talk in church, a teacher has responsibility to bear witness of the truthfulness of the specific gospel principle being taught. To testify is to bear one's own witness of the truth. It is to publicly declare and attest that one has received revelation from the Holy Ghost certifying that that principle is true. The teacher should simply but boldly proclaim what he or she personally believes or knows to be true about that principle (D&C 80:4).

If moved by the Spirit, the teacher may briefly relate a spiritual experience that helped him or her gain a testimony of the principle being taught. In such a case, the teacher or speaker must refrain from exaggerating or embellishing the incident in any way and also from becoming so involved in retelling the experience that he or she forgets to bear testimony. The teacher should also be sensitive to the constraining influence of the Spirit: "Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no condemnation, and ye receive the Spirit through prayer; wherefore, without this there remaineth condemnation" (D&C 63:64).

Let the Spirit do the convincing. In the last verse of his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord states, "For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen" (D&C 1:39). In the middle of this statement, the Lord declares that "the Spirit beareth record." To bear record is to give testimony that substantiates and establishes the truth. One function of the Holy Ghost is to manifest the truthfulness of gospel principles as they are taught by humble servants of the Lord (Moroni 10:5). The evidence provided by the Holy Ghost is usually detectable not by the human senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell, or taste but by an additional spiritual sense. Spiritually manifested evidence provides the confirming witness that enables a receptive recipient to know for a surety that a principle is true and of God.

In their attempts to teach the gospel, teachers or speakers need not, and indeed should not, attempt to contrive emotional responses for their students or listeners. Elder Loren C. Dunn emphasized that teaching by the Spirit is much more than "telling inspirational stories or relating experiences that appeal to the emotions." [^13] He warned teachers not to confuse emotional appeals with the influence of the Spirit. To paraphrase Elder Dunn, the confirming influence of the Spirit may not be emotionally appealing, but it will be edifying and uplifting. Conversely, that which is emotionally appealing will not necessarily be edifying. [^14]

Doctrine and Covenants 100 contains a revelation given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon when they visited the small town of Perrysburg in western New York in October 1833. The Lord directed them to "lift up their voices" to the people in that area and to "speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts" (v. 5). Then the Lord added the following "commandment" and "promise": "But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things. And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say" (D&C 100:7-8).

I believe that the promise given to the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon applies to all who are called to teach the gospel to others. Inasmuch as we comply with the conditions of this promise, the Holy Ghost will "be shed forth in bearing record" of the truthfulness of the ideas we have taught.

Avoid being so self-reliant that the Spirit is excluded. During preparation and presentation, teachers or speakers must be careful not to exclude the Spirit by attempting to teach solely with their own learning (2 Nephi 28:4) or solely by the power of human reasoning and persuasion (1 Corinthians 2:1-5, 11-14). Teachers or speakers must recognize the limitations of human wisdom and reasoning as they apply to spiritual matters. They must acknowledge dependence on the Lord (D&C 59:21) and ask for his help in overcoming weaknesses in their reasoning and in their presentation skills. Teachers or speakers should pray to be able to speak with conviction while presenting the message the Lord wants presented.

Two verses near the end of section 46 present helpful advice that should help teachers and speakers prevent themselves from getting in the way when attempting to teach by the Spirit. First, whatever is attempted in the Spirit "must be done in the name of Christ" (D&C 46:31). Second, the teacher or speaker must "give thanks unto God in the Spirit" for any success experienced (D&C 46:32).

Conclusion

Teaching by the Spirit is a collaborative process that includes inspiration received by the teacher or speaker and confirmation experienced by the learner. Both are forms of revelation from the Holy Ghost. For the learning process to occur, both the teacher and the learner must have prepared themselves to be sensitive to the promptings of the Spirit through personal purity, humility, and obedience to the Lord's commandments. In addition, the teacher or speaker should seek to know and treasure up the word of the Lord.

Teachers and speakers should work to develop prayerfully prepared messages that will edify learners. They should present their message with Spirit-guided spontaneity and rely upon the Spirit to do the convincing. In making their presentation, they should take precautions to avoid pedantry and any form of self-reliance that might exclude the Spirit.

Members of the Church who serve in teaching assignments can and do receive revelation to guide their preparation and enhance their teaching. Learners can and do receive the witness of the Holy Ghost confirming that what they have been taught is true. These miracles happen day after day, week after week throughout the Church.

Members of the Church can increase their teaching effectiveness if they prepare themselves spiritually, put more effort into prayerfully preparing messages that edify, and rely upon the Lord to give them utterance.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal of Jared Carter, typescript, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 20.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973), 2:224-25.
[^3] For a further study of the United Firm, see Lyndon W. Cook, Joseph Smith and the Law of Consecration (Provo, Utah: Grandin Book, 1985), 57-67.
[^4] Milton V. Backman Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 144. Keith W. Perkins, "Land Ownership in Kirtland," in Historical Atlas of Mormonism, ed. S. Kent Brown, Donald Q. Cannon, and Richard H. Jackson (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 24.
[^5] Smith, History of the Church, 2:345.
[^6] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1958), 746.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] John Murdock to Julia Murdock Smith Dixon Middleton, 20 January 1859, in John Murdock Journal, typescript, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, 154-59.
[^9] Smith, History of the Church, 1:261-65.
[^10] John Murdock Journal, 20.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Ibid., 25.
[^14] Ibid., 25-26
