Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER TEN

Real Covenants and Real People

Craig J. Ostler

Craig J. Ostler is assistant professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

The Doctrine and Covenants contains many well-known revelations. Among them are the three degrees of glory, the ministry of the Savior in the spirit world following his crucifixion, revelations on the priesthood, and the signs of the Second Coming. Within them we find the answers to many of life's questions. There are also, however, some lesser-known revelations and passages that provide valuable insights and also have answers to questions. In some cases the questions and answers are of a more individual nature. A characteristic of these lesser-known revelations is that they are usually shorter, or the passages are quoted less often. They were often given for individuals who are also less known to members of the Church today. As a result, we may tend to give less attention to these revelations in our personal study and class discussions and thus miss the important insights they provide. Indeed, there may even be those who question why such revelations are included in the Doctrine and Covenants. An examination of a few of these "lesser-known" revelations and passages illustrates their value and suggests a few keys that we might apply to our study of other lesser-known revelations.

Doctrine and Covenants 79 and 80

The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 79 and 80 were received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in March 1832. They are calls to missionary service. Section 79 was directed to Jared Carter, and section 80 to Stephen Burnett. The insight gained from these revelations comes from the contrast in the mission calls. Jared Carter was called specifically to "go again into the eastern countries" (D&C 79:1). He had just returned from serving as a missionary for nearly six months in that very same area a few weeks before this revelation was received. In contrast, Stephen Burnett was told "go ye and preach my gospel, whether to the north or to the south, to the east or to the west, it mattereth not, for ye cannot go amiss" (D&C 80:3).

The first missionary was given a specific area of assignment, and the second missionary was told he could go anywhere. Apparently there are times and circumstances in which it matters very much where an individual is called to serve and other times when the area of assignment is not as important. I have seen this truth in my own life. For example, there have been occasions when it was very important that I be assigned as a home teacher to a particular family—I was so informed by my priesthood leaders. On other occasions, I was informed that it really did not matter where I gave my service; as my priesthood leader felt that I could serve just about anywhere, or, in the words of the Lord to Stephen Burnett, "it mattereth not, for you cannot go amiss."

The experience of Jared Carter when he responded to the Lord's call to return to the eastern countries illustrates the importance of that assignment. He accepted the call to return to the area of his previous mission with enthusiasm. After his service in this call came to an end, he recorded in his journal: "Now while I make this record, I remember the goodness of the Lord to me in the mission that I have lately been to in the East. I have enjoyed my health continuely and the Lord, not withstanding the great opposition to the glorious work, he has blessed me . . . in this mission in which I have been gone six months and two days. The Lord has permitted me to administer the gospel to 79 souls and many others by my instrumentality have been convinced of this most glorious work, where I have been in this mission." [^1]

The importance of serving a second time in the same calling is demonstrated by the many individuals who received the gospel due to Jared Carter's repeat service. This revelation reminds those who are called to the same callings more than once that the Lord is aware of their lives and talents and is mindful of those whom they may bless in their repeat service.

Doctrine and Covenants 96

Doctrine and Covenants 96 contains another lesser-known passage that provides important insight. In verses 6 through 9, John Johnson was told by the Lord that his offering was accepted and that his prayers were heard. Before this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his wife, Emma, had lived with John and his wife, Elsa, on their farm in Hiram, Ohio. On this farm the leading elders of the Church met in conference and determined to publish a selection of the revelations that had been received. They called that collection the Book of Commandments. [^2] Here Joseph and Sidney Rigdon received the vision of the three degrees of glory while they were engaged in the translation of the Bible.

The Lord instructed Joseph the Prophet that "it is expedient in me that he [John Johnson] should become a member of the order" (D&C 96:8). The order of which he was to become a member was a business firm composed of some of the leading elders of the Church and was referred to as the United Order or United Firm. Members of this order covenanted to consecrate their surplus property and business profits for the poor and needy of the Church. [^3] At this time, as indicated in section 96, the order had negotiated the purchase of a farm from Peter French that included a house, or inn. As a member of the order, John was instructed by the Lord that he was to "seek diligently to take away incumbrances that are upon the house named among you" (D&C 96:9).

This simple passage in the Doctrine and Covenants had a profound influence in the life of John Johnson and the history of the Church. John sold his home and farm in Hiram, Ohio, as part of honoring the covenant he had made as a member of the order. The large frame home is still standing today, along with several other buildings on the property. In fact, the home is used as a visitors center for the Church. It is evident that John was a prosperous farmer in the community. The proceeds from the sale of his farm in Hiram were combined with the money of the order to pay the mortgage on the Peter French farm. [^4] It was on a part of this land that the Kirtland Temple was built. This temple and the blessings received in it (among them the preparatory ordinances of the endowment), many great spiritual manifestations, and the long-awaited restoration of priesthood keys held by Moses, Elias, and Elijah were made possible in part by this one man's offering. Therefore, an obscure commandment in the Doctrine and Covenants to an individual not commonly known shows the importance of the covenants made by real people of the 1830s. Further, the implication is that members today who keep their covenant of consecrating their worldly wealth and time may someday be given the same promise the Lord gave to John Johnson, "Unto whom I give a promise of eternal life inasmuch as he keepeth my commandments from henceforth" (D&C 96:6).

Doctrine and Covenants 108

Doctrine and Covenants 108, addressed to Lyman Sherman, illustrates a valuable personal application for many Saints today. Little is known about why this section was given. Also, unlike the revelations previously discussed, our insight into its value is not enhanced by an understanding of the life of Lyman Sherman as we have record of it today. In fact, it has been my own experience as a bishop that has helped me understand this revelation. I have found that the Lord's words to Brother Sherman offer hope for those within the Church who may be prompted by the Spirit of the Lord to visit with their bishop concerning their standing before the Lord. On account of similar spiritual promptings, Lyman Sherman went to the Prophet Joseph Smith and expressed his feelings: "I have been wrought upon to make known to you my feelings and desires, and was promised that I should have a revelation which should make known my duty." [^5] As a result, Joseph received the following: "Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Lyman: Your sins are forgiven you, because you have obeyed my voice in coming up hither this morning to receive counsel of him whom I have appointed. Therefore, let your soul be at rest concerning your spiritual standing" (D&C 108:1-2).

This may not have been the first time Lyman was prompted to visit with his priesthood leader concerning his spiritual standing. The Lord admonished Lyman to "resist no more my voice" (D&C 108:2). How long he had been receiving promptings from the Lord to visit with the Prophet is not known. It is evident, however, that his anxiety over his spiritual standing could have been of a shorter length if he had not earlier resisted the Lord's voice to go to the Prophet. In like manner, there are members today who resist visiting with their priesthood leaders concerning their spiritual standing, even though the Lord has prompted them to do so many times. How sweet is the comforting solace that comes from meeting with one's bishop and receiving the assurance that one can be at peace concerning his or her spiritual standing before the Lord. That peace may not come during the initial interview, but, as Lyman Sherman learned, as the individual is able to "receive counsel of him whom I [the Lord] have appointed," forgiveness will come. Additional strength will come as the member follows the further counsel given to Lyman in this revelation: "And arise up and be more careful henceforth in observing your vows, which you have made and do make, and you shall be blessed with exceeding great blessings" (D&C 108:3).

Doctrine and Covenants 117

When I was teaching a class on the Doctrine and Covenants, one of the students related that she had been approached by a friend of another faith, who asked, "Do you know who Oliver Granger was?" She simply answered that she had never heard of him. The friend's reaction took her by surprise: "Well, that just proves that Joseph Smith was a false prophet!" The friend then referred to the revelation contained in Doctrine and Covenants 117:12: "And again, I say unto you, I remember my servant Oliver Granger; behold, verily I say unto him that his name shall be had in sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord."

It appeared obvious to the friend that because the student did not know who Oliver Granger was, this revelation was not true. A closer reading of the passage reveals that more important than having any other individual remember Oliver Granger is that the Lord indicated that he remembered his servant Oliver Granger. No doubt through the succeeding generations, the Lord still remembers Oliver and holds his name in sacred remembrance. Who was Oliver Granger and what covenant did he make to be held in sacred esteem by the Lord?

"Oliver Granger was a man of faith and business ability—two qualities which form a rare combination. . . . When the Prophet fled from Kirtland, he appointed Granger his business agent, and so well did he perform this duty that he was commended by business men." [^6] This information concerning Oliver Granger makes the following instructions from the Lord easier to understand: "Therefore, let him contend earnestly for the redemption of the First Presidency of my Church, saith the Lord; and when he falls he shall rise again, for his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase, saith the Lord" (D&C 117:13).

The covenant that Oliver Granger made to put his business talents to work on behalf of the First Presidency later led to another blessing. "At a conference held at Quincy, (Illinois), May 4th to 6th, 1839, he was appointed to return to Kirtland and take charge of the Temple and Church there." [^7] Thus he also fulfilled the Lord's command in this same revelation: "Verily I say unto you, let all my servants in the land of Kirtland remember the Lord their God, and mine house also, to keep and preserve it holy, and to overthrow the moneychangers in mine own due time, saith the Lord." (D&C 117:16).

The story of this man and the lessons we can learn for our own lives are revealed in the sacrifice he made to be the Prophet's business agent. Being a man of sound business sense and reputation, Oliver might have become a very wealthy man. Indeed, his name might be more commonly known among members of the Church had he become a man of immense wealth. The Lord recognizes the sacrifice of opportunity for wealth made by his servants. The Lord assured Oliver that "his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase" (D&C 117:13), and it is true in the lives of Saints today. Throughout the Church are those who could obtain more wealth, but that might require less service in the kingdom. The Lord, however, does not count the value of his children according to the amount of tithes and offerings they contribute to the kingdom. The Lord may receive their sacrifice as being more sacred to him than their increase.

The answers to difficult decisions concerning wealth versus service may be found in this revelation. Oliver Granger was a man who paved the way for those who sacrifice worldly wealth to give service in the kingdom. Therefore, with the Lord, I feel to exclaim, "Let no man despise my servant Oliver Granger, but let the blessings of my people be on him forever and ever" (D&C 117:15).

Doctrine and Covenants 99

Doctrine and Covenants 99 is another revelation that might be classified as a lesser-known section. This revelation was a call for John Murdock to proclaim the gospel. An understanding of the historical background and the individual to whom the revelation was addressed may help the reader to apply the principles found in this section. The first verse elicits our interest because Brother Murdock was called to preach the gospel "in the midst of persecution and wickedness" (D&C 99:1). In a later verse, the Lord counseled John to send his children to "the bishop in Zion" (D&C 99:6).

John Murdock, at the time of this missionary call, was a widower left to bring up five children at the death of his wife. Two of his children had been given to Joseph the Prophet and his wife, Emma, to rear as their own. John's beloved wife, Julia, had died in giving birth to twins. About the same time Emma Smith had also given birth to twins, both of whom died within hours of their birth. John, having no relatives who had accepted the fulness of the restored gospel and to whom he could entrust the babies, [^8] took his motherless babies to Emma. The twins, a boy and a girl, were named Joseph and Julia.

By the time this revelation was received, in August 1832, the baby Joseph had become the first martyr for the gospel. At the time of the baby's death, Joseph and Emma resided with John Johnson and his wife, Elsa, on their farm in Hiram, Ohio. On the evening of 24 March 1832, a mob entered the Johnson home and dragged the Prophet Joseph from his room. Emma and Joseph had been taking turns caring for the eleven-month-old twins, who were seriously ill with measles. Emma had nursed the children, and Joseph was sleeping in the trundle bed with little Joseph lying on his chest. The mob took the Prophet but left little Joseph behind to the ravages of the cold that swept into the room. On March 29, on account of the cold and the measles, the not-quite-year-old baby boy died. [^9] John Murdock was on a mission at the time. When he returned he recorded in his journal: "[I] arrived in Ohio, in the Church in the month of June, about 12 months after leaving my children. . . . arrived there about the 1st of June, found my little son Joseph had died. I had left my eldest son Orrice with Benjamin Bragg and John with Philo Judd and Phebe with Syrenus Burnet. I had to pay them all full price for keeping my children during my absence. But my daughter was still doing well with Bro. Joseph, the Prophet." [^10]

At this time Orrice was seven years old; John, six; and Phebe, four. These were the children whom, in obeying the instructions contained in the revelation, John Murdock was to send to Zion to stay with the family of Bishop Edward Partridge. Again we read from John's journal: "I then continued with the church preaching to them and strengthening them and regaining my health till the month of Aug. when I received the Revelation recorded in the Book of Covenants [D&C], page 206, at which time I immediately commenced to arrange my business and provide for my children and send them up to the Bishop in Zion, which I did by the hand of Bro. Caleb Baldwin in Sept. I gave him ten dollars a head for carrying up my 3 eldest children." [^11]

In addition to clarifying the instructions concerning the children to be sent to Zion, John's journal also gives examples of the doctrine of the "law of representation" in which the Lord had told John that "thou art called to go into the eastern countries from house to house, from village to village, and from city to city, to proclaim mine everlasting gospel unto the inhabitants thereof, in the midst of persecution and wickedness. . . . And who receiveth you receiveth me. . . . And whoso rejecteth you shall be rejected of my Father and his house; and you shall cleanse your feet in the secret places by the way for a testimony against them" (D&C 99:1-2, 4).

He recorded: "I then settled my business and on the 24th of Sept. I visited Father Clapp's family [his deceased wife's father and family] preached the gospel to them. They were very unbelieving and hard. I returned to the brethren in Kirtland on the 25th and on the 27th started, in company with Brother Zebedie Coltrin, and on that day called on Mr. Conning's family, Father Clapp's family and Benjamin Blich's family; all unbelieving. Stayed with Bro. Kingsbury, in Painesville, Preached in the evening. He gave each of us 75Â¢ God bless him. Met with a Dr. Matthews, a very wicked man, and [he] reviled against us, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine we taught. We bore testimony according to the Commandment and the Lord helped us in tending to the ordinance." [^12]

These revelations were given to real people who made real covenants with the Lord to serve him. These revelations profoundly influenced the lives of these people. The Lord was mindful of John Murdock's faithfulness in keeping the commandments given to him in the revelation. He had truly sacrificed to bring forth the kingdom of God.

The placement of section 99 in the Doctrine and Covenants positions it in the chronological context of the Saints' persecutions in and expulsion from Jackson County, Missouri, during 1833. Actually, the revelation was received a year earlier, in August 1832. But, the placement of this section directs our attention to the fact that John Murdock had sent his children to Zion and they had been there without father or mother during that troubled time. As recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 103, the Lord called for an army to march to Missouri to redeem the Saints who had been driven from their homes and property. John Murdock had a double interest in going with the army (which became known as Zion's Camp). He had not seen his three eldest children in more than a year. What had happened to these children sent to Zion at the instructions of the Lord? At the end of the journey to Zion, the little army of Saints was disbanded at Fishing River. John wrote concerning his little daughter: "On the 30th [of June 1834], word came to me that my daughter Phebe was sick nigh unto Death, of Cholera, and Bro. A. [Algernon] S. [Sidney] Gilbert, with whom she lived was dead. I immediately went and took care of her till July 6th when the Spirit left the body just at the break of day, being 6 years, 3 months, 27 days old." [^13]

His journal continues with the names of two young men, Reid Peck and Henry Rawlins, being blessed for their help as they "assisted me and we buried her by little after sun rise in the morning. She was decently laid out, and they dug a grave and we laid 2 split shakes in the bottom and one each side and laid in some straw, and laid the corpse on it, laid 2 sticks across and covered it over, and that was her coffin." [^14]

What may have been passed over as insignificant verses of the Doctrine and Covenants mean more to us when we understand the real people involved and the influence their real covenants had in their lives.

Doctrine and Covenants 88

John Murdock was involved in another covenant which the Lord made with the elders in the School of the Prophets at Kirtland. In the revelation known as the Olive Leaf (D&C 88), the Lord gave the elders gathered the following promise:

"And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

"Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will.

"Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you; . . . And I give unto you, who are the first laborers in this last kingdom, a commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean;

"That I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God, that you are clean from the blood of this wicked generation; that I may fulfil this promise, this great and last promise, which I have made unto you, when I will" (D&C 88:67-69, 74-75).

This revelation was given for real people. These were not idle promises to be passed over lightly. They were and are real covenants that the Lord made with his Saints. A fulfillment of this "great and last promise" was recorded by John Murdock in his journal. Referring to a prayer meeting held in the Prophet Joseph Smith's quarters at the Newell K. Whitney store in Kirtland, Ohio, Brother Murdock wrote: "In one of these meetings the Prophet told us, if we could humble ourselves before God, and exercise strong faith, we should see the face of the Lord. And about midday the visions of my mind were opened, and the eyes of my understanding were enlightened, and I saw the form of a man, most lovely, the visage of his face was sound and fair as the sun. His hair a bright silver grey, curled in most majestic form, His eyes a keen penetrating blue, and the skin of his neck a most beautiful white and he was covered from the neck to the feet with a loose garment, pure white, whiter than any garment I have ever before seen. His countenance was most penetrating, and yet most lovely. And while I was endeavoring to comprehend the whole personage from head to feet it slipped from me, and the vision was closed up. But it left on my mind the impression of love, for months, that I never before felt to that degree." [^15]

Conclusion

The lesser-known revelations and passages of the Doctrine and Covenants illustrate how wise it is to include such sections in this important book of answers. A few moments of pondering their messages will bring us renewed commitment to live the restored gospel and an appreciation for the real people with whom the Lord made real covenants. Thus we see that as we study and teach the Doctrine and Covenants, it is important to give attention to revelations that are lesser known as well as those with which we are more familiar. Understanding the lives and circumstances of those individuals who were addressed in the revelations brings a greater appreciation of the influence these revelations had in the lives of early Church members as well as the understanding and strength they offer for students of the Doctrine and Covenants today.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Zion Shall Flourish," Instructor, February 1959, 33.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 362.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Brigham Young taught that "Zion will extend, eventually, all over the world"; in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 9:138. Because this is a millennial condition and will happen following the establishment of the city of the New Jerusalem, it is only mentioned here.
[^5] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 160.
[^6] Ibid., 362.
[^7] See James Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible, ed. Frederick C. Grant and H. H. Rowley, rev. ed. (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1963), 689-90.
[^8] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 248.
[^9] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:427-28.
[^10] Deseret News, 23 May 1931, as cited in Roy W. Doxey, Zion in the Last Days (Salt Lake City: Olympus Publishing, 1965), 55.
[^11] The destruction of Missouri fulfilled a prophecy of Joseph Smith to General Doniphan. See B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century One, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930), vol. 1, chapter 39.
[^12] This is an allusion to the Song of Solomon. Most people are aware that Joseph Smith said the Song of Solomon was not inspired; they may wonder why the Lord used it here. Perhaps the author of the Song of Solomon was quoting from something else or perhaps some things in it are inspired.
[^13] Ibid., 25.
[^14] Ibid., 25-26
[^15] Ibid., 21.
