Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER ELEVEN

When Will Zion Be Redeemed?

Monte S. Nyman

Monte S. Nyman is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

When will Zion be redeemed? From the very beginning of the history of the Church when the concept of the building of a Zion society was introduced, there has been much speculation, much misinformation, and many ideas put forth about when and how Zion will be redeemed. The Lord invites the members of the Church to search the scriptures and avoid the confusion of speculation. As we seek an answer to our question, we must first determine the meaning of the term Zion.

President David O. McKay said, "Zion means, literally, a 'sunny place,' or 'sunny mountain.' It first designated an eminence in Palestine on which Jerusalem is built. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Zion has three designations: first, the land of America; second, a specific place of gathering; and third, the pure in heart." [^1] Each one of these Doctrine and Covenants definitions given by President McKay will be briefly analyzed, but the redemption of Zion, the "specific place of gathering," or city of the New Jerusalem, will be emphasized.

Zion as the Land of America

The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion—where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The Prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it." [^2]

The whole of North and South America is Zion. General Mormon also understood this definition of Zion. In Alma we read, "And it came to pass that when he had poured out his soul to God, he [General Mormon] named all the land which was south of the land Desolation, yea, and in fine, all the land, both on the north and on the south—a chosen land, and the land of liberty" (Alma 46:17). As the Prophet Joseph Smith said, when elders will take up the scriptures and the prophecies and look at them, they will find that to be the case. [^3] When we accept this definition of Zion, we can understand the prophecies spoken by the ancient prophets in a new light.

A Specific Place of Gathering

The Lord revealed to the Latter-day Saints that the specific place of gathering was Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, the center place of Zion (D&C 57:3). The center place introduces another scripture related to the gathering of the Saints. The prophet Isaiah spoke of enlarging the tent of Israel—of lengthening its cords and strengthening its stakes (Isaiah 54:2). At the time of Moses, the tabernacle was a tent, which was picked up and carried. It was, in effect, a portable temple. After that time, the concept of Israel being gathered into a tent was familiar among the prophets.

The "tent of Israel" has great importance to Latter-day Saints. No other group in the Christian world uses the term stake, but we speak of the thousands of stakes of Zion. This term has direct reference to the tent of Israel. To set up a tent, particularly a large tent, you must have at least one large center pole held up by cords or ropes secured to stakes driven into the ground. The center pole, or the center place, cannot be set up until there are stakes established all the way around it. Similarly, Zion must have stakes all the way around the New Jerusalem (Independence, Missouri) before the tent of Israel will be established.

We now have many places of gathering, stakes established all around Jackson County, and are coming to the time of establishing a center place. Every state in the United States has one or more stakes, and there are stakes in Canada, Mexico, and Central American countries. Stakes are also established throughout other parts of the world, but the Lord defined Independence, Missouri, as the center of "the land which I have appointed . . . for the gathering of the saints . . . the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion" (D&C 57:1-2). Therefore, it seems that the tent concept refers to the Americas and specifically to North America, which was the initial place appointed for the gathering. Now, as the Church, or the tent of Israel, is enlarged, it will be necessary, as Isaiah says, to "lengthen [the] cords and strengthen [the] stakes." This strengthening will enable Zion to be established successfully.

The Pure in Heart

The Doctrine and Covenants describes the people who inhabit the land of Zion as the pure in heart (D&C 97:21). Earlier the Lord had given the formula for becoming pure in heart: "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:67-68).

The people who had gathered to Jackson County, Missouri, and were driven out were commanded to build a temple in Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 95:8), where they could work toward perfection and becoming pure in heart. The Lord declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith that the house of Zion was to be "For a place of thanksgiving for all saints, and for a place of instruction for all those who are called to the work of the ministry in all their several callings and offices; that they may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in theory, in principle, and in doctrine, in all things pertaining to the kingdom of God on the earth, the keys of which kingdom have been conferred upon you" (D&C 97:13-14).

Becoming pure in heart is a process. Through the instruction received in the temple and through serving in various callings, the people would become perfected in understanding. The perfection of understanding and an eye single to the glory of God would help them become pure in heart. If the temple was built and not defiled, the Lord's glory would rest upon it. "Yea, and [the Lord's] presence shall be there, for [he] will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God" (D&C 97:16). Thus will be fulfilled the beatitude: "Blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God" (3 Nephi 12:8; Matthew 5:8).

To establish a center place of Zion, the Lord must have a Zion people. Therefore, the place to begin to establish Zion is in the individual. The whole idea of the gospel is to make ourselves pure in heart. Then when enough people seeking to become pure in heart gather together in a designated place, a stake of Zion is established. When a center place is established, surrounded by stakes of Zion, the stakes will be strengthened and the cords will be lengthened to include North and South America and even the whole world as part of the Zion of our God. [^4] The Lord promised these blessings to the people gathered in Ohio in 1833: "And, now, behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible. And the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there; and he hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high tower" (D&C 97:18-20).

Those people failed; therefore, this promise is to be fulfilled later. Zion's extension to North and South America and the whole world may not be completely fulfilled until the end of the Millennium, but we should work toward this goal.

Our Greatest Object

With the restoration of the gospel and the establishment of the Church in 1830, the Prophet Joseph Smith received numerous revelations for various individuals to "seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 6:6; 11:6; 12:6; 14:6). On one occasion, the Prophet said, "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object." [^5] Every dispensation in the history of the world has been given the same commandment: to seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion. It will be accomplished in this dispensation, although the early members of the Church were given the opportunity and failed.

New Jerusalem of the Seed of Joseph

Regarding the city of the New Jerusalem in America, the Lord talked about the day of calling and the day of choosing (D&C 105:35). The day of calling seems to be the one that was issued in Doctrine and Covenants 58. The members of the Colesville Branch had just moved to the land of Independence, Missouri, the center place of Zion (D&C 57) and were given further information concerning the future glory of Zion. The Lord revealed: "Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation. For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand" (D&C 58:3-4).

A careful reading shows that the Lord told the Saints that they were not going to establish the city of Zion at that time but that a great period of tribulation yet awaited them. The Lord further stated their purposes in going to Jackson County at this time: "Behold, verily I say unto you, for this cause I have sent you—that you might be obedient, and that your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony of the things which are to come" (D&C 58:6). It was an individual test for these people to go into Jackson County to see if they would be obedient to the things the Lord had commanded. Also, it was important that their "hearts might be prepared to bear testimony." To establish Zion in the future, the Lord needed individuals who had been there, to bear testimony of the land.

The second purpose of the Saints' going to Independence was that the Saints "might be honored in laying the foundation, and in bearing record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand" (D&C 58:7). Though the Saints failed to comprehend their immediate purpose in going to the land, they were told that they were only going to lay the foundation of Zion.

The third and final reason for sending the Saints to Missouri was "that a feast of fat things might be prepared for the poor; yea, a feast of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, that the earth may know that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail. Yea, a supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all nations shall be invited" (D&C 58:8-9). Two questions arise from this statement. First, what is the feast of fat things? and second, what prophets foretold it?

Searching the scriptures reveals that the feast of fat things is related to the law of consecration and stewardship. It is a law that will bless the poor and eliminate poverty (D&C 42:30-34; 51:7-15). It is a law that will bring about an equality among the Saints—not in the sense that we usually think of but an equality in which all are equal because there is "no respect to persons as to those who [stand] in need" (Alma 1:30). It is a law which will allow the Saints to "prosper and become far more wealthy than those who [do] not belong to [the] church" (Alma 1:31). It is the law that will be lived in Zion, the only law upon which Zion can be built (D&C 51:2-3; 104:15-18; 105:3-5, 34). It is a privilege for the Saints, said the Lord to Edward Partridge, to establish this law (D&C 51:15).

What prophets foretold the feast of fat things? Although all of the prophets spoke generally of Zion as North and South America, [^6] Isaiah was the prophet who specifically foretold of the feast of fat things. He prophesied that the Lord will reign in Mount Zion (Isaiah 24:23) and the strong people shall glorify the Lord (Isaiah 25:3). "For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall" (Isaiah 25:4).

The law of consecration was to eliminate poverty. The places of refuge for the Saints were the stakes of Zion, as the Lord revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 115:5-6; 124:36). The strangers (Gentiles) are to be brought low (Isaiah 25:5), and then, the Lord said: "And in this mountain (of Zion or America) shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined" (Isaiah 25:6).

Isaiah said "all people" would be invited to the feast. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said "all nations shall be invited" (D&C 58:9), but the invitations are to be extended to the nations in a certain order. "First, the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble; and after that cometh the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come" (D&C 58:10-11).

The first invited to the feast are the rich and the learned, the Gentile nations of the earth. The word nations is often translated "Gentiles." [^7] In the revelation in which he introduced the law of consecration to remember the poor (D&C 42:30-38), the Lord declared: "For it shall come to pass, that which I spake by the mouths of my prophets shall be fulfilled; for I will consecrate of the riches of those who embrace my gospel among the Gentiles unto the poor of my people who are of the house of Israel"(D&C 42:39). Again the Lord referred to what he spake by the mouths of the prophets, and he equated the Gentiles with riches. After the rich and the learned are invited, the "poor of [the Lord's] people who are the house of Israel" (D&C 42:39) are to be invited. One purpose of the revelation of the gospel in the latter days was "that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets" (D&C 1:18). The Lord's use of the exact words of the prophets in his revelations to the Latter-day Saints is not coincidental. It is given to us to be able to interpret the prophets and to verify the revelation. As Nephi said, "In the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass" (2 Nephi 25:7).

As the Colesville Branch moved into Jackson County in 1831, the inhabitants of Missouri (the Gentiles) were given the opportunity to accept the gospel, come in and be numbered with Israel, and help build Zion. They rejected that opportunity by driving out the Saints; when the rejection is full, the fulness of the Gentiles will have come to pass (3 Nephi 16:10; D&C 45:28-29). Nevertheless, the mission of the Saints was not a total failure. The Lord said that he had spoken to the Saints "that the testimony might go forth from Zion, yea, from the mouth of the city of the heritage of God" (D&C 58:13). The mission of the early Saints who went to Missouri in 1831 was to bear testimony of the land. They were now qualified to bear that testimony.

The Saints were driven out of Jackson County in 1833. A revelation was given to them concerning why they had been driven out. They had not been a people who were pure in heart. "There were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances. They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble. In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me" (D&C 101:6-8).

Two months later, the Lord gave the early members of the Church the opportunity to go back and endeavor to redeem their brethren who were driven from Zion (D&C 103:1-2). He decreed then that if they would hearken unto his counsel, they should "begin to prevail against mine enemies from this very hour" (D&C 103:6). Zion's Camp was organized to redeem Zion. Four months later, after they had failed in their attempt, the Lord gave them additional counsel. In that revelation (D&C 105), he repeats that they had not been obedient (v. 3), they had been full of all manner of evil (v. 3), they would not impart of their substance to the poor (v. 3), and they had not been united according to the law of the celestial kingdom, as was required (v. 4). He further stated that the only way that Zion will ever be built up is upon the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom (v. 5).

Prerequisites for Redeeming Zion

The Lord revealed that his elders must wait for a little season before Zion will be redeemed. He did not define the length of a "little season" but outlined eight things that must be accomplished before that redemption will come to pass. Actually nine events must occur; the Lord had revealed another in a revelation previously received. The Lord promised those who would gather to return to Missouri (Zion's Camp) that "the redemption of Zion must needs come by power; therefore, I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel. For ye are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham, and ye must needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm" (D&C 103:15-17).

The man like unto Moses is the president of the Church, the president of the high priesthood (D&C 107:91-92). That man is the mouthpiece of the Lord, as was Moses. Other men may receive personal revelation, but the one to whom the Lord speaks directly to guide his Church is its president (Numbers 12).

Elder John A. Widtsoe has verified scripturally that the man like unto Moses is the president of the Church: "In the early days of the Church, persecution raged against the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri. For the comfort of the people, the Lord gave several revelations. In one, he promised, 'I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel' (D&C 103:16). There have been many conjectures concerning this statement. There have even been misguided men who have declared themselves to be this man 'like as Moses.'

"Yet, the meaning as set forth in the scriptures is very simple. In modern revelation, the President of the Church is frequently compared to Moses. Soon after the organization of the Church, the Lord said, 'no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses' (D&C 28:2). In one of the greatest revelations upon Priesthood, this is more specifically expressed: 'The duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses' (D&C 107:91).

"The discussion of this question among the Saints, led to the following statement in the Times and Seasons (6:922) by John Taylor, then the editor: 'The President [of the Church] stands in the Church as Moses did to the children of Israel, according to the revelations.'" [^8]

The Lord will raise up the man who will lead the children of Israel back to build up the city of the New Jerusalem (D&C 103:16). That man is the President of the Church. He may be the present president of the Church or any one of his successors.

Doctrine and Covenants 105 outlines the rest of the nine prerequisites for the redemption of Zion. The people must receive and be taught through their temple endowment. The Lord instituted the endowment "that [the elders] themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands. And this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with power from on high" (D&C 105:10-11). Zion will never be established except by a people who receive and live up to their temple endowment, which is to help them become pure in heart (D&C 97:12-16). This revelation was given in 1834, and the Kirtland Temple was completed two years later, in 1836. The dedication of the temple on 3 April 1836 was a great historical incident spoken of by the prophets. The collective outpouring of the Spirit accompanied this dedication. [^9] Yet that endowment of spiritual power does not fulfill the prophecy; each member must be personally endowed as well.

The people must also be taught the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ more perfectly at the temple of the Lord. The temple is the Lord's university. It is a degree-granting university, fully accredited in every aspect, in which we prepare ourselves for the celestial degree. Therefore, when the Lord stated that the Saints must be taught more perfectly, he was referring to the building of the temple and the receiving of personal endowments. In the temple endowment, we are instructed how to live; then we covenant to live as we have been instructed. Doing work for our dead also brings us personal blessings of increased knowledge. It is true that to bring our ancestors out of the spirit world, we must vicariously perform their temple ordinances. That is a vital and integral doctrine of the gospel. But we are also beneficiaries because we have a constant reminder of those covenants, better enabling us to know how to live and what the Lord requires at our hands. With this knowledge, we may become a pure people, a Zion people, ready to establish the center place of Zion in the tent of Israel. If the relatively few Saints in 1833 who had not received their temple endowments could have redeemed Zion had they hearkened to the Lord, certainly we now have enough temples built and people endowed for Zion to be redeemed if the rest of the Lord's prerequisites are met.

The third prerequisite of the redemption of Zion is that when the people are prepared, the Lord will fight the Saints' battles for them. To the elders of the Church, he says: "For behold, I do not require at [your] hands to fight the battles of Zion; for, as I said in a former commandment [D&C 98:37], even so will I fulfil—I will fight your battles" (D&C 105:14). Zion's Camp had been offered divine intervention but had not been faithful (D&C 105:15-19). The Lord had told Zion's Camp four months earlier that from that very day he would give them power to prevail over their enemies (D&C 103:6). The same promise is applicable to us. From this very day, if we will become the Zion people that we have the potential of being, the Lord will fight our battles. But if we again let jarrings and contentions and the designs of the world enter our lives, the Lord will not redeem Zion.

We occasionally hear that Heber C. Kimball prophesied that there would not be a yellow dog left to wag its tail in resistance to the Saints' return to Jackson County. [^10] This prophecy has been tied to another prophecy—that Zion will be swept clean. These are actually two separate prophecies and should not be linked together. The sweeping clean of Missouri may have already been fulfilled. During the Civil War, opposing factions called the Bushwhackers and the Jayhawkers battled in Missouri. Through these and other battles, Zion, or Missouri, was swept clean, leaving only chimneys in place of farms and houses. [^11] The yellow dog prophecy may be referring to another kind of resistance. The return of specified Saints to Missouri will come about in a natural way; they will have no resistance from the inhabitants. Today, many members live happily in Missouri without resistance. The Lord said he would fight our battles; he will take care of whatever resistance is raised if we trust him.

The fourth prerequisite for redeeming Zion is the establishment of stakes around the center place, New Jerusalem. The Lord commanded: "that as many as have come up hither, that can stay in the region round about, let them stay; and those that cannot stay, who have families in the east, let them tarry for a little season, inasmuch as my servant Joseph shall appoint unto them" (D&C 105:20-21).

The people dwelling in the regions round about as appointed seems to refer to the establishment of stakes around the New Jerusalem for the center place, or center pole, of the tent of Israel to be put in place. Earlier, when the members of the Church were under great persecution, the Lord had declared that Zion would "not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered" (D&C 101:17). The pure in heart would return "that the prophets might be fulfilled" (D&C 101:19). Then he would appoint other places of gathering, which would "be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion" (D&C 101:21). (Note again the association with the tabernacle of Moses.) The Lord then admonished, "And let all my people who dwell in the regions round about be very faithful, and prayerful, and humble before me, and reveal not the things which I have revealed unto them, until it is wisdom in me that they should be revealed. Talk not of judgments, neither boast of faith nor of mighty works, but carefully gather together, as much in one region as can be, consistently with the feelings of the people" (D&C 105:23-24).

To understand the Lord's instructions not to disclose or boast of the revelation concerning Zion, we must know the background of what had taken place there. In 1831, the Saints arrived in Independence in the midst of a rough group of settlers. There, they boasted of building up Zion and implied that they were going to drive out all of the inhabitants. This attitude undoubtedly contributed to their being driven out. The Lord chastised the Saints for their behavior and admonished them to go about their future building up of stakes quietly, without conceit, living the gospel and preparing themselves for the Second Coming.

The Lord instructs the people to "find favor in the eyes of the people, until the army of Israel becomes very great" (D&C 105:26). This is the fifth prerequisite of the redemption of Zion. Estimates of the number of people driven out of Missouri range from approximately three thousand to twelve thousand. The total membership of the Church at the time is not known, but lower estimates seem more correct. Still, when we compare the larger number (twelve thousand) to our present Church membership (nearly ten million), we can see that the army of Israel has become very great. We do not know how many soldiers the Lord requires in his army of Israel, but it's obvious that his ranks have grown tremendously. As Church membership continues to skyrocket, we need not fear that the Lord will have sufficient men and women to bring to pass his great work of redeeming Zion.

The sixth prerequisite of the redemption of Zion concerns the purchase, not conquest, of the land of New Jerusalem. The Lord will "soften the hearts of the people, as [he] did the heart of Pharaoh, from time to time, until [his] servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and [his] elders, whom [he has] appointed. . . . [will send] wise men, to fulfil that which I have commanded concerning the purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county that can be purchased, and in the adjoining counties round about" (D&C 105:27-28).

The Church has very quietly purchased land in Missouri. Much speculation has been made about how much land has been bought, but though the amount of land in Missouri that is owned by the Church is not known, we can be assured that the work is progressing.

A few years ago, the governor of Missouri issued a decree abolishing the extermination order issued by former Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, which had stated that no Mormon was welcome in Missouri. This is a noteworthy example of hearts being softened. Other events have taken place and will yet take place to that same effect. In our day, for instance, political leaders and dignitaries of the United States and of foreign countries who come to Utah visit the prophet and the First Presidency. Though some visits may be mere political moves, nonetheless, they are a recognition of the kingdom of Zion. Again, how much more is required will be known when the Lord reveals it.

Earlier, the Lord revealed that the only way Zion will be built up is by purchase or by blood, and the Lord forbade the shedding of blood (D&C 63:27-31). Therefore, the Lord instructed the Saints in other areas to send money to the land of Zion to make purchases. The faithful would receive an inheritance in Zion (D&C 63:37-41, 47-48). Just as David was forbidden to build the temple because he was a man of war (1 Chronicles 28:2-3), it seems that we, as a people, will also be forbidden to enter Zion if we attempt to obtain the land by force. The land in Missouri will be purchased, not conquered (D&C 105:28-29).

The Church and the kingdom of God will become banners to the world. That is the seventh prerequisite. The Lord's "army [will] become very great" and become pure and holy, or sanctified before the Lord, "that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations" (D&C 105:31). [^12] The banner of Zion, the ensign—the Book of Mormon and the Church—must be waved for the world to see. Eventually, the New Jerusalem will become the banner acknowledged by the Gentiles, or the world (Isaiah 60:3). When that happens, the army of Israel will become great and also become sanctified. "The kingdoms of this world [will] be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore let us become subject unto her laws" (D&C 105:32). The character of the people of the Church both individually and collectively will lead other nations to recognize the hand of God upon Zion (D&C 45:64-71). Although this prophecy is not yet fulfilled, the recognition of the Church and kingdom by the people and nations of the world is coming to pass.

The reinstitution of the law of consecration in Zion, the New Jerusalem, is prerequisite number eight. The Lord commanded the Saints to "let those commandments which [he has] given concerning Zion and her law be executed and fulfilled, after her redemption" (D&C 105:34). The Lord commanded the early Saints called to move to Missouri to covenant to live the law of consecration (D&C72). The Lord then declared: "There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing; and let those be chosen that are worthy. And it shall be manifest unto my servant, by the voice of the Spirit, those that are chosen; and they shall be sanctified" (D&C 105:35-36).

Some have believed that all the members of the Church would leave their homes and go to Missouri; however, that concept is not clearly taught in the scriptures. We cannot establish the center place without having stakes. Those who will go to Jackson County will be called in an orderly manner. The call will come on an individual basis as people are needed to establish the center place of Zion. But there will be multitudes who will not be called. Bear in mind that those who are not called are not necessarily unworthy or less worthy than those who are called. The stakes must be maintained, and leadership will be needed in those stakes. The call to Jackson County is simply a different stewardship that a person will be given for establishing the Zion society there. Those people will be united in living the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom, including the law of consecration.

The ninth prerequisite requires us to do missionary work in the meantime. The Lord admonishes us to "sue for peace, not only to the people that have smitten [us], but also to all people; and lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the ends of the earth" (D&C 105:38-39). Those who preach the gospel are the publishers of peace (Mosiah 15:13-18). The Latter-day Saints are to preach the gospel to the world. Today we have about fifty thousand missionaries in many countries of the world. Still other countries are being prepared by the Lord. Missionary work will continue into the Millennium, and the Lord will proclaim when enough people have heard the gospel message for Zion to be established.

Of the nine prerequisites outlined by the Lord for the redemption of Zion, all have been met to one degree or another; and many Saints are prepared to meet further requirements. To prepare for the redemption of Zion on an individual basis, we must make ourselves a Zion people, live the principles of the gospel to fulfill our temple covenants, and preach the gospel to all the world. May we prepare ourselves further and become a Zion people, pure in heart.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Family," Ensign, November 1995, 102.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, "Salvation Is a Family Affair," Improvement Era, June 1970, 43-44.
[^3] Hinckley, "Family," 102.
[^4] B. H. Roberts, Introduction to History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by Joseph Smith, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 5:xxx.
[^5] 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, 251.
[^6] Roberts, Introduction, xxix-xxx. Elder Roberts taught: "There is indisputable evidence that the revelation making known this marriage law was given to the Prophet as early as 1831. In that year, and thence intermittently up to 1833, the Prophet was engaged in a revision of the English Bible text under the inspiration of God, Sidney Rigdon in the main acting as his scribe. As he began his revision with the Old Testament, he would be dealing with the age of the Patriarchs in 1831. He was doubtless struck with the favor in which the Lord held the several Bible Patriarchs of that period, notwithstanding they had a plurality of wives. What more natural than that he should inquire of the Lord at that time, when his mind must have been impressed with the fact—Why, O Lord, didst Thou justify Thy servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; as also Moses, David, and Solomon, in the matter of their having many wives and concubines (see opening paragraph of the Revelation)? In answer to that inquiry came the revelation, though not then committed to writing.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 219-20.
[^8] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 172.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children about the Temple," Ensign, August 1985, 10.
[^10] Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 723.
[^11] Hugh Nibley, Approaching Zion, ed. Don E. Norton (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1989), 385. The reference from Heber C. Kimball may come from Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 6:127.
[^12] McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 578-79.
