Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER TWELVE

Marriage and Family: "Ordained of God"

Guy L. Dorius

Guy L. Dorius is assistant professor of Church history and Doctrine at Brigham Young University.

The importance of marriage and family in the great plan of happiness has been emphasized by the Lord through prophets for most of this dispensation. As recently as 23 September 1995, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles issued a proclamation on the family. President Gordon B. Hinckley stated: "We, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, solemnly proclaim that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children." [^1]

The need for this proclamation is evidenced by the increase in marital dissolution and unhappy families. Many people seem to take lightly the important doctrine of marriage. The importance of marriage and family is not new doctrine but a reiteration of doctrine taught by many leaders of the Church. In 1970 Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "From the moment of birth into mortality to the time we are married in the temple, everything we have in the whole gospel system is to prepare and qualify us to enter that holy order of matrimony which makes us husband and wife in this life and in the world to come.

"Then from the moment we are sealed together by the power and authority of the holy priesthood—the power to bind on earth and have it sealed eternally in the heavens—from that moment everything connected with revealed religion is designed to help us keep the terms and conditions of our marriage covenant, so that this covenant will have efficacy, virtue, and force in the life to come.

"Thus celestial marriage is the crowning ordinance of the gospel, the crowning ordinance of the house of the Lord. Thus the family unit is the most important organization in time or in eternity.

"And thus we should have more interest in and concern for our families than for anything else in life." [^2]

Because of the great emphasis on marriage and family, it is fundamental for Latter-day Saints to consider the historical and doctrinal foundations of these teachings. Although principles pertaining to marriage and family are taught throughout the scriptures, the most specific instructions are found in the Doctrine and Covenants, which provides a scriptural framework of marriage and family relations.

The History

The central role that marriage has in the gospel plan is presented in the recent proclamation to the Church. In it we read: "The family is ordained of God. Marriage between man and woman is essential to His eternal plan." [^3]

This latest affirmation of the importance of marriage has its roots early in the history of the Church. Joseph had strong family ties and always viewed his own family as crucial to his happiness. Yet alternative views concerning marriage were taught among religious sects in the early nineteenth century. When the Saints were instructed to move from New York State to the Kirtland, Ohio, area, they came into contact with the Shakers. The Shakers taught that to receive a higher degree of salvation, one had to be celibate. The Lord gave a revelation to be read to the Shaker community (D&C 49), in which he refuted the Shaker doctrine that taught against marriage. The Lord stated: "And again, verily I say unto you, that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man" (D&C 49:15). Therefore, in the early days of the Restoration, the doctrine of marriage was firmly established as a God-ordained ordinance. Additionally, the Lord addressed the objection the Shakers had to the intimate relationship between a husband and wife in bringing children into the world. The revelation continued: "Wherefore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; and that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made"(D&C 49:16-17). Therefore, not only marriage, or the companionship of a husband and wife, was revealed to be ordained of God but also the bringing of children into the world was revealed as an essential part of God's plan in the very creation of the earth.

At the same time, the Lord gave instruction (known as "the law") to the brethren in Ohio in which he reiterated the commandments. He then stated: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else. And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out. Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out" (D&C 42:22-24). Not only was the Lord commanding unity and complete fidelity in marriage but he connected fidelity and having the Spirit and characterized lust as denying the faith and losing membership in the kingdom. At approximately the same time the Lord declared that marriage was "ordained of God," he was developing the doctrine that marriage was crucial in the spiritual development of Church members.

Other evidence suggests that the brethren were teaching the importance of marriage early in Church history. The first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (1835) included an article titled "Marriage." Elder B. H. Roberts stated: "When the Book of Doctrine and Covenants was presented to the several quorums of the priesthood of the Church for acceptance in the general assembly of that body, the 17th of August, 1835, an article on 'Marriage' was presented by W. W. Phelps, which for many years was published in the Doctrine and Covenants. It was not a revelation, nor was it presented as such to the general assembly of the priesthood. It was an article, however, that represented the views of the assembly on the subject of marriage at that time." [^4]

This article addressed the issue of civil marriage and instructed that marriage should be "celebrated with prayer and thanksgiving." [^5] It is obvious that the Church taught that marriage was positive and desirable. Joseph was not present at the conference when the article was presented, but it remained in the Doctrine and Covenants until it was replaced by section 132 in 1876.

There is evidence that Joseph had received earlier revelations that gave him insights concerning future laws and keys that would seal a husband and wife in the covenant of marriage after the resurrection. Elder Roberts wrote that there is good reason to believe that Joseph had received the information in section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the section on eternal marriage, as early as 1831. [^6] Why was the revelation not written until 1843? One obvious answer is that the keys, or authorization, needed to seal marriages for eternity had not yet been restored. That which was revealed to Joseph Smith at such an early date emphasized the keys of the priesthood being used to perform marriage. Earlier, the Lord revealed that the keys of baptism were needed for the ordinance of baptism to be recognized by God (see D&C 13; 22). Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery learned from the translation of the Book of Mormon plates that authority to perform baptisms was necessary. Following their sincere prayer inquiring about baptism, John the Baptist restored the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, including the keys of baptism.

Similarly, while Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were translating the Bible, they had questions concerning the teachings on marriage, and they sought the Lord's guidance. The Lord revealed to Joseph the essential elements of the law and the authority necessary to be married in eternity. Although the Prophet may have understood, the Church had not had sufficient time to understand such important doctrine nor had the keys been restored.

The Restoration

It is quite well known that on 3 April 1836 in the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith received important keys to the fulness of priesthood ordinances. Less well known is that after the appearances of the Savior and Moses and before the appearance of Elijah, Elias appeared and committed the dispensation of Abraham. Joseph recorded: "After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). This was an important event in the unveiling of eternal, or celestial, marriage. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "Now what was the gospel of Abraham? Obviously it was the commission, the mission, the endowment and power, the message of salvation, given to Abraham. And what was this? It was a divine promise that both in the world and out of the world his seed should continue 'as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them.' (D. & C. 132:30; Gen. 17; Abra. 2:1-12.)

"Thus the gospel of Abraham was one of celestial marriage. . . . It was a gospel or commission to provide a lineage for the elect portion of the pre-existent spirits, a gospel to provide a household in eternity for those who live the fulness of the celestial law. This power and commission is what Elias restored, and as a consequence, the righteous among all future generations were assured of the blessings of a continuation of the seeds forever, even as it was with Abraham of old." [^7] Further emphasis was given to the importance of children and family in the implications of eternal marriage.

Elias restored the dispensation in which the Abrahamic covenant was made, thus restoring the doctrine of celestial marriage. This restoration was still not enough for celestial marriage to last through the eternities. It was therefore necessary for Elijah to return with keys of the priesthood. Why was Elijah's return so necessary? Joseph Smith answered: "Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." [^8]

Through those keys and authority Joseph Smith was now able to officiate in all of the ordinances necessary for the salvation and exaltation of men and women. Elijah restored the keys that seal all blessings to us for time and all eternity. President Ezra Taft Benson taught: "Elijah brought the keys of sealing powers—that power which seals a man to a woman and seals their posterity to them endlessly, that which seals their forefathers to them all the way back to Adam. This is the power and order that Elijah revealed—that same order of priesthood which God gave to Adam and to all the ancient patriarchs which followed after him." [^9]

The Law

Joseph Smith was then prepared to instruct the Saints in celestial marriage. Not until 1843 were the revelations issued that teach the doctrine of celestial marriage. Joseph gave the following instructions to the Church: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase" (D&C 131:1-4). This section introduces to the Church the need to have the new and everlasting covenant of marriage to be exalted. It also defines what is meant by exaltation when it indicates that those who do not receive this covenant will not have an increase. This sounds much like the promise made to Abraham that his seed would be innumerable not only in this life but throughout all eternity. Therefore, the restoration of the blessings of Abraham enable Saints in this dispensation to enjoy a continuation of the promises made to him.

The Lord continued to clarify the doctrine of marriage in Doctrine and Covenants 132. The revelation first exhorts those reading to "prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them must obey the same" (D&C 132:3). Why prepare our hearts? With increasing divorce rates, it is understandable that the Lord teaches that successful marriages take a prepared heart. He is also about to reveal that not only do certain marriages continue through eternity but that some will not.

The revelation then gives the law of marriage and the conditions of the law: "For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory. For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. And as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall abide the law, or he shall be damned, saith the Lord God" (D&C 132:4-6). The idea of a "new and everlasting covenant" was familiar doctrine for the Saints. In section 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants they learned of the new and everlasting covenant of baptism. The covenant of baptism initiates our salvation and exaltation, but to enter into God's glory, one must accept the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. Those who do not will be damned, or in other words, denied eternal increase.

The revelation then teaches the conditions that make this law binding: "And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead" (D&C 132:7).

Stated simply, covenants made in this life must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise to be recognized in the next life. At the time of the revelation Joseph held the keys, or the power that Elijah had committed to him, to initiate covenants that would be valid after death. Those included the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, or celestial marriage. In the Church today, we sustain the present prophet as the only one authorized to exercise those keys. Though the keys may be delegated to such others as sealers in the temple, they are always used under the direction of the living prophet.

The Lord reiterates this point by reminding us that anything of this world, "whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God" (D&C 132:13).

The revelation clarifies which marriages do not endure through eternity and provides two examples of marriage that do not fall under the eternal nature of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. The first of these involves a man who marries a woman "not by me nor by my word" (D&C 132:15). This marriage union is not of force after death. These marriages are civil marriages which generally do not pretend to have eternal consequence.

The second example of marriage is discussed in verse 18 which has eternal language. A man may "make a covenant with her for time and for all eternity," but without the proper authority, the marriage will not exist beyond death. These marriages may be those performed by well-meaning individuals who believe in eternal marriage but do not understand the necessity of keys and authority. These may also include marriages in which a couple may write their own vows and include eternal language. Neither of these marriages is valid after death. As the Lord has stated: "Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory. For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever" (D&C 132:16-17).

Finally, the Lord teaches us of the only marriage that will exist beyond death. He states: "And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life, that he shall commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, and if ye abide in my covenant, and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" (D&C 132:19).

From this verse we understand that to be exalted and have eternal increase, eternal marriage must be sealed upon us under the new and everlasting covenant of marriage by him who has the authority. It must be noted that part of this verse alludes to having one's calling and election made sure. Sidney B. Sperry stated: "It should be made clear that the part of verse 19 beginning with 'it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection . . . ' does not pertain to marriage, but to having one's calling and election made sure." [^10] It is interesting that in both sections 131 and 132, following the revelation of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, there is a discussion of having one's calling and election made sure. That gives added emphasis to the doctrine of marriage as an important step toward our exaltation. Indeed, exaltation can only be enjoyed by those who are married and sealed as man and wife, to live together eternally.

It is also important to consider the language of the Lord as he discusses civil marriages in contrast to celestial marriage. As he taught us of civil marriage, in both instances he refers to a man making a "covenant with her," meaning his wife (D&C 132:15, 18). In verse 19 the idea of a man covenanting with a woman is conspicuously missing. In eternal marriage, the covenants are made with God. This covenant includes another person and involves promises and covenants with each other, but eventually it comes back to a covenant relationship between us and God. In all other forms of marriage, the vows are made to another person. We know from sad experience that covenants between individuals are easily negotiated and broken. We know that covenants with God are not negotiable. In referring to teachings of Heber C. Kimball, Hugh Nibley stated:

"As Heber C. Kimball reminded the Saints, there are no covenants made between individuals in the Church. All promises and agreements are between the individual and our Father in Heaven; all other parties, including the angels, are present only as witnesses. Therefore whether anybody else observes and keeps the promise is not my concern, but if I do not do what I have promised, what blessings can I expect?" [^11]

This reminds us that if we break our marriage covenant, we are not just breaking covenants with a person, we are breaking covenants with God. It is ironic that people would hold on carefully to their baptismal covenant, but the idea of a broken marriage does not hold the same fear. The exalting power of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage must not be overlooked. The Lord invites us to consider that as he teaches us that when we accept this covenant and abide in it, "then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory. For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also. This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law" (D&C 132:20-24).

The Lord ties our exaltation directly to our willingness to receive his law and abide in it. That law includes this sacred order of marriage. It is interesting that the scriptures here invite us to think of "eternal lives" in contrast with "eternal life" (John 17:3). Exaltation is experienced as couples and families, not as individuals. We also learn that to receive this law is to receive the Savior. It may be concluded that to truly know Christ, we must experience marriage under the new and everlasting covenant.

Many suppose that we do not have the fulness of the law because we don't practice plural marriage. Indeed, the remaining verses of section 132 deal with the plural marriage application of this law. But we would be wise to remember that this law is administered through the living prophet and the Lord directs him as to its current application. On 6 October 1890, President Wilford Woodruff issued a manifesto declaring the revealed end of the practice of plural marriage in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Since that time, the law of celestial marriage has been applied to the marriage of one man and one living woman at a time. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated:

"Plural marriage is not essential to salvation or exaltation. Nephi and his people were denied the power to have more than one wife and yet they could gain every blessing in eternity that the Lord ever offered to any people. In our day, the Lord summarized by revelation the whole doctrine of exaltation and predicated it upon the marriage of one man to one woman. (D. & C. 132:1-28.) Thereafter he added the principles relative to plurality of wives with the express stipulation that any such marriages would be valid only if authorized by the President of the Church. (D. & C. 132:7, 29-66.)" [^12]

Conclusion

In the official proclamation on the family we read: "The divine plan of happiness enables family relationships to be perpetuated beyond the grave. Sacred ordinances and covenants available in holy temples make it possible for individuals to return to the presence of God and for families to be united eternally." [^13]

We are blessed to have this modern revelation to guide us in our return to our Father in Heaven and to remind us of the sacred obligation we have to keep the covenants we have made. We must realize that our marriages and families play an important role in our relationship with Christ and therefore take seriously the commitment we have made to build celestial families.

Notes

"Corroborative evidences of the fact of the revelation having been given thus early in the Prophet's career are to be found in the early charges against the Church about its belief in 'polygamy.'"

Elder Roberts continues: "In this article on marriage the following sentence occurs:

"'Inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication and polygamy, we declare that we believe that one man should have one wife, and one woman but one husband, except in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again.'

"From this it is evident that as early at least as 1835 a charge of polygamy was made against the Church. Why was that the case unless the subject of 'polygamy' had been mooted within the Church? Is it not evident that some one to whom the Prophet had confided the knowledge of the revelation he had received concerning the rightfulness of plural marriage—under certain circumstances—had unwisely made some statement concerning the matter?"

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Family," Ensign, November 1995, 102.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, "Salvation Is a Family Affair," Improvement Era, June 1970, 43-44.
[^3] Hinckley, "Family," 102.
[^4] B. H. Roberts, Introduction to History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by Joseph Smith, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 5:xxx.
[^5] 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, 251.
[^6] Roberts, Introduction, xxix-xxx. Elder Roberts taught: "There is indisputable evidence that the revelation making known this marriage law was given to the Prophet as early as 1831. In that year, and thence intermittently up to 1833, the Prophet was engaged in a revision of the English Bible text under the inspiration of God, Sidney Rigdon in the main acting as his scribe. As he began his revision with the Old Testament, he would be dealing with the age of the Patriarchs in 1831. He was doubtless struck with the favor in which the Lord held the several Bible Patriarchs of that period, notwithstanding they had a plurality of wives. What more natural than that he should inquire of the Lord at that time, when his mind must have been impressed with the fact—Why, O Lord, didst Thou justify Thy servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; as also Moses, David, and Solomon, in the matter of their having many wives and concubines (see opening paragraph of the Revelation)? In answer to that inquiry came the revelation, though not then committed to writing.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 219-20.
[^8] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 172.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children about the Temple," Ensign, August 1985, 10.
[^10] Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 723.
[^11] Hugh Nibley, Approaching Zion, ed. Don E. Norton (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1989), 385. The reference from Heber C. Kimball may come from Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 6:127.
[^12] McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 578-79.
[^13] Hinckley, "Family," 102.
