Dennis A. Wright, Craig J. Ostler, Leon R. Hartshorn, Doctrine and Covenants, a Book of Answers: The 25th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium ( 1996)

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

The Day of Judgment As Taught in the Doctrine and Covenants

Terry B. Ball

Terry B. Ball is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

There are certain events through which every soul born to this earth must pass. Paul identified two when he wrote to the Corinthians, "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Corinthians 15:21-22). The newly converted Alma the Younger taught of a third certainty. He exclaimed, "all men shall stand to be judged of him" (Mosiah 27:31). Of these three certain events—death, resurrection, and the final Judgment—this last perhaps causes us the most concern. The universality of the Judgment causes each of us to consider the interrogatives, who? when? what? where? why? how? We wonder: Who will judge us? When will we be judged? What are the criteria upon which we will be judged? When must we prepare for the Judgment? Where will the Judgment place us? Why will we be judged? How will we be judged?

One manifestation of God's love for us is that he has provided answers to these important questions through the scriptures. The Doctrine and Covenants is an especially valuable scriptural source for finding such answers. Not only does the Doctrine and Covenants confirm those answers given in other scriptures but it also adds significant insights found nowhere else in the standard works. Those who study it carefully will be better able to prepare for the great day of judgment.

Who Will Judge Us?

In a revelation on the degrees of glory the Lord revealed that "God and Christ are the judge of all" (D&C 76:68; see also 77:12; 82:23; 88:104). Some might question the role of the Father in the Judgment in light of Christ's teachings recorded in the Gospel of John in which he taught that "the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son" (John 5:22). Christ later explained, however, that the Father does indeed play a role in the Judgment, for all the judgments the Son makes are according to the will of the Father (see John 8:15-16, 26, 50).

The Book of Mormon teaches that Christ will be assisted in the Judgment of the house of Israel by the twelve original apostles and that the twelve New World apostles would assist with the judging of the remnant of the descendants of Lehi (1 Nephi 12:9-10; Mormon 3:18-19). The Doctrine and Covenants clarifies that the assisting apostles would judge only the righteous (D&C 29:12). Elder Bruce R. McConkie summarized and clarified the roles of the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, and the apostles in the Judgment. "The scriptural assertion that all men 'shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil' (Alma 11:44) means simply that Christ's judicial decisions are those of the other two members of the Godhead because all three are perfectly united as one. The ancient Twelve and the Nephite Twelve, and no doubt others similarly empowered, will sit in judgment, under Christ, on selected portions of the house of Israel; but their decrees will be limited to those who love the Lord and have kept his commandments, 'and none else.' (D&C 29:12; 3 Ne. 27:27; Matt. 19:28)." [^1]

Although apostles and others play a role in the Judgment, Jacob testified that the final decision to allow entrance into the kingdom ultimately belongs to the Savior (2 Nephi 9:41). It is most appropriate that he who atoned for sins should make that judgment.

When Will We Be Judged?

Our judgment is both a process and an event. Throughout our existence we go through a process of partial and preparatory judgments, all leading up to the event of our final judgment. The Doctrine and Covenants teaches that one of the earliest judgments came in the premortal existence when those spirits who followed Lucifer and rebelled against our Heavenly Father's plan "were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels; and, behold, there is a place prepared for them from the beginning, which place is hell" (D&C 29:37-38). Jacob taught that there was also an early judgment passed upon man at the fall of Adam and that it would have been the final judgment were it not for the atonement of Christ: "Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more" (2 Nephi 9:7).

The Doctrine and Covenants further teaches that some judgments, especially those of chastening, are poured out upon men during mortality (e.g., D&C 84:58; 99:5; 109:30, 38; 124:52; 136:42). Joseph F. Smith explained that the purpose of such chastisement is to "bring mankind to a sense of his power and his purposes, that they may repent of their sins and prepare themselves for the second coming of Christ to reign in righteousness upon the earth." [^2]

Alma taught that there will be a type of partial judgment immediately after death to determine our place in the spirit world (Alma 40:11-14). The Doctrine and Covenants teaches that there must also be a type of judgment at the Resurrection, for the wicked are to be resurrected after the righteous (D&C 63:17-18; 76:50-65; 88:97-101).

All of these early and partial judgments are not to be confused with the final judgment. Of the final judgment Jesus taught his disciples that "the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works" (Matt. 16:27). The Doctrine and Covenants makes it clear that the coming in glory to which Jesus referred is at the end of the millennium, when the resurrection is to be completed, and the heaven and earth are about to pass away preparatory to the coming forth of the new heaven and new earth (D&C 29:22-28; see also 2 Nephi 9:15). The Doctrine and Covenants also suggests that the order of judgment will follow the order of resurrection, with the righteous being judged before the wicked (D&C 88:97-102; 86:1-7).

Although our judgment is not completed until the final judgment, Elder McConkie explained that "it is very evident that men will not have to await the day of final judgment—the formal occasion when every living soul will stand before the Judgment bar, an event that will not take place until the last soul has been resurrected—to learn their status and the degree of glory they are to receive in eternity. Those who are living a telestial law will be swept off the earth at the Second Coming. (D&C 101:24; Malachi 3; 4.) Those who come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, who 'are Christ's, the first fruits,' will have celestial bodies and go to a celestial kingdom. 'Those who are Christ's at his coming' will come forth with terrestrial bodies and go to a terrestrial kingdom. Similarly those coming forth in the beginning of the second resurrection will have telestial bodies and go to a telestial kingdom, while the sons of perdition, the last to be resurrected, will have bodies capable of receiving no glory and will be cast out with the devil and his angels forever. (D&C 88:98-102.)" [^3]

What Are the Criteria upon Which We Will Be Judged?

Our Father in Heaven wants us to be well prepared for the Judgment. That is one of the reasons he has revealed the standards by which we will be judged. In the Doctrine and Covenants we learn that the criteria by which we will be judged include our works, our desires, our scriptures, and our opportunities.

Works

While teaching Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon about the kingdoms to which man may be assigned at the Judgment, the Lord revealed that all men "shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared" (D&C 76:111; see also 19:3; 101:65; 121:24; 124:48; 128:6; 136:42; 137:9). Later it would be revealed that this is just, because God has given each of us moral agency, allowing us to individually "act in doctrine and principle," thus assuring that "every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment" (D&C 101:78).

Records are kept of our works and will be used at the Judgment. John the Revelator described the following vision: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works" (Revelation 20:12).

In the Doctrine and Covenants Joseph Smith discussed what constitutes the books referred to in Revelation: "You will discover in this quotation that the books were opened; and another book was opened, which was the book of life; but the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works; consequently, the books spoken of must be the books which contained the record of their works, and refer to the records which are kept on the earth. And the book which was the book of life is the record which is kept in heaven; the principle agreeing precisely with the doctrine which is commanded you in the revelation contained in the letter which I wrote to you previous to my leaving my place—that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven.

"Now, the nature of this ordinance consists in the power of the priesthood, by the revelation of Jesus Christ, wherein it is granted that whatsoever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Or, in other words, taking a different view of the translation, whatsoever you record on earth shall be recorded in heaven, and whatsoever you do not record on earth shall not be recorded in heaven; for out of the books shall your dead be judged, according to their own works, whether they themselves have attended to the ordinances in their own propria persona, or by the means of their own agents, according to the ordinance which God has prepared for their salvation from before the foundation of the world, according to the records which they have kept concerning their dead" (D&C 128:7-8).

In Doctrine and Covenants 127 the Prophet explained again the importance of keeping accurate records of saving ordinances: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning your dead: When any of you are baptized for your dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be eye-witness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may testify of a truth, saith the Lord; that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you bind on earth, may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be loosed in heaven" (D&C 127:6-7).

Apparently those works that are properly witnessed and recorded on earth will also be recorded in the book of life in heaven. Elder Orson Pratt described how these two records will be used at the Judgment: "The sacred books kept in the archives of eternity are to be opened in the great judgment day, and compared with the records kept on the earth; and then, if it is found that things have been done by the authority and commandment of the Most High, in relation to the dead, and the same things are found to be recorded both on earth and in heaven, such sacred books will be opened and read before the assembled universe in the day of judgment, and will be sanctioned by Him who sits on the throne and deals out justice and mercy to all of his creation." [^4]

In the Doctrine and Covenants we are taught that some works will receive special consideration at the Judgment. These include how we have forgiven, served, and judged others, as well as how we have responded to the opportunities and stewardships we have been given.

Forgiving others. At a general council of the Church held in April 1832, Bishop Edward Partridge and Elder Sidney Rigdon apparently resolved a misunderstanding between themselves. [^5] The Lord showed his pleasure at their reconciliation by revealing "that inasmuch as you have forgiven one another your trespasses, even so I, the Lord, forgive you" (D&C 82:1). The doctrine that forgiving others is a requisite to obtaining forgiveness from God is also found in Doctrine and Covenants 64: "Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:9-10; cf. Matthew 6:14-15; Mosiah 26:31).

These teachings suggest that those who come to the Judgment harboring grudges or malice against their fellow beings will not only find it difficult to obtain forgiveness for their own shortcomings but will also find that their refusal to forgive constitutes an additional sin for which they are accountable.

Serving others. While calling the Saints to repentance, the Lord said, "Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved" (D&C 56:16).

This passage suggests that another criteria by which we will be judged will be how we have served and ministered to the needs of our brethren. The truth is taught elsewhere in the Doctrine and Covenants as well: "Wherefore, be faithful; stand in the office which I have appointed unto you; succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees. And if thou art faithful unto the end thou shalt have a crown of immortality, and eternal life in the mansions which I have prepared in the house of my Father" (D&C 81:5-6; cf. Matthew 25:31-46).

Doctrine and Covenants 4 teaches us that one of the most important services we can render to be deemed worthy of salvation at the Judgment is to teach others the gospel (D&C 4:4). In this section we also learn that such service to our fellowman is equated to serving God and that serving God "with all your heart, might, mind and strength" enables us to "stand blameless before God at the last day" (D&C 4:2-3; cf. Mosiah 2:17; Matthew 25:40).

Judging others. In the Sermon on the Mount Jesus taught that how we judge others will influence how we are judged: "Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again" (Matthew 7:1-2). The Joseph Smith Translation makes an important alteration to that passage, which helps us understand that the Savior's teaching is not a simple prohibition against any kind of judgment we might make. The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment. For with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again" (JST, Matthew 7:2-3; emphasis added). The doctrine that righteous judgment is allowed without condemnation is in harmony with John's recording of the Savior's teachings: "Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment" (John 7:24).

These teachings beg the question, How do we judge righteously? One answer is found in the Doctrine and Covenants in a revelation Joseph Smith received through the Urim and Thummim: "And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit" (D&C 11:12). The passage teaches that we can judge righteously by trusting in the Spirit and allowing it to inspire our judgments. Joseph F. Smith taught that there are some prerequisites to enjoying such inspiration: "The only safe way for us to do, as individuals, is to live so humbly, so righteously and so faithfully before God that we may possess his Spirit to that extent that we shall be able to judge righteously, and discern between truth and error." [^6]

Desires

The Doctrine and Covenants makes it clear that we will be judged not only for what we do but also for what we desire. While explaining to Joseph Smith how his brother Alvin could be allowed into the celestial kingdom, even though he had died before the restoration of the gospel and its saving ordinances, the Lord declared, "All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom; for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts" (D&C 137:7-9).

Elder Dallin H. Oaks has also testified that we will be rewarded for our righteous desires, even if we may not have had opportunity to fulfill those desires in mortality: "We know that many worthy and wonderful Latter-day Saints currently lack the ideal opportunities and essential requirements for their progress. Singleness, childlessness, death, and divorce frustrate ideals and postpone the fulfillment of promised blessings. In addition, some women who desire to be full-time mothers and homemakers have been literally compelled to enter the full-time work force. But these frustrations are only temporary. The Lord has promised that in the eternities no blessing will be denied his sons and daughters who keep the commandments, are true to their covenants, and desire what is right." [^7]

The Book of Mormon prophet Alma confirmed that at the Judgment we will not only be rewarded for our righteous desires (see Alma 41:3) but also be condemned for our unrighteous desires and thoughts (see Alma 12:14; 29:4).

Our Scriptures

The Doctrine and Covenants makes it clear that the scriptures constitute another standard by which we will be judged; these include the Bible, the Book of Mormon (see D&C 20:11-13; see also 2 Nephi 25:18; 33:14-15; 3 Nephi 27:25-27; Words of Mormon 1:11), and the Doctrine and Covenants itself (D&C 41:12).

Opportunities

In 1832 the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that at the Judgment those who have been taught the gospel in mortality will not only be expected to have accomplished more but also may be held more accountable for their sins than those who never had the opportunity for such learning: "Unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation. Ye call upon my name for revelations, and I give them unto you; and inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto my law" (D&C 82:3-4).

Once we understand this doctrine, some might conclude that it would be better not to have access to greater light and revelations and thereby avoid being a candidate for a greater condemnation. Those making such a conclusion fail to understand that though we cannot be as readily damned if we are ignorant of the gospel, neither can we be exalted without knowing and partaking of the gospel and its saving ordinances (D&C 131:1-6). Moreover, we may be held accountable for refusing to accept the gospel if we have the opportunity (D&C 60:15; 75:21-22; 84:42, 114-115). This understanding raises some provocative questions. When must we accept the gospel and its ordinances to be prepared for the Judgment? Is there a deadline? What of those who never get the chance to hear the gospel? The revelations found in the Doctrine and Covenants answer these questions.

When Must We Prepare for the Judgment?

The Book of Mormon prophet Amulek declared, "This life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors" (Alma 34:32). The Lord revealed to both Joseph Smith and to Nephite prophets that this life is a probationary state granted to us for the very purpose of preparing for the Judgment (D&C 29:42-43; 1 Nephi 10:21). The Doctrine and Covenants makes it clear, however, that any preparation for the Judgment that we did not have adequate opportunity or ability to accomplish in mortality may be completed through work in the spirit world and vicarious work in the temple (D&C 138:32-34; cf. D&C 76:72-73; 128:8). Elder Orson Pratt summarized why our Heavenly Father's plan makes the provision for those in the spirit world to hear and accept the gospel: "This was the object, then, that they [spirits in spirit world] might have the same Gospel that men have in the flesh. If we acknowledge they had not the opportunity of receiving it in the flesh, they must have it in the spirit world; for in the great judgment day all men are to be judged by the same Gospel, and consequently, in order to judge them, it was necessary that they should hear the same Gospel that was preached upon the earth, that they might have the privilege of entering into the presence of the Lord their God, or, if they rejected it, be justly condemned." [^8]

Once we have accepted the gospel, we are given additional stewardships and opportunities to serve. At the Judgment we will be expected to account for how we responded to those opportunities and will be rewarded or punished accordingly: "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand" (D&C 107:99-100; see also D&C 70:3-4; 104:13; Matthew 25:14-30).

Where Will the Judgment Place Us?

In speaking of where the Judgment will place us in the eternities, most of the standard works tend to focus on the extremes, the best and worst places to which one could be assigned. For example, in the Judgment parable of the sheep and goats, the wicked are simply damned and sent to hell, whereas the righteous are saved and sent to dwell with Christ (Matthew 25:31-46). The Book of Mormon also stresses the extremes. We learn that the punishments of the wicked include being cast off forever from the kingdom of God (1 Nephi 10:21; 15:33), remaining eternally in a filthy or unclean state (1 Nephi 15:33; Mormon 9:14) and in endless misery and unhappiness (Alma 41:4-5; Mormon 9:14), having died as to things pertaining unto righteousness (1 Nephi 15:33; Alma 12:16), suffering torment as a lake of fire and brimstone (2 Nephi 28:23; Mosiah 26:27; Alma 12:17; Moroni 8:21), and being captive to the devil (Alma 12:17). In contrast, the righteous will receive their just rewards, including the privilege of dwelling eternally with Christ (Mosiah 26:24; Alma 41:4; 3 Nephi 28:40; Mormon 7:7) in a state of righteousness and happiness (Alma 41:4; Moroni 9:13; Mormon 7:7).

The Doctrine and Covenants is perhaps the most thorough book of scripture in describing the places to which the Judgment may send us and what we can expect there. Not only does it discuss the maximum rewards and punishments to be given but it also addresses the question of what rewards or punishments are to be given to those who are worthy of something in between. That very question led Joseph Smith to receive Doctrine and Covenants 76. He explained: "Upon my return from Amherst conference, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures. From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body the term 'Heaven,' as intended for the Saints' eternal home must include more kingdoms than one. Accordingly, on the 16th of February, 1832, while translating St. John's Gospel, myself and Elder Rigdon saw the following [D&C 76] vision." [^9]

In the vision we first learn the fate of the extremely wicked, or sons of perdition, who "suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my [God's] power" and who "denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame" (D&C 76:31, 35). We are taught that "these are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—and the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath" (D&C 76:36-38).

Next we are told that those who were very faithful and righteous, who repented and accepted the gospel and the saving ordinances, and who were sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, will have celestial glory, living with God, as gods, having all godly attributes (D&C 76:50-70; see also D&C 88:19-20, 22; 131:1-3; 132:19-20; 137:1-3).

Then we are taught of the fate of those in between. We learn that those "who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it," who also were the "honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men," yet still were "not valiant in the testimony of Jesus," will receive a terrestrial glory that differs from the celestial "as the moon differs from the sun." In this glory they are entitled to "the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father," and "obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God" (D&C 76:71-79).

Finally we learn that there is a telestial glory in store for those "who deny not the Holy Spirit," but "received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus" and who were "liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie." They are to suffer "the wrath of God," and are "cast down to hell," awaiting the time when "Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work." They will be the last to be "redeemed from the devil" and the last resurrected, after which they will receive the lowest degree of glory, one that differs from that of the terrestrial as the stars differ from the moon in brightness. There they will "receive not of his [Christ's] fulness" but "of the Holy Spirit" (D&C 76:81-86, 101-6).

Why Will We Be Judged?

We have been warned that in the last days some would suggest that there will be no judgment. They will profess that there is no sin, that God will not hold us accountable for our sins, or that God loves us so much that he will save us all regardless of our sins (2 Nephi 28:7-8). Such doctrine will cause some to question why we should be judged. Perhaps the simplest answer to the question can be found in the divine declaration that "I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31), or, as Nephi explained it, "Behold, I say unto you, the kingdom of God is not filthy, and there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God" (1 Nephi 15:33-34). The Judgment will assure that only the righteous gain access to God's kingdom, thereby preserving its purity.

Others might question why it is so important for God's kingdom to be pure. Doctrine and Covenants 88 answers that there are certain laws associated with each kingdom and, in regard to God's kingdom, it is obedience to those laws that preserves, perfects, and sanctifies the kingdom and those in it (D&C 88:34-39). Accordingly, the celestial glory can be maintained only by righteousness. Moreover, the prohibition against evil in the celestial glory assures that only the righteous will have access to the powers of God. One can imagine the disastrous consequences should an evil and selfish being gain access to such power. The Judgment gives us the confidence that "the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36).

How Will We Be Judged?

The principles upon which the Judgment will be based are outlined in Doctrine and Covenants 88. They include intelligence, wisdom, truth, virtue, light, mercy, and justice (D&C 88:40). An omniscient and loving God would judge no other way. When our judgment is completed, we will accept the decisions given, exclaiming, "Holy, holy are thy judgments, O Lord God Almighty" (2 Nephi 9:46). Those who are righteous will "have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe of righteousness" (2 Nephi 9:14), whereas the wicked will be forced to acknowledge, "I know my guilt; I transgressed thy law, and my transgressions are mine; and the devil hath obtained me" (2 Nephi 9:46). Apparently, none of us will be taken away from the Judgment bar protesting, "It's unfair! I was framed! I demand a retrial! I want to appeal!" There will be no such nonsense. Rather, "every nation, kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and shall confess before God that his judgments are just" (Mosiah 16:1; see also Alma 41:7).

Conclusion

Through the Doctrine and Covenants and other scriptures, a just and loving Father in Heaven has revealed answers to important questions about the final day of judgment. Those questions include, Who will judge us? When will we be judged? What are the criteria upon which we will be judged? When must we prepare for the Judgment? Where will the Judgment place us? Why will we be judged? and, How will we be judged? As we study, understand, and teach these answers, we demonstrate both our gratitude to Father in Heaven and our willingness to follow his plan for our happiness.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 101.
[^2] M. Russell Ballard, When Shall These Things Be? Brigham Young University Devotional Address (Provo: 12 Mar. 1996), 2.
[^3] Times and Seasons (1 March 1843), 113, cited in Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible, comp. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 109.
[^4] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 15:365-66.
[^5] Millennial Star 21, 582-83.
[^6] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1964), 481-82; see also Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 288-91.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), 582, 584.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), 3:509.
