Cost of transporting Goods from the several embarkadaries to the mines—Price of Merchandize in the mines—Cost of Provisions—Price of Medical Services—Administration of Justice—Manner of spending the Sabbath.

From the two principal embarkadaries upon the St. Waukeen and Sacramento rivers of California, provisions and mining 129 implements are transported to the seat of mining operations at exorbitant costs.

On passing up to the mines from a place calld Stocton, upon the St. Waukeen, our company hird a teamster to carry our goods and implements, for which we paid him, for one wagon load, more than fourteen hundred dollars, rated at 30 cents per pound. Afterwards during the summer, goods were carrid on pack mules at a somewhat less cost. It may also be added, that conveyances were got up for the accommodation of passengers between Stocton and the mines, a distance of 70 or 80 miles, at a charge of 2 ounces of gold dust for each passenger, which, according to its value in California, is worth $32.

From Sacramento city, the present head of navigation upon the Sacramento river, similar prices are chargd for the transportation of goods into that quarter of the mining district.

The price of merchandize at the mines is quite dissimilar to prices in the States. Tea, best, per pound, is worth from $2 to $4. Common sizd frying pans at $8. Tin pans, a large size, at $8 apiece. India rubber elastic cots at $50 to $75 each. Calf-skin shoes, per pair, at $8, and boots at $16. An ordinary article of ax-helve at $3. Lumber, scarce, at $2 per ft. Pint tin cups at $1.50 each. Coarse sheeting, 50 cents per yard.

The cost of provisions ranges somewhat as follows. Flour is worth, per pound, from 75 cts. to $1. Pork, per pound, $1. Beans are sold by the pound, at $1 per pound. Rice, per lb., 62½ cents. Light bread, per loaf of one pound, $1. Beef, 25 cents the pound. Potatoes are sold by the pound, at 50 cents. Green peas preservd in air-tight jars, per pint, $4. Onions, per pound, $2. Public meals, $2.

* * * * * * * *

Medical services are likewise high, in the mining district. Each visit, near to patient, is 1 oz. of gold, or $16. If a week’s attendance is requird, no reduction upon each visit is made. For extracting a tooth, $10 is chargd. Very extravagant prices are chargd for distant visits.

* * * * * * * *

In relation to the administration of justice in the mining district, wherever a sufficient assemblage of miners exists to be 130 thought worthy of judicial attention, an alcalda or justice of the peace is appointed, who presides over the judiciary department, with almost as unlimited sway as an emperor. And although in addition to an alcalda, a sheriff is appointed to a permanent office, and cases are almost universally tried by a jury, which is summond by the sheriff, yet they are generally selected of a stamp congruous to the feelings of the alcalda. From the decisions, no appeal can ever be made, whether right or wrong. I would likewise remark, that decisions are very apt to be made against the party having the most gold, and especially if one of the parties is rather low in circumstances. Such a state of judicial dispensation may seem somewhat objectionable, at first thought, but when we reflect, that where no legislation exists, lynch law is the only mode of dispensing justice, to which men can well resort, and this is so terrific in its consequences of criminal justice, that rogues tremble in view of its administration. Much more civility and less theft exists in the mines than might at first be supposd.

The costs of legal services may be arrangd somewhat as follows: Alcaldas, for each suit, 1 oz. To the sheriff, 1 oz. To each juryman, half an ounce of gold,—and legal pleadings are often enormous, even to $100 for the service of an hour or two.

The several foregoing costs of transportation, price of merchandize, costs of provisions and medical services, are very often increasd or diminishd, according to location, distance, or difficulty of transporting, and also the season of the year.

* * * * * * * *

There is a consideration, likewise, in relation to spending the Sabbath amongst the gold mines of California.

The reader may greatly wonder what is the mode of spending the Sabbath there, when I say to him, that the Sabbath appears as silent as the house of mourning. Seldom is a man seen with his implements in his hands, laboring for gold. All around is quiet, except now and then a few horsemen are passing from one little town to another, for purposes best known to themselves. What, then, is the wonderful employment or idle condition of miners upon that day? Alas! every public tent through the whole mining region is resorted to for gambling. 131 In each of these tents, stands from one to four or six monte tables, around which, miners of all classes assemble to risk their fortunes. These tables are arrangd with small or large sums of money, by one or more persons, according to the ability of the person or persons that establish them. The sums of money so arrangd are calld banks, or monte banks. On opposite sides of the table, sit two men, who manage the affairs of the bank, and deal the cards by which the fate of bettors is determind. This game at cards is carrid on from morning till night, and often through the following night till twilight breaks upon them, with the stillness and quiet of a religious assemblage.

132
