The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the February 2005 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Am a Child of God” on pages F14 and F15 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. Teach that Heavenly Father planned for us to come to a family and have a physical body. It is important for us to take care of our bodies and keep them strong and healthy. Prepare the following wordstrips: Exercise, Healthy Foods, Rest, Good Hygiene, Protect Your Body, and Things to Avoid. (For children who can’t read yet, include pictures that illustrate these concepts.) Place the wordstrips on the chalkboard. In a bag or box, bring items or pictures of items that illustrate what we need to do to take care of our bodies. These could include pictures of foods recommended or forbidden in the Word of Wisdom (see D&C 89), a bar of soap, a washcloth, a toothbrush, a bandage, a small ball, a small pillow or blanket, a comb, and pictures from Primary packets (1-8, 1-15, 1-37, 1-38, 1-40, 1-41, 1-51, 2-23, 2-27, 2-48). Invite children to pick an item from the bag or box, match it with a heading, and tell why it is important for our health. Support principles being taught with songs or hymns.

For older children: Sometimes doing what is healthy for our bodies will require a difficult choice. In your own words, tell the story in Daniel 1 of Daniel refusing the king’s meat. Bear testimony of the Lord’s promise found in D&C 89:18–21. Also review “A Prophet’s Counsel and Prayer for Youth” (see Liahona, Apr. 2001, 30–41) regarding piercings, tattoos, and modesty. Invite the bishop or branch president to discuss President Hinckley’s counsel and prayer with the children.

2. We show our love for Heavenly Father as we keep the commandments. Repeat John 14:15 with the children. Help them memorize the scripture by using simple visuals such as a cutout heart (love) and a representation of a Ten Commandments tablet. Teach the children that Jesus showed His love for Heavenly Father by always being obedient. Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 227 (Jesus Praying in Gethsemane). Have the children read with you the story of Christ in Gethsemane from Matt. 26:36–39. Explain that even though it was not easy, Christ was willing to do what Heavenly Father wanted Him to do to help us return home to Heavenly Father and Jesus. What are some things Heavenly Father has asked us to do? Take responses from the children. Post My Gospel Standards (see Liahona, Oct. 2004, F8–F9), and attach small hearts to corresponding standards as the children give their answers. Post Gospel Art Picture Kit pictures 212–216 (Sermon on the Mount, Jesus Healing the Blind, Stilling the Storm, Jesus Blessing Jairus’s Daughter, Christ and the Children) on the board. Teach that one way to keep the commandments is to love and be kind to others. Invite the children to share ways the pictures show that Jesus loved and served others. Sing a song or hymn about love. Pass out paper, pencils, and/or crayons to the children, and invite them to write a note or draw a picture to send to a missionary, member of the military, someone who is homebound, or your bishop or branch president. Have the pianist play while the children complete this project. Send home two or three paper hearts with each child. Explain that they can do anonymous acts of kindness in their family and leave a heart as a clue that they are showing love to Heavenly Father by keeping the commandments.
