Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

Preface

Doctrines of the Kingdom is the third in a series of four volumes setting forth the thought and doctrine expressed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Preceded by God, Man and the Universe, and Principles of Perfection, this volume is an attempt to analyze the millennial kingdom of Christ which Joseph Smith envisioned and sought to establish.

This book discusses the general order and program of the millennial kingdom, as a divine system based upon enlightening spiritual powers and the principle of mutual covenant; the economic law of the millennial system—the law of consecration and stewardship—as it would center in the City of Zion and be administered under the united order; the concept of the City of Zion and the New Jerusalem; the idea and the principles of the government of God—the divine political system which would prevail in the millennium; and, finally, the divine patriarchial order, or the perfected order of the kingdom into which all of the above principles and programs would eventually be integrated and which would then exist as an eternal family order.

More than setting forth a new combination of religious, social, economic, and political principles, Joseph Smith showed men how to bring enlightening and transforming spiritual powers into their lives, then integrate and synthesize all the functions of society into those spiritual truths and powers. If these principles were followed it would be possible to develop a distinctly new society based upon the highest ideals of human freedom and dignity.

Although various elements of the Prophet's thought have been applied by the Latter-day Saints since 1830, this study is not an analysis of the present church program. It is strictly a historical analysis of Joseph Smith's thought for which the writer alone stands responsible.

In addition to my graduate committees at Brigham Young University and Syracuse University (see the Preface to Volume I), who directed me in my early study of many areas of thought discussed in this volume, I express appreciation to Guy F. Potter for supplying some source materials; to Paul James Toscano for suggesting the arrangement of some of the materials; to Don Norton of the English Department at Brigham Young University for reading the manuscript for style and grammar and for preparing the Index; and, finally, to my wife, Helen Mae, for the continuing assistance and support which has made it possible to present this volume to the public.

Hyrum L. Andrus, F.I.B.A.

Professor of Church History and Doctrine

Brigham Young University

October 15, 1973
