Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

1

The Vision of the Kingdom

Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.—THE LORD'S PRAYER.

Joseph Smith took the bold but consistent position that a religious system that could not successfully aid man to solve his temporal problems and achieve earthly blessings could not be relied upon to save and exalt him in eternity. The kingdom of God that he envisioned was an all-embracing system in which all things—religious, social, economic, and political—were to be gathered together in Christ. [^1] A whole new system of human relations was to be developed, based upon the restored gospel; and all lawful activities among men were to be centered in Christ. The challenge was to integrate and synthesize all these activities into a central core of divine truth and power. And though no greater task has been undertaken by social scientists or reformers, the Prophet held that all this and more was necessary to usher in the earth's great millennium of universal peace and rest.

According to an official proclamation made in 1845, this new system was the kingdom of God "predicted by ancient prophets, and prayed for in all ages." Eventually it would "fill the whole earth," and "stand forever." [^2] After translating the Book of Mormon and organizing the Church at Fayette, New York, April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith directed the Saints to gather in Ohio and Missouri to begin building the new society. With his arrival in Kirtland, Ohio, early in 1831, the Prophet began to receive the principles and laws of the kingdom by revelation and to apply them in settling the Saints at Kirtland and in Missouri. However, in 1838, he and his followers were driven from Missouri by mob elements. After settling the Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois, the Prophet continued to reveal details of the program of the kingdom until his death in June, 1844.

Literally thousands of people in Joseph Smith's day expected the millennium to arrive before the middle of the nineteenth century. [^3] But in several ways the Prophet differed in the position he took.

First, he claimed to receive a direct commission from God to begin preparing a people for the millennial reign, [^4] and to receive the law of the millennial system by revelation from the Lord.

Second, he taught that before Christ came, Zion had to be built as a nucleus of the millennial order, founded upon the millennial law, as the abode of the Lord. The new order would then be extended throughout the earth as the events of the last days occurred and Christ came in glory. "We all look for the appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ," said the Bishopric at Kirtland in an epistle to the Saints; "but we shall look in vain, until Zion is built, for Zion is to be the dwelling place of our God when he comes." [^5] Joseph Smith thus proclaimed in March, 1843, as millennial fervor in America was growing to a climax of disappointment and frustration: "Therefore hear this, O earth, the Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843, nor until everything for the bridegroom is ready." [^6]

Third, the Prophet held that Christ would not come and impose His will arbitrarily upon the world, but that He would prepare a people for His presence, and then judge the wicked for their iniquities and destroy them. Human agency was involved. Joseph Smith explained: "Could we all come together with one heart and one mind in perfect faith the veil might as well be rent today as next week, or any other time." [^7] But this would require the Saints to be sanctified through the law of Zion. "Iniquity must be purged out from the midst of the Saints," the Prophet declared; "then the veil will be rent, and the blessings of heaven will flow down." [^8] But a revelation noted the Saints' failure to fully accept the law of Zion. "Were it not for the transgressions of my people," it said, "speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed even now." [^9] Since the necessary preparations were not made, the Saints were not disappointed, as were other millenarians, when Christ did not come in their day.

Fourth, though Joseph Smith exerted all his energies to build up Zion and prepare a people for the coming of Christ, he expressed a definite conviction that it would not be done in his day. [^10] Because of lack of faith and understanding in the Saints and opposition by the world, it would be reserved to a future time when the program of the last dispensation would finally be developed and God's judgments sent forth upon the wicked. Nevertheless, the law which he was given was that of Zion and of the millennial order, and when it was applied the system of universal peace and union would be introduced.

The Idea Of The Kingdom

The Kingdom of God Defined

The word kingdom is a combination of the word king and the suffix dom. This suffix refers to the jurisdiction of the king—his domain. For a kingdom to exist there must be a king, and that king must have a recognized and established domain under his rule. Viewed in this light, the kingdom of God is simply God's kingdom—that domain over which He reigns.

Requirements for the Kingdom

The Saints held that the establishment of God's kingdom required that certain preparations be made. [^11] First, a true prophet had to be raised up, with authority and power and the keys of revelation to speak and act in the name of God. Second, the message and testimony of the new dispensation had to be given to the world by commissioned emissaries and the articles of adoption administered by which the obedient might become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. [^12] Third, the faithful had to be matured in the knowledge of the kingdom and developed in their spiritual union with God. Fourth, the Saints had to establish their lives upon the celestial principles and laws of Zion—spiritually, socially, economically, politically, and patriarchally. Fifth, the people of the earth who did not want to be members of Christ's true church had to identify themselves with the kingdom of God in a political capacity, by their own free will and choice, that they might receive the benefits of the Lord's law of freedom and civil justice and enjoy the rights and privileges guaranteed by that law. Only when all this was accomplished would the kingdom of God be fully established upon the earth.

The Lord's Design

Joseph Smith held that the latter-day dispensation was designed to prepare the way for Jesus to reign over the earth as King of kings and Lord of lords. "It has been the design of Jehovah, from the commencement of the world, and is His purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in His own time, to stand as a head of the universe, and take the reins of government in His own hands," the Prophet explained. "The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord will try the seventh thousand Himself; 'He whose right it is, will possess the kingdom, and reign until He has put all things under His feet.'" "When this is done," he concluded, "judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and 'nations will learn war no more'; . . . iniquity will hide its hoary head, Satan will be bound, and the works of darkness destroyed; righteousness will be put to the line, and judgment to the plummet, and 'he that fears the Lord will alone be exalted in that day.'" [^13]

God's Right to Reign

Joseph Smith made it clear that only God had a legal right to govern a man and direct him in the paths of life, and upon this foundation the kingdom of God would rest. Having been taught the doctrine of the legitimate exercise of political power, the Prophet's associates expressed it in their teachings. "God alone has the right to control the intelligence that is in the human family," Brigham Young explained, "for he is the giver of it." [^14] This God designed to do in a literal way by establishing His kingdom upon the earth. Of that system and its legitimate rights, Orson Pratt wrote:

The kingdom of God is an order of government established by divine authority. It is the only legal government that can exist in any part of the universe. All other governments are illegal and unauthorized. God, having made all beings and worlds, has the supreme right to govern them by His own laws, and by officers of His own appointment. Any people attempting to govern themselves by laws of their own making, and by officers of their own appointment, are in direct rebellion against the kingdom of God. [^15]

John Taylor agreed. "It is impossible that there can be any legitimate rule, government, power, or authority, under the face of the heavens, except that which is connected with the kingdom of God, which is established by new revelation from heaven." [^16]

It follows that even the government provided by the Constitution of the United States of America should come under that indictment, though the Saints stoutly maintained that the Constitution had been brought forth by the inspiration of God and that its liberal principles had a permanent place in their doctrine and faith. The Lord declared by revelation that He had "suffered" the Constitution to be established. [^17] In this context the word suffer meant to grant leave, to assent, tolerate, or allow, when by right God had no need to do so. The establishment of that system under complete human authority was a concession, when measured by the strict order of heaven. Another revelation commanded the Saints to "be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign." [^18] In order to provide a climate of freedom the Lord suffered the Constitution to be established, and He inspired the framers of that great document to bring it forth consistent with His eternal order of political economy. The Saints were to sustain the Constitution and the system of government it provided until God set up a more perfect form which recognized His right to direct its functions.

The doctrine of legitimacy in the rights of government had its basis in man's relationship to God and his dependence upon God. "We will now come to the principle of legitimacy," John Taylor announced in a discourse on the subject. He began by reaffirming the fundamental principle that Jesus Christ "is the first-born of every creature, for by him were all things made that were made, and to him pertains all things." He then concluded: "If all things were created by him and for him, this world on which we stand must have been created by him and for him; if so, he is its legitimate, its rightful owner and proprietor; its lawful sovereign and ruler." [^19]

Fundamental to this doctrine was the fact that God is man's Father, and that Christ is the heir of the Father with the vested right to direct all things in the Father's kingdom. Furthermore, man in his fallen state is not sufficiently aware of eternal verities to know of himself how to govern himself, or how to direct his life in a way to realize his full potential as an eternal entity. For this reason Nephi exclaimed: "I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh." [^20] He later qualified: "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost." [^21] The doctrine of legitimacy discussed in this section is merely an extension of these principles into the realm of society and of government. No man had a right, in his own wisdom alone, to counsel his fellow man. Likewise, no man had a right, in his own wisdom alone, to make laws to govern his fellow men.

It was obvious, as John Taylor pointed out, that "for generations past" the inhabitants of the earth had "been governed by rulers not appointed of God." [^22] But this order of things was to change. Orson Pratt stressed that the kingdom of God restored through Joseph Smith would be "a restoration of the legal power." Thereby, he said, "the earth, which has groaned under the usurpation of treasonable and rebellious powers for six thousand years, will again have peace restored, and the inhabitants thereof will be happy." [^23]

The Will of God on Earth as in Heaven

The Saints held that the establishment of the kingdom of God in its full power on the earth would be the means by which the will of God would be done on earth as it is in heaven. John Taylor declared that the divine program would be a temporal kingdom as well as a spiritual one, "and when it is fully established upon the earth, the will of God will be done upon the earth precisely as it is done in heaven." [^24] A revelation given through President Taylor stated:

Thus saith the Lord God, . . . I have introduced my Kingdom and my government, even the Kingdom of God, that my servants have heretofore prophesied of and that I taught my disciples to pray for, saying. "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven," for the establishment of my rule, for the introduction of my law, for the protection of my Church, and for the maintenance, promulgation and protection of civil and religious liberty in this nation and throughout the world; and all men of every nation, color and creed shall yet be protected and shielded thereby; and every nation and kindred, and people, and tongue shall yet bow the knee to me and acknowledge me to be Ahman Christ to the glory of God the Father. And my law and my rule and my dominion shall extend over the whole earth, and no one shall stay my hand, or question my authority; for I rule by right in the heavens above, and in the earth; and my right and my rule and my dominion shall yet be known and extended to all people. [^25]

To comprehend the full meaning of this statement, one must understand that there are graded kingdoms of existence in heaven—the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial—with a higher law as the basis of the first kingdom and lesser laws the basis of the latter kingdoms. [^26] Under the government of God in eternity, those who reside in the telestial kingdom receive "the Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial; and the terrestrial through the ministration of the celestial." Personages from the terrestrial kingdom also minister to the inhabitants of the telestial kingdom. [^27] Ultimately all powers of government center in the celestial kingdom, and from that kingdom, where the Father and Son dwell with the faithful who have been glorified, God's law of freedom and truth is sent forth to govern and uplift all things.

For the will of God to be done on earth as it is in heaven, this general order had to be established among men. To this end the Saints were to receive and apply the principles and laws of celestial society and thereby establish Zion upon the earth. An order of political government had also to be established, centered in the Holy Priesthood which directed the Saints in Zion, to maintain a law of freedom and civil justice for all men on earth and permit all to live at the level of spiritual truth and social progress which they desired.

Spiritual Nature Of Kingdom

A Kingdom Based upon Christ

The gospel of Jesus Christ was the foundation upon which the kingdom of God would rest. A Nephite prophet said: "Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation, . . . which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." [^28] Before the social or economic programs of the kingdom could be developed, in particular, man had to center all the activities of his life in Christ and in His gospel—the divine program by which man could obtain a forgiveness of sins, be regenerated spiritually by the transforming power of the Holy Ghost, and partake continually of the enlivening gifts and blessings of the Spirit. [^29]

When Jesus established His kingdom in its fulness upon the Western hemisphere after His resurrection, this was the foundation upon which it was based. Having spoken of His gospel, He said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them. [^30]

Man's Need of Divine Intelligence and Power

The kingdom of God was not to be established by conquest, but by the development of divine truth and power in man. "The power of truth is such," Joseph Smith explained, "that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the gospel." [^31] Man would learn the sublime truth that the Holy Priesthood of God had been restored to the earth, and that the priesthood was a legal channel through which he could acquire divine intelligence and power to enliven and direct all aspects of his life, and that only by utilizing the available intelligence and power could he truly cope with the problems of life and establish universal peace on earth. "Other attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proved abortive," the Prophet asserted; "every effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground." He then stressed: "It needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this." [^32]

As discussed in the first volume of this study, man is a creature of the universe, an eternal being. But on earth he is in a fallen state, without a knowledge of eternal verities and their consequences in his life. To achieve his possible destiny, he must commune with God and receive instructions from the Supreme Intelligence through divinely appointed channels. "A man can do nothing for himself unless God directs him in the right way," Joseph Smith explained; "and the priesthood is for that purpose." [^33] John Taylor further commented: "We believe that it requires the same wisdom that governs the planetary system, that produces seed time and harvest, day and night, that organized our system, and that implanted intelligence in finite man—that it needs the same intelligence to govern men and promote their happiness upon the earth that it does to control and keep in order the heavenly bodies; and we believe that that cannot be found with man independently." [^34]

Need to Transform Man Spiritually

To establish the kingdom of God on earth, Joseph Smith held that man had first to be raised from his natural fallen state in mortality to a higher spiritual state in which he was a new creature in Christ, endowed with the gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost and living in spiritual union with the Master. An angel stressed to King Benjamin the need for man to make this transition if he would be saved, [^35] and the Lord declared to Alma, the younger, that if man did not experience this change he could not "inherit the kingdom of God." [^36]

Alma illustrated the needed transformation by comparing it to the growth of a seed. There is a principle of life in a seed; when planted, it sprouts and grows. There is also a principle of life within the word of God spoken by authorized agents endowed with the Holy Ghost. When that living word finds place in the heart of an honest person who hungers for truth, it will sprout and grow, releasing living powers of divine truth and light into his life and transforming him into a new creature in Christ. [^37]

The kingdom of God was to be built upon this foundation of spiritual transformation. Joseph Smith made it clear that the law of God was designed to raise all the functions of life and all the relationships of society to an enlightened spiritual plane. A revelation explained that all forms of life placed on earth in the creation were first organized in a spiritual (though physical) state, and that in the fall of Adam they were reorganized on a temporal plane. [^38] It then declared that the plan of salvation was designed to raise man again to a spiritual plane so that he could finally be made a spiritual being in the resurrection and enjoy the expanded relationships which were made possible by being endowed with glory. To this end, the Lord explained that every principle and law of the plan of life and salvation was designed to build spiritual powers and attributes in man. He said:

Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.

Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual. [^39]

The Saints held that making this transition to a higher spiritual plane was the key to true progress and happiness in all aspects of life. John Taylor defended their position in 1850, in a discussion with a Mr. Krolokoski, an editor of an Icarian newspaper in Paris, France. A colony of the Icarians, who were utopian socialists, settled in Nauvoo, Illinois, shortly after the Saints were driven from that place in 1846. But their utopian scheme soon came to naught.

"Mr. Taylor, do you propose no other plan to ameliorate the condition of mankind than that of baptism for the remission of sins?" the Icarian asked.

Elder Taylor replied: "This is all I propose about the matter."

"Well," Krolokoski said, "I wish you every success; but I am afraid you will not succeed."

The Latter-day Saint Apostle then reasoned: "Mr. Krolokoski, you sent, some time ago, Mr. Cabet to Nauvoo. He was considered your leader—the most talented man you had. He went to Nauvoo when it was deserted—when houses and lands were at a mere nominal value. He went there with his community at the time we left. Rich farms were deserted, and thousands of us had left our houses and furniture in them, and there was everything that was calculated to promote the happiness of human beings there. Never could a person go to a place under more happy circumstances. Mr. Cabet, to try his experiment, had also the selection in France of whom he pleased. He and his company went to Nauvoo, and what is the result? You have seen the published account in the papers. We were banished from civilized society into the valleys of the Rocky Mountains to seek for that protection among savages which Christian civilization denied us—among the peau rouges, or red skins, as they call them. There our people have built schoolhouses, opened farms, and have organized a government, and are prospering in all the blessings and immunities of civilized life. Not only this, but they have sent thousands and thousands of dollars over to Europe to assist the suffering poor to go to America, where they might find an asylum. You, on the other hand, that went to our empty houses and farms—you, I say, went there under most favorable circumstances. Now, what is the result? I read in all of your reports from there, published in your own paper in Paris, a continued cry for help. The cry is to you for money, money: 'We want money to help us to carry out our designs.' The society that I represent comes with the fear of God—the worship of the great Elohim. They offer the simple plan ordained of God—viz., repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Our people have not been seeking the influence of the world, nor the power of government, but they have obtained both; whilst you, with your philosophy independent of God, have been seeking to build up a system of communism and a government which is, according to your own accounts, the way to introduce the millennial reign. Now, which is the best—our religion, or your philosophy?"

"Well," said the Icarian, "I cannot say anything." [^40]

Christ's Kingdom—Not of This World

Latter-day Saint thought indicated that it was in light of the spiritual transformation discussed above that Christ's statement should be understood when He declared that His kingdom was not of "this world." [^41] "He did not mean to convey the idea that it had no right to be on this earth," Brigham Young explained, "but that his kingdom was a righteous, holy kingdom, and not like the wicked kingdoms of the world." [^42]

Joseph Smith taught that the term world does not always mean "the earth," but is used at times in the scriptures to denote the order which exists among unregenerated man. [^43] A revelation declared, for example, that the "destruction of the wicked" in the last days "is the end of the world." [^44] The earth in its present state is a fallen sphere, severed from the glory and power of God, and the order of life upon it is in many ways alien to God. Jesus came down from heaven [^45]—from that higher order of life which exists above the veil—for the purpose of introducing the law and program of that higher sphere on earth, with the spiritual powers which accompany it. He said to the Jews in their unregenerated state: "Ye are from beneath; I am from above: Ye are of this world; I am not of this world." [^46]

The kingdom of God revealed to Joseph Smith was the restoration of that divine system which Jesus sought to establish anciently. Being centered in spiritual principles and powers, it was not of this world; it did not come from below, but from above. Some may have assumed that the kingdom of God stood aloof of social, economic, or political matters. But it was a kingdom in every sense of the word; however, its principles, laws, and powers had their origin not in the world but in the presence of God. For this higher order Jesus taught His disciples to pray, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." [^47] That desire was finally to be realized. The restored kingdom would never again be taken from the earth, but eventually it would raise up all things spiritually, out of the earth's fallen state, and enable man to rearrange his social, economic, and political institutions according to the pattern of the heavenly system in which the kingdom had its origin.

Universal Obedience—"Every Knee Shall Bow . . ."

The Saints held that when the will of God is done on earth as it is in heaven every knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ—not that every person will join His Church, but that they will submit to His divine political law of freedom and civil justice. Within the climate of freedom which that law guarantees, they will then be free to accept spiritual truths according to their desires and capacity to receive and to enjoy whatever level of happiness they can attain. This is what it means for every knee to bow and every tongue confess.

Brigham Young spoke with this view to the members of the pioneer company which he led to the Great Salt Lake Basin to establish the foundations of the kingdom of God in the West. He said:

Most of this camp belong to the Church, nearly all; and I would say to you brethren, and to the Elders of Israel, if you are faithful, you will yet be sent to preach this Gospel to the nations of the earth and bid all welcome whether they believe the Gospel or not, and this kingdom will reign over many who do not belong to the Church, over thousands who do not believe in the Gospel. Bye and bye every knee shall bow and every tongue confess and acknowledge and reverence and honor the name of God and His priesthood and observe the laws of the kingdom whether they belong to the Church and obey the Gospel or not. . . . That is what the scripture means by every knee shall bow, etc., and you cannot make anything else of it. [^48]

In another statement, President Young explained that "when Jesus comes to rule and reign King of Nations as he now does King of Saints," all people will be required to sustain His political law of freedom and justice. But His coming does not mean that all people will accept His spiritual law and program. "Seeing the Lord does not make a man a Saint." Brigham Young saw the law of Christ's kingdom politically as one thing and the law of Zion by which men would be exalted in the celestial kingdom as another. Though many would bow the knee in support of Christ's position as King of kings and in obedience to His political law, President Young stressed, "the spirit of their feelings may be couched in these words, 'I will be damned if I will serve You.'" [^49] Continuing, he explained:

In those days, . . . the different sects of Christendom will not be allowed to persecute each other.

What will they do? They will hear of the wisdom of Zion, and the kings and potentates of the nations will come up to Zion to inquire after the ways of the Lord, and to seek out the great knowledge, wisdom, and understanding manifested through the Saints of the Most High. They will inform the people of God that they belong to such and such a Church, and do not wish to change their religion.

They will be drawn to Zion by the great wisdom displayed there, and will attribute it to the cunning and craftiness of men. It will be asked, "What do you want to do, ye strangers from afar?" "We want to live our own religion." "Will you bow the knee before God with us?" "O yes, we would as soon do it as not;" and at that time every knee shall bow, and every tongue acknowledge that God who is the framer and maker of all things is the governor and controller of the universe. They will have to bow the knee and confess that He is God, and that Jesus Christ, who suffered for the sins of the world, is actually its Redeemer. . . .

They will ask, "If I bow the knee and confess that he is that Saviour, the Christ, to the glory of the Father, will you let me go home and be a Presbyterian?" "Yes." "And not persecute me?" "Never." "Won't you let me go home and belong to the Greek Church?" "Yes." "'Will you allow me to be a Friend Quaker, or a Shaking Quaker?" "O yes, anything you wish to be, but remember that you must not persecute your neighbors, but must mind your own business, and let your neighbors alone, and let them worship the sun, moon, a white dog, or anything else they please, being mindful that every knee has got to bow and every tongue confess. When you have paid this tribute to the Most High, who created you and preserves you, you may then go and worship what you please, or do what you please, if you do not infringe upon your neighbors." [^50]

Summary

The kingdom of God was a divine system directed by the Lord through a living prophet on earth, by which man could care adequately for every legitimate need in life and fulfil every lawful desire. Joseph Smith testified that it was God's purpose to build up the kingdom as the system through which Christ would reign as the earth's lawful king during the millennium. The will of God would then be done on earth as it is in heaven.

The kingdom was based upon Christ and His gospel, by which man could acquire regenerating truth and power from God. The kingdom, therefore, was not of this world. It derived its truth, power, and law from a higher order of life, and it was designed to elevate man to that higher sphere of existence where God and Christ dwell in glory. When the divine system was established on earth, every knee would eventually bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ—not that all men would immediately join the Church of Christ, but that they would sustain His political law of freedom and civil justice.

Footnotes

Is it treason for God Almighty to govern the earth? Who made it? God, did he not? Who made you? God, if you have an Eternal Father. Well, whose right is it to rule and reign over you and the earth? It does not belong to the Devil, nor to men. It has never been given to men yet: it has never been given to the nations. It belongs solely to God and He is coming to rule and reign over it.—Ibid., XIII, p. 164.

The first principle of Theology as held by this Church, is Faith in God the eternal Father, and in his Son Jesus Christ, who verily was crucified for the sins of the world, and who rose from the dead on the third day, and is now seated at the right hand of God as a mediator, and in the Holy Ghost who bears record of them, the same to day as yesterday, and forever. The second principle is Repentance towards God; that is, all men who believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are required to turn away from their sins, to cease from their evil deeds, and to come humble before the throne of grace with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. The third principle is Baptism, by immersion in water, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for remission of sins, with the promise of the Holy Ghost to all who believe and obey the gospel. The fourth principle is, the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus Christ, for the gift of the Holy Ghost. This ordinance is to be administered by the apostles or elders of the Church, upon those who are baptized into this church. Through these several steps of faith and obedience, man is made partaker of the Holy Ghost, and numbered with the children of God. Through this process man is adopted into the Church and kingdom of God, as one of his Saints: his name is then enrolled in the book of the names of the righteous, and it then becomes his duty to watch, to pray, to deal justly; and to meet together with the saints as oft as circumstances will admit of; and with them to partake of bread and wine in remembrance of the broken body, and shed blood of Jesus Christ; and in short, to continue faithful unto the end, in all the duties which are enjoined by the Law of Christ. Fifth, it is the duty and privilege of the saints thus organized upon the everlasting gospel, to believe in and enjoy all the gifts, powers, and blessings which flow from the Holy Spirit. Such for instance, as the gifts of revelation, prophecy, visions, the ministry of angels, healing the sick by the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus, the working of miracles, and in short all the gifts as mentioned in scripture, or as enjoyed by the ancient saints.—Parley P. Pratt, Introduction to Late Persecution of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (New York, 1840), pp. iii-v. For a discussion of the gospel plan in detail, see Volume II of this work.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, VI, p. 184. A corndodger is a long cornmeal cake, and a beetle is a wooden hammer or mallet.
[^2] Ibid., VI, p. 185. Since the program he was establishing was necessary for men to attain exaltation in the celestial kingdom, he added: "How many will be able to abide a celestial law, and go through and receive their exaltation, I am unable to say, as many are called, but few are chosen."—Ibid.
[^3] Ibid., V, pp. 424, 425.
[^4] Ibid., V, pp. 256, 257. For further explanations, see pp. 258-259.
[^5] MS, I (February, 1841), p. 257.
[^6] JD, XX, p. 204.
[^7] Ibid., VI, p. 24. See also p. 23.
[^8] Juvenile Instructor, Salt Lake City, Utah, XXXI (February 1, 1896), p. 140; HC, VII, p. 382.
[^9] D&C 134:9.
[^10] See Joseph Smith's explanation of the introduction of the sacred temple rites by which the divine patriarchal order was to be established, in HC, V, pp. 1-2. For a discussion of the Church of the Firstborn, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Right to Commune with Church of the Firstborn."
[^11] See HC, I, p. 283.
[^12] Ibid., III, p. 388.
[^13] D&C 105:5. For other references that the laws of Zion were those of a heavenly order, see D&C 38:32; 41:4; 42:2; 43:9; 44:6; 51:2, 15; 58:19; 82:15.
[^14] D&C 97:21.
[^15] Moses 7:18.
[^16] HC, I, p. 364; V, p. 424.
[^17] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Right to Come to Mount Zion and Heavenly Jerusalem."
[^18] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Blessings Of The Second Comforter."
[^19] See, for example, Moses 7:17; D&C 45:67; 64:41.
[^20] D&C 57:3.
[^21] D&C 101:21. See, also, D&C 57:3; 82:13, 14; 94:1; 101:21; 104:40; 107:36; 109:39; 115:6, 18; 119:7; 124:2, 36, 124; 125:4; 133:9; 136:10. See also Isaiah 33:20; 54:2, where the figure of a tent is used to refer to the heavenly system.
[^22] D&C 57.
[^23] D&C 57:2.
[^24] D&C 42:9; 84:2.
[^25] HC, VI, pp. 318-319.
[^26] See, for example, D&C 6:6; 11:6; 12:6; 14:6; 21:7.
[^27] D&C 82:14.
[^28] D&C 105:32.
[^29] D&C 97:19.
[^30] D&C 64:42.
[^31] D&C 105:31-32.
[^32] D&C 45:9.
[^33] D&C 115:5.
[^34] D&C 64:37, 43.
[^35] Written in England and published initially as Psalmody No. 33, in the hymnbook which Elder Pratt printed there in 1840.
[^36] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, May 29, 1847, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^37] JD, XXIV, p. 315.
[^38] "Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles," p. 10.
[^39] D&C 38:31-32.
[^40] D&C 43:9.
[^41] JD, XVII, p. 112, citing D&C 105:31-32.
[^42] JD, XVII, p. 112.
[^43] See, for example, Volume II of this study, the section in chapter seven entitled "King Lamoni and His People."
[^44] D&C 104:14-17.
[^45] D&C 38:22-27.
[^46] D&C 78:5-6.
[^47] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Endowment of Zion with Glory Through Temple Ordinances."
[^48] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Renewal of the Earth to Glory by Establishment of Temple-Centered Society."
[^49] HC, IV, p. 208.
[^50] Ibid., V, p. 427. See also p. 423.
