Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

2

The Nature of the Kingdom

It should be a matter of serious thought . . . whether there should not, in the very nature of present circumstances, and future millennial hopes, be an entire remodelling, or reorganization of religious society, upon the broad basis of revealed knowledge, tangible fact, and philosophical, scientific and spiritual Truth—a universal "standard," of immutable Truth.

—PARLEY P. PRATT.

Joseph Smith held that the spiritual and temporal went hand in hand, and that man should not seek one at the exclusion of the other. He also made it clear that the divine program of the kingdom extended beyond strictly spiritual matters, and that man could achieve full salvation only by establishing his life upon the spiritual, social, economic, and political laws of God. When he had done this, he could then cope successfully with the challenges and problems of life and realize its full objectives and ideals. On this basis the millennial kingdom would rest.

The Kingdom: New Social Arrangements

Open, Closed, and Covenant Society

There existed in the world of Joseph Smith's day two kinds of society, the open society and the closed society, with their several blends and variations. The open society was bounded by no arbitrary restrictions. The people were free, and the primary role of government was to maintain that freedom and administer civil justice. The open society resembled a mass of moving elements with no arbitrary restraints governing where they moved. Man achieved social status by merit or by fortune. A person could be born in a cabin and rise to the chief office of government, or to the greatest eminence in professional or social status. Conversely, a person could be born to luxury or position, but be reduced by misfortune or mismanagement to a low status.

Some of the significant benefits of the open society, exemplified to a degree by society in America during the second quarter of the nineteenth century (excluding the system of slavery in the South) were freedom, the release of human initiative, and a sense of personal dignity on the part of its members. Important deficiencies of the open society included a lack of union among the free members within the system, the inability of the system to give vigorous leadership and intelligent direction to the cause of social and economic well-being without restricting or destroying the principle of freedom, and a consequent sense of insecurity.

The closed society was bounded by arbitrary restrictions in the form of ideology, superstition, or brute force. The people were not free, or were not truly free, and the primary role of society was to regulate and direct the lives of its members, supposedly in their interest and for their good. A closed society was a well-regulated, orderly body of people, disciplined and regimented to the cause which the society espoused. Movement within the system was controlled, and changes of status were made according to established rules and procedures.

Some benefits of the closed society were security, unity, a sense of belonging, and a feeling of common goals. Its major deficiencies, exemplified by socialist orders and religious systems which used ideology, superstition, or force to induce conformity, were the suppression of freedom, a lack of initiative, a tendency to subordinate the individual to the system and thereby to destroy human dignity and create general inefficiency.

The central system of the kingdom of God was neither an open nor a closed society, but a covenant society in all aspects of its organization. Based upon enlightening and transforming spiritual powers, it consisted of new and more perfect relationships than could be attained in a strictly free society. It thus opened to man a whole new world in which new arrangements were possible in the home and in the social, economic, and political spheres of life, based upon greater freedom, justice, and social union.

As a covenant society, the divine system represented a third type of social arrangement which differed in significant ways from either the open or the closed society. Covenant society was a free society, with all the characteristics and benefits of a free order. In fact, therein all the desirable elements of the open society were broadened and enhanced. In addition, certain desirable elements were added to the open society. Among these were free and open union with all its benefits, and the means by which the free man could be induced to give willing and intelligent adherence to authority without being arbitrarily restricted in his actions by that authority. True covenant society, therefore, was a significant step forward in human relations—a breakthrough of the greatest magnitude—in the tradition of social arrangements based on the premise of freedom and human dignity. It built upon and enhanced the qualities and benefits of freedom of the open society while eliminating its deficiencies. It secured and refined the benefits of the closed society, while avoiding its perversions. Therefore, unity, security, and a sense of belonging were all achieved within a true covenant society, along with the ability to give vigorous leadership and intelligent direction to the cause of man's social and economic well-being.

The Kingdom in Its Own Setting

Because the kingdom of God consisted of new social relationships based on the principle of covenant and sustained by enlightening spiritual powers, it must be seen in that light and judged upon its own merits. Societies have different underlying philosophies and ideologies, varying patterns of thought and practice, and divergent customs and mores. A principle or practice that may be incongruous or contradictory in one system may fit harmoniously into another. This was particularly true of the kingdom of God. Many of its principles and practices appeared contradictory to established traditions, and for this reason many people expressed prejudice and hatred against the Prophet. He was tarred and feathered in Ohio as he began to institute the new economic system. He was charged with treason and sentenced to be shot in Missouri when he spoke of establishing the government of God. And he was denounced as a base and degenerate libertine in Illinois when he sought to institute a new marital program. The prejudice he encountered prompted him to quip:

There has been a great difficulty in getting anything into the heads of this generation. It has been like splitting hemlock knots with a corn-dodger for a wedge, and a pumpkin for a beetle. Even the Saints are slow to understand. [^1]

The Prophet even had difficulty getting his associates to grasp the divine plan. "I have tried for a number of years to get the minds of the Saints prepared to receive the things of God," he explained; "but we frequently see some of them, after suffering all they have for the work of God, will fly to pieces like glass as soon as anything comes that is contrary to their traditions: they cannot stand the fire at all." [^2] Again he said:

Many men will say, "I will never forsake you, but will stand by you at all times." But the moment you teach them some of the mysteries of the kingdom of God that are retained in the heavens and are to be revealed to the children of men when they are prepared for them, they will be the first to stone you and put you to death. It was this same principle that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, and will cause the people to kill the prophets in this generation. . . .

It always has been when a man was sent of God with the priesthood and he began to preach the fullness of the gospel, that he was thrust out by his friends, who are ready to butcher him if he teach things which they imagine to be wrong. [^3]

Priesthood: the Basis of a Church and State

The Prophet made it clear that the entire program of the kingdom of God was derived from the Holy Priesthood: "Whenever there has been . . . a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God, there is the kingdom of God; . . . and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not." [^4] Joseph Smith's associates who had been instructed by him made similar statements on the relationship of the kingdom of God to the Holy Priesthood. "The priesthood of Melchizedek was never in operation on the earth without the kingdom of God also," Parley P. Pratt explained; "for the priesthood is the government, or rather the source and fountain from which springs all things pertaining to his government on the earth." [^5]

Fully developed, the kingdom of God was to be both a church and a state. The two organizations grew out of the Holy Priesthood. George Q. Cannon, who as a young man knew Joseph Smith and later became one of the greatest students of the Prophet's thought, declared that God restored "two powers" through the latter-day Seer: one was an ecclesiastical system and the other a municipal organ. [^6] John Taylor, a close associate of the Prophet and the third President of the Church, said:

Was the kingdom that the [ancient] Prophets talked about, that should be set up in the latter times, going to be a Church? Yes. And a state? Yes, it was going to be both Church and State, to rule temporally and spiritually. [^7]

Though both church and state grew out of the priesthood and were under the direction of the living prophet who held the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, George Q. Cannon made it clear that the political system was "a separate organization from the Church of God." He stressed: "On this point the Prophet Joseph gave particular instructions before his death." [^8] The dictum of the Saints was to be strictly maintained which said: "We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members, as citizens, denied." [^9]

Both organizations within the kingdom were based upon the principle of covenant. The covenant of spiritual renewal and regeneration by which man could become a new creature in Christ was that upon which the Church was established, and the covenant of freedom and civil justice was that upon which the state was based.

The Perfected Kingdom

Though the kingdom of God was to be a church and a state, this was an initial organization. To see the full vision of the Prophet's thought, one must look beyond that type of arrangement. Joseph Smith made it clear that the perfected kingdom was a divine patriarchal order in which all the functions of the church and state would ultimately center. That perfected order was the Church of the Firstborn—the eternal, celestial family of Jesus Christ [^10] in which righteous men, as priests and kings, would exercise both spiritual and political power over a continuing posterity in the millennial kingdom and throughout eternity. In eternity, the law and ministry of God would also go forth from the celestial kingdom or family to govern and bless those in lesser kingdoms of glory, and a similar order would be established on earth in the millennial kingdom.

Zion

The Meaning of Zion

The perfected church, or the divine patriarchal order established upon its full spiritual, social, and economic law and program, was called Zion. The municipal organ of the kingdom was not part of the program of Zion. Instead, Zion was the heart of the kingdom, the germ from which the millennial government would one day develop as a separate organ. Thus associated, both systems would be centered in the eternal family order and be directed by the living prophet who held the keys of the kingdom, and in many ways they expected to supplement and complement each other.

Joseph Smith's concept of Zion rested on the premise that there was a heavenly society comprised of exalted beings who lived in the presence of God, and that the abode of the heavenly beings was called Mount Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem. [^11] Zion on earth was patterned after the heavenly society. The Saints looked for a city whose builder and maker was God [^12]—a city whose laws came from God and whose order was patterned after celestial society. Consistent with this view, a revelation said: "Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom." [^13]

A patriarchal structure based upon the order and program of the house of the Lord, Zion derived her name from her most essential feature: "This is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART." [^14] But in Latter-day Saint thought, man became pure in heart only by embracing the gospel and establishing his life upon the law of Zion. A revelation said that in Enoch's day, "The Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^15] By the law of Zion they achieved these great objectives and were made pure by the divine program and its enlightening spiritual powers.

Members of the heavenly society were made heirs in the Father's kingdom, enjoying all the rights which that status implied. [^16] When they were sanctified and sealed by the Holy Priesthood to become a permanent part of the divine order, Joseph Smith taught that the Saints would, as heirs on earth, have a right to commune openly with the heavenly hosts and share their glory. [^17] Only then would Zion—the pure in heart who were privileged to see God by receiving the blessings of the second Comforter [^18]—truly exist on earth. Zion was a heavenly society established on earth where Jesus could come and be with His people and manifest His glory to them. [^19] Fully developed, Zion was composed of those who had made their calling and election sure within the divine patriarchal order.

Organizationally, Zion was like a tent, with a Center Place [^20] and supporting "stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion." [^21] The Center Place—designated by revelation to be built at Independence, Jackson County, Missouri [^22]—was also called the City of Zion [^23] and the City of the New Jerusalem. [^24] Cities of Zion, or stakes, were to be built up throughout North and South America, which the Prophet designated as the land of Zion. [^25] But ultimately, Zion would extend throughout the earth.

Several revelations referred to the work of establishing "the cause of Zion" on earth. [^26] "Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness," one declared; "her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments." [^27] The nations of the earth would then "be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion" was in very deed "the kingdom of our God and his Christ," [^28] and they would honor her by saying: "Surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there." [^29]

Zion an Ensign and Standard

Zion as the heart of the kingdom of God was to be an ensign and a standard to the world, that all men might look to her and pattern their lives and their social arrangements after her example of truth and righteousness. An ensign is a distinguished flag or banner, used in ancient times to direct the actions of men such as in a military campaign. As an ensign to the world in the last days, Zion was to be a rallying point of truth—a true banner of freedom, justice, union, and human dignity—to attract the attention of all men and direct them into the paths of peace and progression. "She shall be an ensign unto the people," a revelation said of Zion, "and there shall come unto her out of every nation under heaven." [^30] Before the work of the Lord could be consummated in the last days, another revelation admonished: "First let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me, that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations; that the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ." [^31]

A standard is a means of measuring things to determine their relative position or relationship to truth. As an ensign, the society of Zion was to be a standard to the world, setting forth correct spiritual, social, and economic principles and relationships among men. The Lord said by revelation: "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me." [^32]

As a messenger before the Lord, the society of Zion was to be a nucleus of the millennial kingdom—an opening wedge—containing the basic principles and powers through which, eventually, peace and good will could be established universally among men. The divine system was to be developed among the Saints first, and then expanded throughout the earth as the millennial kingdom of Christ was ushered in. "Arise and shine forth," a revelation therefore instructed the Saints, "that thy light may be a standard for the nations." [^33] Of Zion as a standard, another revelation said:

Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. . . . And the day shall come when the [corrupt] nations of the earth shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones. [^34]

In 1840, Parley P. Pratt wrote poetically of the role of Zion as a standard to the world, and from that time the Saints have sung the following stanzas:

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled. The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world. The clouds of error disappear Before the rays of truth divine; The glory, bursting from afar Wide o'er the nations soon will shine. [^35]

To raise Zion to be an ensign and a standard to the world the Saints had, first, to apply Zion's celestial law and develop a dynamic Christian society which achieved the goals of true brotherhood and social justice; and, second, to maintain God's government as a system which guaranteed freedom to all men. As Brigham Young led the Saints west to the Great Salt Lake Basin, he expressed the ideal of the kingdom. Wilford Woodruff reported:

He . . . spoke of the standard and ensign that would be reared in Zion to govern the Kingdom of God and the nations of the earth. . . . On the standard would be a flag of every nation under heaven, so there would be an invitation to all nations under heaven to come unto Zion. The Saints would have to keep the celestial law, and all nations and religions would have to bow the knee to God and acknowledge the right and reign of Christ. Then if they felt disposed to reject the gospel and the doctrine, they had a right to. . . . And upon this principle all men or religions may dwell with us in peace, if they will keep the outward laws of the kingdom of God so as to acknowledge his name and his right to reign and let us keep the laws of the gospel and obey his commandments undisturbed. [^36]

Only when Zion became an ensign and a standard, showing the way to true peace, union, and prosperity, could the full program of the kingdom of God which the Saints envisioned be developed and God's government be established on earth. Daniel H. Wells, a counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency, stressed:

After He [God] has gotten unto Himself a people who will do His work, a people whom He has proved to be faithful and true and full of integrity, why, with such a people He can fulfill His words spoken through His servants centuries ago, that the kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdom of our Lord and His Christ. Until He does obtain a people of this kind, He cannot consistently bestow this kingdom. [^37]

Of the role Zion would play in the divine kingdom upon the Western hemisphere when that day came, an official proclamation of the Quorum of the Twelve said in 1845: "The City of Zion, with its sanctuary and priesthood, and the glorious fulness of the gospel, will constitute a standard which will put an end to jarring creeds and political wranglings, by uniting the republics, states, provinces, territories, nations, tribes, kindred, tongues, people, and sects of North and South America in one great and common bond of brotherhood; while truth and knowledge shall make them free, and love cement their union." [^38]

Benefits Of The Kingdom

The Perfecting of the Saints

A revelation declared that the law of Zion was designed to gather the Saints unto the Lord and make them "a righteous people, without spot and blameless." [^39] Another promised that by complying with the new program they could "be sanctified" by that which they received. [^40] This was to be done through the influence of several factors. First, the divine system was designed to encourage man's initiative and dignify him through true freedom and justice. Second, the program of Zion was designed to unite man with his fellow man without destroying individuality and give him the benefits of the concerted efforts. Third, the Prophet held that the Spirit could be developed in man as he complied with the divine program, until the Saints in Zion were finally glorified with the presence and power of God. Orson Pratt explained: "By obedience to these laws [of Zion] we continually gain more and more favor from heaven, more and more of the Spirit of God, and thus will be fulfilled a revelation given in 1834, which says that before Zion is redeemed, let the armies of Israel become very great, let them become sanctified before me." [^41]

The Saints did not believe in instant sanctification, Elder Pratt observed, but "in the sanctification that comes by continued obedience to the law of heaven." [^42] The Holy Spirit could change a man's heart in a relatively short time so that he had no more desire to sin, [^43] but the task of fully renovating and purifying his whole being from all the effects of sin and the fall of Adam would come gradually only as he lived the gospel. The family, the social order, the economic order, and the political state—all had to be established upon the law of God. Only when society was purified and permeated by the Holy Spirit could man be fully sanctified.

Spiritual, Social, and Economic Justice

The kingdom of God was designed to answer the cry of the true liberal who sought social justice, as well as the desire of those who sought freedom to direct their own interests. But a cardinal assumption of the kingdom was that true justice, prosperity, freedom, and human dignity could be achieved only through the Lord's law. A revelation said of the purposes of God in regard to the economic needs of man:

I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine.

And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine.

But it must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low.

For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves. [^44]

Joseph Smith taught that God designed to give each individual in Zion an equal opportunity to acquire both temporal and spiritual blessings. In a revelation which sought to prepare the Saints for the law of Zion by making known some of the underlying principles of that law, the Lord said:

Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people. . . .

Teach one another according to the office wherewith I have appointed you;

And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me.

And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself.

For what man among you having twelve sons, and is no respecter of them, and they serve him obediently, and he saith unto the one: Be thou clothed in robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou there—and looketh upon his sons and saith I am just?

Behold, this I have given unto you as a parable, and it is even as I am. I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine. [^45]

This revelation was concerned with both spiritual and economic justice and union. If the Saints were not one temporally, on the basis of social and economic justice, they were not Christ's. Another revelation declared that spiritual equality would come only in the wake of temporal equality. Zion's economic order was to be established, it declared, that the Saints might "be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things." It then added: "For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things." [^46]

These declarations imply that true freedom and justice do not come through the state alone, but, in addition, from correct spiritual, social, and economic institutions. So long as deficient or perverse institutions allow or generate spiritual darkness, social distinctions, and economic inequalities, man cannot truly be free.

The Prophet held that the task had to be achieved in a climate of freedom, by men intelligently and spontaneously attaining a kind of union—spiritually, socially, and economically—that would not destroy individualism. Coercion could not be used without a critical loss of personal freedom and dignity, even if applied by the people themselves through democratic processes. The will of the majority would coerce minority groups; and even when the majority chose to compel themselves, a form of coercion would still be employed, with its inevitable baneful effects.

Endowment of the Saints with Glory

The Prophet's view that the Saints could be endowed with glory by building Zion upon the sacred rites and covenants of the temple has been mentioned earlier in this study, [^47] along with the fact that the establishment of this temple-centered society would contribute to the renewal of the earth to a state of paradisiacal glory during the millennium. [^48] He taught that just as there is a practical program by which man can be placed in possession of the Holy Ghost and receive its sacred gifts and powers—by applying faith in Christ, repenting of sin, being properly baptized for the remission of sins, and receiving the laying on of authorized hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost—so also there is a practical program centering in the higher rites and covenants of the gospel and the system of Zion by which man can be endowed with the glory of God while yet in mortality. This is a vital point. The Prophet therefore referred to the program of the kingdom as "that glorious and perfect order" by which God sends "forth power, revelation, and glory." [^49] For this reason, he explained, it was necessary to gather the people together, that they might "receive the ordinances, the blessings, and glories that God has in store for His Saints." [^50]

The ancient prophets and patriarchs desired to build up the kingdom of God and restore the earth to a state of glory, [^51] but they largely failed. However, Joseph Smith explained that the ancients "prophesied of a day when this glory would be revealed." This, he said, would be in the dispensation of the fulness of times, when, through Zion's law, all things had been gathered together in Christ. [^52]

It was the design of the new dispensation from the beginning to endow the Saints with the glory and power of God. In 1823, the angel Moroni directed the attention of Joseph Smith to the time when the Saints would "be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God shall rest upon them." [^53] To this end they were to receive the law of Zion—that they might "be endowed with power from on high." [^54]

On this basis many of the Saints received a significant endowment of glory and power in the Kirtland Temple. [^55] But these manifestations were but the beginning of the spiritual powers and blessings which the faithful were to receive. [^56] Isaiah spoke prophetically of Zion in the last days, saying, "And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence." [^57]

Jesus affirmed this testimony when He spoke to the Nephites of His latter-day work, stating of the New Jerusalem: "And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you." [^58] Again He said of His people in the New Jerusalem: "Then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst." [^59]

In initiating the program upon which Zion or the New Jerusalem was to be built, Joseph Smith made it clear that its design was to bring every eligible person to commune openly with Christ and partake of His glory. [^60] This he expected many of the faithful to do before the Lord came to reign on earth. In 1833, the Prophet was instructed to lay out the "foundation of the city of the stake of Zion" at Kirtland, Ohio. The divine plan called for a house to be built for the Presidency of the Church. Of that building the revelation said:

It shall be wholly dedicated unto the Lord for the work of the presidency.

And it shall not suffer any unclean thing to come in unto it; and my glory shall be there, and my presence shall be there.

But if there shall come into it any unclean thing, my glory shall not be there; and my presence shall not come into it. [^61]

Revelations to the Prophet referred repeatedly to Zion being endowed with glory prior to the millennial reign of Christ. Of the New Jerusalem one said: "The glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord shall also be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it." [^62] Another revelation declared:

Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her;

And she shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her out of every nation under heaven.

And the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of her terrible ones. [^63]

Still another revelation spoke of the temple in the New Jerusalem, which the Prophet held would be built before Christ came to reign on earth:

Inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it;

Yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God.

But if it be defiled I will not come into it, and my glory shall not be there; for I will not come into unholy temples. [^64]

These blessings to the Saints were predicated upon their obedience. Having stated the requirement to obey the law of God and build Zion, the revelation said: "And, now, behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible." [^65] But the Saints did not do all that was required of them to establish Zion in the days of Joseph Smith, [^66] and they were hindered in their efforts by their fellow Americans. As they moved westward under the leadership of Brigham Young, a revelation therefore declared, after stating that Zion would be redeemed in the Lord's "own due time": "Marvel not at these things, for ye are not pure; ye can not bear my glory; but ye shall behold it if ye are faithful in keeping all my words that I have given you." [^67] The challenge to acquire the glory of God by building Zion was still before them.

Preparation of the Saints for the Coming of Christ

The program for endowing the Saints with glory was also necessary to prepare them for the coming of Christ in His glory. The Lord declared that Zion was "to be a standard for my people . . . and . . . a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me." [^68] Another revelation stated that the New Jerusalem had to be built that the Saints might "gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming." [^69] The Saints could not look intelligently for Christ's coming until this was done. The ancient psalmist declared: "When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory." [^70] This, Joseph Smith explained, would be done in "the land of America." [^71] Only by establishing the full law of Zion could the Saints prepare fully for Christ's coming and be sanctified so they could associate with the Lord in His glory.

Speaking of the need to establish Zion, a revelation explained: "Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." [^72] This applied to Christ receiving the Saints unto Himself either as He came to earth or in eternity. The requirement in both cases was the same. Having marvelled at the myriad creations of God, the ancient patriarch Enoch said: "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity." [^73] Presumably this was done by their obedience to the law of Zion. That law required the Saints to meet the same challenge, if they were to be received by Christ on earth and in eternity. "As a people we are expecting the day to come when Jesus will descend in the clouds of Heaven; but before this day comes we must be prepared to receive him," George Q. Cannon observed. "The organization of society that exists in the heavens must exist on the earth; the same condition of society, so far as it is applicable to mortal beings, must exist here." [^74]

In a vision, God showed Enoch that the building of the New Jerusalem would prepare the faithful Saints to be united with the heavenly hosts who would accompany Christ when He came in glory. [^75] Moreover, God made a covenant with Enoch which was symbolized by the rainbow, and which was renewed with Noah, in which the Lord said, as recorded in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible:

The bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself.

And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy;

And the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch. [^76]

Giving the Saints an Eternal Inheritance

Through the law of Zion the Saints were to secure an eternal inheritance with God in the resurrection. The Lord said of this in a revelation: "If you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and required of you." [^77]

The divine economic law was one of the requirements the Saints had to meet. The Lord declared: "And whoso is found a faithful, a just, and a wise steward shall enter into the joy of his Lord, and shall inherit eternal life." [^78] Another revelation stated: "He that is a faithful and wise steward shall inherit all things." [^79]

The final inheritances referred to in these revelations were to be given at the judgment when the millennial kingdom had been established and the faithful of all ages had been resurrected at Christ's coming. "Then shall the angels be crowned with the glory of his might," a revelation said, "and the Saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritances and be made equal with him." [^80]

The Government Of God

The municipal organ through which the political law of the Holy Priesthood would be expressed was named by revelation: "The Kingdom of God, and His laws, with the keys and power thereof, and judgment in the hands of His servant, Ahman Christ." [^81] Thereby the law and power of God were to be extended into the civil sphere of life, making the divine system a kingdom in every sense of the term.

Joseph Smith referred to the Church as the kingdom of God, in a spiritual sense; [^82] but he and his associates also spoke of the municipal organ, specifically, as being the kingdom. [^83] Depending on the context, this will be the meaning of the term kingdom of God in some statements by the Prophet and his associates which are cited in this and the succeeding volume of this study. To avoid confusion, this writer will always refer to the kingdom of God as any part of the over-all program of Zion, including the political system. But the term "government of God" will be used exclusively to refer to the political system of the kingdom.

Brigham Young spoke of the two views of the kingdom of God when he said, after referring to the Church: "This is what we are in the habit of calling the Kingdom of God." "But," he stressed, "there are further organizations." Having explained that "the Prophet gave a full and complete organization of this kingdom the spring before he was killed," President Young said of the more complete system that would one day "be organized in strength and power": "The Kingdom of God will protect every person, every sect and all people upon the face of the whole earth in their legal rights; I shall not tell you the names of the members of this kingdom, neither shall I read to you its constitution, but the constitution was given by revelation." [^84]

In a letter to Henry Clay, Joseph Smith mentioned a political organ as being part of the system which ancient prophets foretold [^85] as they spoke of the millennial kingdom of Christ. According to the Prophet, Isaiah was one who wrote of the "promise of a perfect government in the last days." [^86] Speaking of Christ, Isaiah said: "The government shall be upon his shoulder." [^87] Again, of the millennial kingdom:

With righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. . . .

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. [^88]

It was also made clear that the latter-day kingdom of which Daniel spoke [^89] would ultimately assume political character. After referring to the national states which would exist in the last days, he said: "In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these [latter-day] kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever." [^90] The divine kingdom was likened unto a stone "cut out without hands" and which "smote the image upon the feet . . . and broke them to pieces." The elements of the earthly kingdoms then "became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them." Meanwhile, the stone "became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth." [^91]

Three things about the kingdom to which Daniel referred are important. First, it was to be primarily a spiritual system. With obvious reference to Daniel's prophecy, Joseph Smith wrote in a revelation: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth." [^92] Being fundamentally a spiritual system, the latter-day kingdom was to originate with God, not man, and for this reason it was said that it would be cut out without hands. Orson Pratt explained that this metaphor meant "it should be organized by the Lord, and governed by His laws." It meant, also, that "when the kingdom of God should be taken from the mountains, it should be taken by the power of the Almighty, and not by human hands." [^93]

Second, the kingdom of God, when fully developed, would include a political organ designed to protect all men in the exercise of their inalienable rights. Such a system would be necessary in order for the kingdom to take the place of the national states which would be broken and destroyed by the judgments of God in the last days. Charles W. Penrose therefore explained that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had been "established by the Almighty for the express purpose of opening up the way" for the complete kingdom of which Daniel spoke. "In this Church," he said, "is the germ of that kingdom that Daniel saw." [^94]

Several leading men among the Saints expressed the view that the fully developed kingdom to which Daniel referred would include a system of political law and government. [^95] Brigham Young declared that "the kingdom that Daniel spoke of," which was to be "set up in the last days," would "rule the nations of the earth, . . . protecting them in their rights." [^96] This was the system which God introduced through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith. "The Lord God Almighty has set up a kingdom that will sway the sceptre of power and authority over all the kingdoms of the world, and will never be destroyed," President Young explained, "it is the kingdom that Daniel saw and wrote of." [^97] Still again he said:

The kingdom that Daniel saw will push forth its law, and that law will protect the Methodists, Quakers, Pagans, Jews, and every other creed there ever was or ever will be, in their religious rights. . . . The kingdom that Daniel saw will actually make laws to protect every man in his rights, as our government does now, whether the religions of the people are true or false. [^98]

This was the millennial kingdom of Jesus Christ. While explaining the "grand panorama of kingdoms" portrayed in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Orson Pratt said: "It was a prophetic scenery, reaching to the latter times, showing him how man-made governments should be destroyed, and how the divine government should succeed and triumph, and have universal and everlasting dominion on earth." [^99]

Third, the kingdom which Daniel saw would not use arbitrary force or military action to break in pieces the national states of the last days, but they would be broken by the power of truth and the judgments of God. In speaking of the fact that he was an instrument in setting up the kingdom of Daniel, Joseph Smith explained that it would "not be by sword or gun" that the kingdom would roll on, but by "the power of truth." [^100] Orson Pratt also explained:

Connected with the kingdom or stone cut out of the mountain without hands is a power superior to that of carnal weapons—the power of truth. . . . The kingdom of God cannot be organized on the earth . . . without men again being called to the Holy Priesthood and Apostleship, and sent forth to publish the truth in its naked simplicity and plainness to the inhabitants of the earth. This truth will be the weapon of warfare . . . among the nations that compose the feet and toes of the great image. Will they be broken to pieces? Yes, when this message is published to them. When they are sufficiently warned, when the servants of God have . . . published . . . these sacred and holy principles that God Almighty has sent down from heaven in the latter times, it will leave all people, nations and tongues that hear the Gospel, and the principles and message pertaining to that kingdom, without any excuse. It will be a warning that will be everlasting on the one hand, or on the other, either to the bringing of the people to repentance, reformation and obedience to the Gospel of the kingdom, or the judgments which are predicted in this prophecy of Daniel will be poured out upon the heads of those nations and kingdoms, and they will become like the chaff of the summer threshing floor. [^101]

The Order Of The Kingdom

A Prophet's Place in the Kingdom

Joseph Smith held that a true prophet, as God's mouth-piece on earth, occupied a position of authority above both the church and the state in the kingdom of God. His function was to speak for God on any issue of life, spiritual, political, etc.; and in fulfilling this central responsibility he was not dependent upon any earthly authority or organization. Brigham Young therefore explained: "A man may be a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and it may have nothing to do with his being the President of the Church." [^102]

This meant that in speaking for God, a prophet did not need to have the consent of man. God alone called prophets, and God alone sustained them. But when a prophet acted in the additional function as President of the Church, he was to function in that ecclesiastical capacity only by the expressed consent of the people. Likewise, a prophet had also to have the consent of the people to direct the political operations of the kingdom.

Priesthood Direction of All Branches of the Kingdom

"Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself," Joseph Smith said; "he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were both one, there was no distinction." [^103] This was the true order of the kingdom. When some of the Prophet's associates evidenced a lack of understanding of the divine system, he challenged: "Have we not learned the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, which includes both Prophets, Priests and Kings?" [^104] A king was a political figure within the kingdom of God, while a priest was an ecclesiastical figure—one who held spiritual keys and powers in that system. Those offices and functions were included in the divine system that centered in the Holy Priesthood. Again the Prophet explained, as he spoke of the perfected patriarchal order of the kingdom:

Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings. In fact, that Priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam. [^105]

Parley P. Pratt wrote of the full scope of divine authority and power of the priesthood:

Jesus Christ, being the first Apostle thus commissioned, and the President of all the powers thus delegated, is Lord of lords, and King of kings, in the heavens and on the earth. Hence this Priesthood is called the Priesthood after the order of the Son of God. It holds the keys of all the true principles of government in all worlds, being without beginning of days or end of life. It . . . holds the keys of revelation of the oracles of God to man upon the earth; the power and right to give laws and commandments to individuals, churches, rulers, nations and the world; to appoint, ordain, and establish constitutions and kingdoms; to appoint kings, presidents, governors or judges, and to ordain or anoint them to their several holy callings, also to instruct, warn, or reprove them by the word of the Lord.

It also holds the keys of the administration of ordinances for the remission of sins, and for the gift of the Holy Spirit; to heal the sick, cast out demons, or work miracles in the name of the Lord; in fine, to bind or loose on earth and in heaven. For the exercise of all which powers the student of Theology will find abundant precedents in the sacred Scriptures. [^106]

Sequence in Building the Kingdom

A natural order was to be followed in building the kingdom of God on earth. John Taylor explained: "Before there could be a kingdom of God, there must be a Church of God, and hence the first principles of the Gospel were needed to be preached to all nations, as they were formerly when the Lord Jesus Christ and others made their appearance on the earth." [^107] There were intelligent reasons why this sequence had to be followed. First, the Church had initially to be established, Elder Taylor explained, "because of the impossibility of introducing the law of God among a people who would not be subject to and be guided by the spirit of revelation." [^108] Before God could establish the full program of His kingdom on the earth without resorting to coercive measures, the obedient had to be taught and nurtured in the principles and processes of revelation. This meant that they had to learn how to exercise true and living faith in Christ, how to obtain the Holy Ghost and utilize His blessings and powers in their lives, and how to employ true theocratic procedures in the operations of society. Only among such a people could the full program of the kingdom of God be introduced.

Second, the government of God was a system of free and open union in its political operations, and the Church had to precede the divine political organ to establish a foundation of union upon which the latter organization could rest and by which it could function properly. "The world have generally made great mistakes upon these points," Elder Taylor observed. "They have started various projects to try to unite and cement the people together without God; but they could not do it." Having mentioned some of the schemes in his day by which men tried to "cement the human family together," he continued:

And then we have had peace societies, based upon the same principles; but all these things have failed, and they will fail, because, however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan our ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God, and that Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the Gospel; and hence Jesus told his disciples to go and preach the Gospel to every creature. . . . It was by this cementing, uniting Spirit, that true sympathetic, fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed. [^109]

A revelation to Joseph Smith mentioned a third condition prerequisite to the full establishment and extension of the government of God throughout the world. It declared that the Saints had first to apply the economic law of Zion and become "independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world" before they could "come up unto the crown prepared" for them and "be made rulers over many kingdoms." [^110] For them to be made rulers over many kingdoms meant for them to attain to the place which they were to fill in the full program of the kingdom when the powers of government were to be "given to the people of the saints of the most high." [^111] To that end they had first to become an independent people, economically, under Zion's law—an ensign and a standard to the world. They could then administer true justice and maintain freedom by means of the government of God.

The Kingdom Of God In Past Ages

Past Examples of the Kingdom

"The Lord has at various times commenced this kind of government, and tendered His services to the human family," Joseph Smith explained concerning the kingdom in past ages. [^112] Specifically, he mentioned the patriarch Enoch, Abraham, Joseph in Egypt, and Moses." [^113] In some instances the record of the kingdom in the past emphasized the spiritual programs of the system. At other times, the report placed emphasis upon the economic order which the people developed. And at times mention was made of the political program of the kingdom.

The Zion of Enoch

Enoch was the must successful prophet and patriarch in developing the program of the kingdom of God in antediluvian times. [^114] Joseph Smith explained that God "selected Enoch, whom He directed, and gave His law unto, and to the people who were with him; and when the world in general would not obey the commandments of God, after walking with God, he translated Enoch and his church, and the Priesthood or government of heaven was taken away." [^115]

Enoch began to build the kingdom by preaching the gospel which regenerated those who received its spiritual gifts and blessings. He then gathered believers together and established among them the divine patriarchal, social, economic, and political programs of Zion. [^116] Enoch was a prophet, patriarch, and king over his people by virtue of the same order of priesthood to which Adam and Noah belonged, for those two great patriarchs also presided as prophets, patriarchs, and kings over their people. Abraham spoke politically of "the reign of Adam, and also of Noah." [^117]

When Enoch's people applied the full spiritual, social, economic, and political laws of the kingdom of God in their lives, they obtained marvelous blessings and powers from God. A revelation stated:

So great was the faith of Enoch, that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spoke the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course. . . .

There went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God;

And . . . the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness.

The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people. And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish.

And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness, and there was no poor among them. [^118]

By truly applying the principles and ordinances of the gospel, the followers of Enoch became a holy people and achieved a free and open union made possible only through the power of the Holy Spirit. They were of one heart and one mind, and they lived according to the divine economic order of Zion so that there were no poor among them. They achieved the goal of social and economic justice. Because they made their callings and elections sure to a celestial resurrection, the glory of God rested upon them in great power; [^119] the Lord came and dwelt with them; and they enjoyed many blessings reserved for those who receive the second Comforter. So great was the glory and power of God in Enoch's Zion that the fear of God came upon the unregenerated nations of their day. But in Zion true and lasting peace prevailed, and the people flourished.

The System of Melchizedek

Like Enoch, Melchizedek was also successful in building up the kingdom of God in his day. "Having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, it being after the order of the Son of God." [^120] He then developed the economic and political programs of the Holy Priesthood. Economically this included the law of tithing, which was given "that thereby the people might look forward on the Son of God, it being a type of his order, or it being his order, and this that . . . they might enter into the rest of the Lord." [^121] Their political system also centered in the Holy Priesthood, as the expression of the municipal law of that priesthood. [^122] Within that divine system, Melchizedek was a king over the land of Salem. Because of his efforts to establish the divine order among his people, peace was established in the land, and he was called "the prince of Peace." [^123]

Like Enoch's followers, the people of Melchizedek obtained great spiritual blessings by establishing the kingdom of God in their midst. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible states that they "wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven [i.e., the blessings of the second Comforter], and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth." [^124]

The Order of Ancient Israel

Moses to a degree established the kingdom of God among the ancient Israelites. Having brought them across the Red Sea, he preached the gospel to them, baptized them in the sea, and gave them the baptism of the Holy Spirit. [^125] Through the Israelites later rejected the greater spiritual endowments which they could have received through the full law and program of the kingdom, the social, economic, and political forms of that kingdom were partially established among them. God's law to Israel was not limited to spiritual and religious matters; at Mount Sinai, the Israelites were organized into a political kingdom. Joseph Smith explained:

When the children of Israel were chosen with Moses at their head, they were to be a peculiar people, among whom God should place His name; their motto was: "The Lord is our lawgiver; the Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our King, and He shall reign over us." While in this state they might truly say, "Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord." Their government was a theocracy; they had God to make their laws, and men chosen by Him to administer them; He was their God, and they were His people. [^126]

A volume could be written on the kingdom which was established among the Israelites at Mount Sinai. Many of its laws were codified by Moses in the book of Deuteronomy. Only fifteen verses dealt with the Ten Commandments. [^127] But chapter after chapter, about six hundred verses, sets forth commandments, statutes, and judgments which God gave Moses to govern individual, family, and national matters. Because Israel rejected the higher law and program of the kingdom which the Lord sought initially to give them, these and other statements in the Old Testament contain a mixture of lesser and higher laws, evidenced by the fact that Jesus later approved of some but replaced others.

The functions of the Israelite kingdom centered in the temple, [^128] and the cloud of God's glory was reckoned as one of the special blessings of Israel in her days of greater righteousness. [^129] When God promised, "My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest," Moses could therefore respond, "If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence." [^130] The glory of God filled the tabernacle, their portable temple, and directed the Israelites in their travels. [^131] And when the temple was constructed at Jerusalem by Solomon, fire came down from heaven and the glory of God filled the Lord's house. [^132]

The Kingdom Among the Nephites

There are several examples of the kingdom of God among the Nephites. The original Nephi was more than a spiritual leader in the colony of Lehi. Under his father he was a "ruler" and a "teacher." [^133] Being a mighty prophet and seer, he was later accepted by the Nephite segment of the original colony "as a king or a protector," [^134] who "wielded the sword of Laban in their defence" and labored "all his days for their welfare." [^135] Of their system, Nephi wrote: "We did observe to keep the judgments, and the statutes, and the commandments of the Lord in all things according to the law of Moses." [^136]

Nephi's reign marked the beginning of a political dynasty, and his brother Jacob wrote at his death:

Wherefore, the people were desirous to retain in remembrance his name. And whoso should reign in his stead were called by the people, second Nephi, third Nephi, and so forth, according to the reigns of the kings; and thus they were called by the people, let them be of whatever name they would. [^137]

A similar system was later established in the land of Zarahemla after the more righteous element of the Nephites left their original inheritance and merged with the people of Mulek. Mosiah became their king. [^138] He was a translator, "by the gift and power of God"; [^139] and as such he was a prophet, seer, and revelator. [^140]

After the death of Mosiah, his son Benjamin reigned in his stead as an ideal prophet, priest, and king. Of him and his ministry, Mormon wrote:

King Benjamin was a holy man, and he did reign over his people in righteousness; and there were many holy men in the land, and they did speak the word of God with power and with authority; and they did use much sharpness because of the stiffneckedness of the people—

Wherefore, with the help of these, King Benjamin, by laboring with all the might of his body and the faculty of his whole soul, and also the prophets, did . . . establish peace in the land. [^141]

The proceedings of the great convocation at which King Benjamin later anointed his son Mosiah to be his successor was a classic example of the nature and order of the kingdom of God among a people who accepted the institutions of heaven. When he declared that he would no longer be their teacher or their king [^142] and presented his son Mosiah to succeed him in these positions, King Benjamin delivered a last great discourse and gave the people his last admonitions to apply the gospel in their lives. The central message of his discourse was given to him by an angel of God, [^143] and it concerned the mission of Christ and man's obligation to exercise faith in the great Redeemer and to obey the plan of salvation. [^144]

When the people heard the words which King Benjamin gave them from the angel, they covenanted to take upon themselves the name of Christ and keep His commandments. King Benjamin then consecrated his son, Mosiah, to be their king and gave him "all the charges concerning the kingdom." King Benjamin also "appointed priests to teach the people . . . the commandments of God." [^145]

Like his father, King Mosiah, the second, was a true prophet, priest, and king. In Mosiah's day, Alma became a prominent figure among the Nephites. Having previously taught the gospel to a group of people and baptized them, in the land of the original Nephite inheritance, Alma stressed that they should have "their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another." He also placed them under the economic law of the gospel. [^146] When Alma and his people joined the greater body of righteous Nephites, King Mosiah gave him authority to "establish churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla; and gave him power to ordain priests and teachers over each church." [^147] This Alma did, under the direction of Mosiah, who was both the spiritual and political head of the Nephite people in the kingdom of God, which was patriarchal in nature. Among other things, King Mosiah sent out a proclamation that unbelievers were not to "persecute any of those who belonged to the church of God." [^148]

Before his death, the second King Mosiah instituted a system of judges in place of the order of kings which had prevailed among the Nephites. Judges were chosen by the voice of the people, to judge the people according to the laws of the Lord. The rights of appeal and of review by higher judges were established; and it was provided that if the higher judges did not judge righteously, a number of the lower judges could convene and judge the propriety of their actions. [^149]

In this system, the Nephites retained the practice of centering both ecclesiastical and political authority in the prophet of God. Alma, the son of Alma, became the presiding high priest of the church. He was also appointed to be the first chief judge in the new political system. [^150]

Jesus brought the kingdom of God to its most perfect form among the descendants of Lehi when He visited the Nephites after His resurrection. Following the general procedure, Christ first taught the Nephites the gospel and placed them under its law. [^151] The brief report of history given thereafter in the Book of Mormon makes the fact apparent that Jesus then gave them the full program of the kingdom of God. [^152] In teaching the Nephites what is now called the Lord's prayer, Christ significantly omitted the phrase, "thy kingdom come." [^153] There was no reason for them to pray for that which was then among them.

With the full spiritual, economic, and political program of the kingdom established in their midst, the Nephites experienced an era of unprecedented peace and prosperity. The report of this period of Nephite history states:

There were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another.

And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift. . . .

And there were great and marvelous works wrought by the disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of miracles did they work . . . in the name of Jesus.

And the Lord did prosper them exceedingly in the land. . . .

And . . . the people of Nephi did wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast, and became an exceedingly fair and delightsome people, . . . continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord. . . .

And . . . there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

And there were no envyings, strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanits, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings, . . . and . . . they [became] . . . exceeding rich, because of their prosperity in Christ. [^154]

The New Testament System

John the Baptist heralded the proclamation, "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," [^155] and, as he spoke of the basic program of the kingdom, Jesus later explained to the Jews: "The kingdom of God has already come unto you." [^156] Much which the Master taught was concerned with the nature of the kingdom and the character of its members. Repentance and childlike humility were necessary conditions for entrance into the spiritual kingdom; [^157] baptism of water and of the Spirit was the door to its saving program. [^158] The Sermon on the Mount, particularly the Beatitudes, described the character of the members of the spiritual kingdom; the parables of the kingdom (those which began with the words "The kingdom of heaven is like unto" this or that) told something of the method of the kingdom's growth, the difficulties it would encounter, and the work it would perform.

Though the political organ of the kingdom was not developed significantly among the disciples of Christ at Jerusalem, [^159] they did institute the divine economic law, and they enjoyed many of the spiritual gifts of the kingdom. On the day of Pentecost, there "came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." [^160] Of the system which was established among the disciples, the record says:

And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.

And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all.

Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold,

And laid them down at the apostles' feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. . . .

And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people . . . insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one. [^161]

Summary

The kingdom of God was a system of new and more perfect human relationships in the religious, social, economic, and political spheres of life, founded upon principles of mutual covenant and sustained by the blessings of the Holy Spirit in the life of man. It therefore must be analyzed on its own merits. Within the kingdom the priesthood was the basis of both a church and a state. But the perfected kingdom was a divine patriarchal order into which all elements of the kingdom would be integrated.

Zion was the heart of the kingdom—the perfected spiritual, social, and economic family order patterned after the law of Mount Zion and the heavenly Jerusalem where exalted beings dwell in the presence of God. Purity was Zion's distinguishing mark, but man's heart was made pure as he established his life upon the law of God. Regenerated individuals would then be of one heart and one mind; there would be no poor among them. That divine system was to be an ensign and a standard to the world which secured to its members many benefits. The new order was designed to perfect the Saints; to establish spiritual, social, and economic justice; to endow the faithful with glory; to prepare the obedient for the coming of Christ; and to give the Saints an eternal inheritance.

The government of God was the municipal organ to express the political law of the priesthood. The kingdom, fully developed, was that which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel concerning the last days. Under Christ, the living prophet on earth directed both the political and the ecclesiastical branches of the kingdom. But the Church had to be established before the fuller program of the kingdom could be developed. Sacred writ records many examples of the kingdom of God in past ages, each reflecting some feature or features of the divine system.

Footnotes

We know assuredly that the set time to favor Zion has come, and her sons and daughters shall rejoice in her glory. The time has come when the great Jehovah would have a resting place on earth, a habitation for His chosen where His law shall be revealed, and His servants be endowed from on high, to bring together the honest in heart from the four winds.—HC, IV, p. 437. See also p. 449.

This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven did the Lord behold the earth;

To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death;

To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;

When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the Lord.—Psalm 102:18-22.

It is one thing to see the kingdom of God, and another thing to enter into it. We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe to the articles of adoption to enter therein."—Ibid., VI, p. 58.

It may be asked what I mean by the kingdom of God. The Church of Jesus Christ has been established now for many years, and the kingdom of God has got to be established, even that kingdom which will circumscribe all the kingdoms of this world. It will give laws to every nation that exists upon the earth.—JD, XI, p. 275. See also ibid., VI, p. 342.

In stating what he understood the kingdom of God to be, John Taylor also said:

We tall a good deal about the church and the kingdom of God. I sometimes think we understand very little about either. The kingdom of God means the government of God. That means power, authority, rule, dominion, and a people to rule over; but that principle will not be fulfilled, cannot be entirely fulfilled, until, as we are told in the Scriptures, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord and his Christ, and he will rule over them.—Ibid., XXI, p. 63.

George Q. Cannon also said:

A good many of our people confound the Kingdom of God with the Church of God. Now there is a very wide distinction between the two. . . . The Kingdom of God when it shall prevail in the earth—as it will do—will be the civil power which will shield and protect the Church of Christ.—Ibid., XXVI, p. 12.

MA. III (September, 1837), p. 561. Joseph Smith also spoke of the subject of Daniel's prophecy and declared that "in the last days the God of heaven would set up a kingdom."—Journal History, July 3, 1842.

---
Notas:
[^1] Consistent with the Book of Mormon, this term will be used hereafter to designate Caucasian Americans and their ancestors in Europe.
[^2] 1 Nephi 13:1-3.
[^3] See 1 Nephi 13.
[^4] 1 Nephi 22:8.
[^5] 1 Nephi 22:9.
[^6] Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^7] See D&C 101:77-80.
[^8] See HC, VI, pp. 78, 365.
[^9] See D&C 78:5-6.
[^10] See 1 Nephi 13:12-20.
[^11] 3 Nephi 20:27.
[^12] 3 Nephi 21:4.
[^13] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Light of Life and Reason Within Man."
[^14] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "Christ's Holy Spirit Leads Man Upward to God."
[^15] See D&C 11:12-13; 50:21, 24, 27; 84:45-46; 88:5-13; 93:28.
[^16] D&C 93:37.
[^17] JD, I, p. 81.
[^18] See D&C 93:29-30. For a discussion of this point, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "All Truth and Intelligence Independent."
[^19] Alma 61:15.
[^20] 3 Nephi 21:4.
[^21] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "Life, or Intelligence, Inherent in Matter," and the section in chapter seven entitled "The Primal Life Or Intelligence Of Man."
[^22] See D&C 84:45-53; 93:31-33.
[^23] D&C 88:40.
[^24] D&C 88:12-13, 40. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Light of Christ Quickens, Sustains, and Governs all Things."
[^25] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Divine Spectrum," and the section in chapter seventeen entitled "Man's Dependence Upon Christ."
[^26] See, for example, D&C 34:2; 39:2; 88:66.
[^27] JD, XXII, p. 41. See also ibid., XX, p. 123.
[^28] See D&C 84:45-48; 88:6-13.
[^29] JD, VII, pp. 10-11.
[^30] Mosiah 2:36.
[^31] See, for example, his editorial on "Try The Spirits," published first in TS, III, pp. 743-748, then in HC, IV, pp. 571-581.
[^32] A religious society, the followers of Laelius and Faustus Socinus, which denied the trinitarian doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, the personality of the devil, the natural depravity of man, vicarious atonement, and eternal judgment. The views of the Socinians persisted from the sixteenth century and finally culminated in modern Unitarianism.
[^33] HC, IV, p. 595.
[^34] Ernst Troeltsch, The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches, tran. Olive Wyon, with an introduction by Charles Gore (New York, 1949), I, p. 377. See also Preserved Smith, The Age of the Reformation (New York, 1920), pp. 26-27, 732.
[^35] A Letter to the Queen [Victoria] Touching on the Signs of the Times, and the Political Destiny of the World, pub. by Parley P. Pratt at Manchester, England, 1841.
[^36] See Preserved Smith, op. cit., pp. 12-13.
[^37] Ibid., pp. 20-27.
[^38] Ernst von Dobschutz, The Influence of the Bible on Civilization (New York, 1914), p. 95.
[^39] 2 Peter 1:21. For similar expressions in Latter-day Saint thought, see D&C 68:3-4; 2 Nephi 33:1.
[^40] In the Preface of his The Bloudy Tenant. For expressions which indicate this relationship in Latter-day Saint literature, see D&C 18:35; 84:45; 88:66.
[^41] William Tyndale, Answer to Sir Thomas More's Dialogue (Cambridge, 1850), p. 55. Knappen considered a study of the social and political importance of the Protestant effort to interpret scripture as "easily the greatest of all historical undertakings."—M. M. Knappen, Tudor Puritanism: A Chapter in the History of Idealism (Chicago, 1939), p. 361. A study of the underlying spiritual forces associated with that effort is equally significant and important.
[^42] John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, tran. Henry Beveridge (Edinburg, 1850), I, p. 99.
[^43] Preserved Smith, op. cit., pp. 62, 733.
[^44] For instance, when John Knox and Christopher Goodman published certain logical deductions of Calvinistic thought, Calvin took "the utmost pains to disassociate himself from them" and informed Queen Elizabeth that he "strongly disapproved of their doctrines and had prohibited their circulation."—G. P. Gooch, The History of English Democratic Ideas in the Seventeenth Century (New York, 1912), pp. 6-7.
[^45] Ibid., pp. 8-9. See also pp. 43-50.
[^46] Troeltsch, op. cit.
[^47] Woodhouse, Puritanism and Liberty, "Introduction," p. 46.
[^48] See, for example, A. Mervyn Davies, Foundations of American Freedom (New York, 1955), chapt. 4.
[^49] R. H. Tawny, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (New York, 1926), pp. 198-201.
[^50] Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science (New York, 1952), p. viii. See also J. Bronowski and Bruce Mazlich, The Western Intellectual Tradition: From Leonardo to Hegel (New York, 1962), p. 107.
[^51] JD, IX, p. 369.
[^52] Ibid., XXI, pp. 75-76.
[^53] Ibid.
[^54] 1 Nephi 17:36-38.
[^55] Alma 23:17-18.
[^56] 1 Nephi 13:15, 20.
[^57] JD, IV, p. 152.
[^58] Pratt, "A Letter to the Queen . . . ."
[^59] See Preserved Smith, op. cit., pp. 721-722.
[^60] Switzerland, Holland, Rhenish Germany, Scotland, England, Wales, and France, until the Reformation was crushed there by the Bourbon monarchy.
[^61] 1 Nephi 13:20-30.
[^62] See Volume II, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Universal Apostasy."
[^63] Referred to also as the social compact or the original contract.
[^64] See Genesis 11:4-8; Ether 1.
[^65] Ether 2:7.
[^66] Ether 2:12.
[^67] Moroni explained:
[^68] 2 Nephi 1:5, 7.
[^69] 2 Nephi 1:8.
[^70] 2 Nephi 1:6.
[^71] 1 Nephi 13:12.
[^72] Jacob Wassermann, Columbus: Don Quixote of the Seas, tran. Eric Sutton (Boston, 1930), pp. 61-62. See also pp. 19-20, 46-48.
[^73] 1 Nephi 13:13-16.
[^74] 1 Nephi 13:13, 16.
[^75] 1 Nephi 13:13.
[^76] Cited in Perry Miller, Orthodoxy in Massachusetts, 1630-1650 (Cambridge, 1933), p. 137.
[^77] William Houghton, New England's True Interests.
[^78] 1 Nephi 13:15-16.
[^79] See again Alma 61:15.
[^80] See Peter H. Odegard and E. Allen Helmes, American Politics: A Study in Political Dynamics (New York, 1938), pp. 15-16.
[^81] Vernon Louis Parrington, Main Currents in American Thought (New York, 1930), I, p. 236.
[^82] Jacob P. Mayer, Alexis de Tocqueville, tran. M. M. Bozman and C. Hohn (New York, 1940), p. 61. See also Alexis de Tocqueville's Democracy in America.
[^83] John Stuart Mill, Dissertations and Discussions (New York, 1882), II, p. 142.
[^84] Frederick Jackson Turner, The Frontier in American History (New York, 1920), p. 27.
[^85] Mill, op. cit., p. 84.
[^86] Turner, op. cit.
[^87] Mill, op. cit., pp. 142-143.
[^88] 3 Nephi 21:4.
[^89] 1 Nephi 13:15-18.
[^90] 1 Nephi 13:15-19.
[^91] 1 Nephi 13:30.
[^92] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 76.
[^93] D&C 101:80.
[^94] From a handwritten paper by James Madison which traces the causes and steps which led to the convention of 1787, written late in his life, in Debates on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution, ed. Jonathan Elliot (Philadelphia, 1901), V, p. 122.
[^95] The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, ed. H. A. Washington (New York, 1859), IV, pp. 440-441.
[^96] The Works of John Adams, ed. Charles Francis Adams (Boston, 1856), I, p. 66.
[^97] MS, III (September, 1842), p. 94.
[^98] Pratt, Key To Theology, pp. 79-80.
[^99] Edward Stevenson, Reminiscences of Joseph, the Prophet, and the Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1893), p. 6.
[^100] 100. HC, VI, p. 365.
[^101] 101. JD, XV, p. 72. See also ibid., XVIII, p. 181.
[^102] 102. Ibid., I, p. 133.
[^103] 103. HC, V, p. 64.
[^104] 104. Discourse by Joseph Smith, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 318.
[^105] 105. HC, V, p. 555.
[^106] 106. Parley P. Pratt, Key To Theology (Liverpool, England, 1855), pp. 65, 66-67.
[^107] 107. JD, XVIII, p. 137.
[^108] 108. Ibid.
[^109] 109. Ibid.
[^110] 110. D&C 78:13-15.
[^111] 111. Daniel 7:27.
[^112] 112. HC, V, p. 64.
[^113] 113. Ibid.
[^114] 114. For a reference to an earlier example of the kingdom of God than that of Enoch, see Moses 6:17.
[^115] 115. HC, V, p. 64.
[^116] 116. See Moses 6 and 7, in light of Moses 7:17-19.
[^117] 117. Abraham 1:25-26.
[^118] 118. Moses 7:13, 15-18.
[^119] 119. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fifteen entitled "Zion of Enoch."
[^120] 120. I. R., Genesis 14:27-28.
[^121] 121. Alma 13:16.
[^122] 122. See the discourse delivered by Joseph Smith July 23, 1843, manuscript in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, 318. Joseph Smith indicated that the system of Melchizedek included "Prophets, Priests and Kings."
[^123] 123. Alma 13:17-18.
[^124] 124. I. R., Genesis 14:34.
[^125] 125. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Israel The Chosen People."
[^126] 126. HC, V, p. 64.
[^127] 127. In addition there are references to these commandments individually from time to time throughout the book.
[^128] 128. See, for example, D&C 124:38-39.
[^129] 129. Romans 9:4.
[^130] 130. Exodus 33:14-15. See also Deuteronomy 4:33-36; 5:24-26.
[^131] 131. Exodus 40:34-38; Numbers 9:17-22; 10:11; 12:10.
[^132] 132. 2 Chronicles 5:13-14; 7:1-3.
[^133] 133. 2 Nephi 5:19.
[^134] 134. 2 Nephi 6:2.
[^135] 135. Jacob 1:10.
[^136] 136. 2 Nephi 5:10.
[^137] 137. Jacob 1:11.
[^138] 138. Omni 1:12-19.
[^139] 139. Omni 1:20.
[^140] 140. See, for example, Mosiah 8:13-18.
[^141] 141. Words of Mormon 1:17-18.
[^142] 142. Mosiah 2:29.
[^143] 143. Mosiah 3:2ff; 4:1.
[^144] 144. See Mosiah 3:3-27.
[^145] 145. Mosiah 6:3.
[^146] 146. See Mosiah 18:5-29. See also Alma 1:27-31.
[^147] 147. Mosiah 25:19. See also Mosiah 26:8.
[^148] 148. Mosiah 27:2.
[^149] 149. Mosiah 29:25-29.
[^150] 150. Mosiah 29:42.
[^151] 151. See 3 Nephi 11-15, 27.
[^152] 152. See 4 Nephi.
[^153] 153. See 3 Nephi 13:9-13.
[^154] 154. 4 Nephi 1:2-3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15-18, 23.
[^155] 155. Matthew 3:2.
[^156] 156. I. R., Luke 17:21.
[^157] 157. Matthew 3:2; 18:3.
[^158] 158. Mark 1:4; John 3:5; Acts 2:38-39.
[^159] 159. Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the book of Revelation makes it clear that the municipal organ was brought forth in New Testament times, but that it was not developed, and it was soon taken away. John saw that the sign of a woman in heaven (who represented the church) brought forth a man child (the political organ) who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron. But her child was caught up unto God and His throne. See I. R., Revelation 12:1-3.
[^160] 160. Acts 2:2-3.
[^161] 161. Acts 4:32-35; 5:12, 15-16.
