Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

5

Zion's Covenant Society

This is a new and everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith was positive and optimistic in his assessment of the contributions of Western civilization. God had poured out His spirit to a degree upon the gentiles, and the Spirit's influence in the life of man had brought forth many divine and eternal principles—the principle of freedom, justice, equity, and union through covenant or contractual relationships. With the Constitution of the United States established as a great secular covenant guaranteeing man the full expression of his inalienable rights, the Prophet claimed that he was called of God to bring about a "renewal of the everlasting covenant" by which Zion could be built and the kingdom of God established in its fulness upon the earth. [^1] Jesus was the mediator of this covenant, [^2] which God had established with the righteous "from the beginning." [^3] Upon it a new society was to be built and perfected as "a light to the world," a "standard" for God's people. As the nucleus of the millennial kingdom, it would be a "messenger" to prepare the way before Christ's coming to reign on earth according to the just and holy principles embodied in the kingdom of God. [^4]

The time was ripe for the establishment of the divine covenant system. Parley P. Pratt reasoned that "moral energy and spiritual light must be forthcoming from the heavens commensurate with the physical and political preparations for a new Era," and with these developments a "new dispensation should be manifest, a new covenant established, 'A Standard' for the nations, 'An Ensign' for the people." [^5] But for man to realize the objective of universal freedom under constitutional law, the Saints held that he had to recognize that freedom was born of the Holy Spirit and that it could be sustained and spread abroad only by the aid of that enlightening power. To this end man would have to acquire an understanding of the nature of the Holy Spirit, the laws that controlled its expressions, and its several and varied operations in human life. By dedication to righteousness, by obedience to divine laws, and by responsiveness to the enlightening influence of the Spirit, man would have to assist in bringing about the conditions by which God could pour out His Holy Spirit upon all flesh. Only then could universal peace, righteousness, and justice become a reality.

Covenant Principles In Zion

Covenant Defined

A covenant is a solemn compact, agreement, or contract entered into by two or more persons or parties, in which each of the contracting parties freely binds himself to abide by certain principles and fulfil given obligations. In the sense that covenants were the foundation upon which the kingdom of God rested, they were sacred agreements between the Lord and man, and they concerned God's promises to man and man's duty to God and man.

God operates by covenant in His relationship with man, promising stipulated blessings to be received on the performance of a condition—obedience. Since a covenant is a personal agreement which expresses the will of each of the contracting parties, revelation from God must be forthcoming in order to solemnize each covenant which involves Deity. No person or group of individuals can enter legitimately into a covenant with God except by direct and immediate revelation from Him. And either God must personally express His will in making the covenant or an authorized agent must act under inspiration as the Lord's representative in forming the agreement.

Spiritual and Secular Covenants

Within the kingdom of God there was a variety of covenants involving both spiritual and secular relationships. The Church was based upon divine covenants of eternal truth and human regeneration. The full program of Zion extended these covenant relationships into the social and economic spheres of life. These covenants brought the blessings of true peace, union, temporal prosperity, and eternal life to those who complied with their divine requirements. The government of God, on the other hand, was based upon the civil covenant of freedom, legal justice, and equity before the law of the land. This covenant secured these blessings to all within the kingdom.

Specific Covenants

Though conceived in obscurity and born on the edge of the American frontier, Zion's covenant society was a system "fitted to the times and with the principles and laws adapted to the reorganization, order and government of a renovated world." [^6] With the restored gospel as a foundation of enlightening spiritual truth and power not before possessed by Western man, [^7] Joseph Smith sought to build a unique society based upon free and open covenant. "It was my endeavor to so organize the Church," he said, "that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship and mutual love." [^8] This covenant concept put the Prophet in the main stream of Western history. It made the Renaissance and Reformation relevant and important, and, in the Latter-day Saint mind, preparatory to Zion and her related political program.

The new and everlasting covenant was the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and when completely revealed it embraced every promise and agreement within the divine plan of life and salvation [^9] by which the true believer could be admitted into the celestial family of Christ to inherit all that the Father had. He would receive a fulness of the Father's glory and power in the resurrection and be made like the exalted Man of Holiness in all His essential powers and attributes of life.

The Prophet made it clear that each aspect of the divine program which led to that exalted state rested upon the foundation of covenant. He was promised that he would be given covenants "sufficient to establish" the Saints in Ohio, where they were then gathering, and in the New Jerusalem, where the central program of the kingdom was to be developed. [^10] By those covenants, the Saints were to "bind" themselves freely to act "in all holiness before God." [^11]

By baptism, believers initially "complied with the requirements of the new covenant." [^12] In taking upon themselves the name of Christ and becoming members of the Lord's family, they committed themselves to respect and love others as themselves and to fulfil the requirements of the gospel. [^13] Thereafter, they were to comply with "the church covenants," [^14] and all their teachings were to be "according to the covenants." [^15] Officials were to serve only as the members gave their consent and pledged their support. [^16] By the ordinance of the sacrament, members renewed their covenants with the Lord and received again the assurance that by their faith and worthiness they would have the Holy Spirit to be with them, to bless and guide them to eternal life. [^17] Meanwhile, they were committed to honor the law of the Sabbath which was given to God's people "throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant," [^18] and which carried promises of both spiritual and temporal blessings. [^19] Being part of the order of God by which man was prepared to enter into His presence, [^20] the law of tithing was also a covenant which carried the promise of spiritual and temporal blessings. [^21] In like manner, the Word of Wisdom [^22] was "given for a principle with promise," conformity to which assured the Saints greater strength of body and "great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures," through keeping their bodies fit receptacles of the Holy Ghost. [^23]

Since the Book of Mormon contained "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ," [^24] it was "the new covenant" of God with His people in modern times, and the law and doctrine of that volume was binding upon those who received it. They were "not only to say, but to do" according to its teachings and "bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom." [^25]

With their lives established upon those covenant foundations, the Saints were to build up Zion by means of further covenant relationships. Priesthood authority and rights carried covenant obligations. Those ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood were to observe "the duties of their office, as given in the covenants." [^26] Men ordained to the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, were given by God a specific covenant which opened the way for them to inherit all that the Father possessed. [^27] To this end, they were to receive all the covenants of the priesthood and to implement them in building up the full and perfect order of Zion—the divine patriarchal order. [^28] This included the establishment of Zion's law of consecration and stewardship wherein the faithful consecrated all they possessed to God "with a covenant and a deed" that could not be broken. [^29] The capstone of the divine patriarchal order was the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. [^30]

Finally, the central program of Zion's educational system (known as the School of the Prophets) was based upon the principle of covenant, [^31] in which the president or teacher saluted his brethren in "remembrance of the everlasting covenant" and received a like saluation from them in return. [^32]

As could be expected, missionaries expounded upon the "new covenant" and encouraged converts to gather to Zion where the divine system was being built. [^33] Members were reminded repeatedly to keep the covenants which they had made. [^34] "And this shall be our covenant," Brigham Young wrote by revelation, "that we will walk in all the ordinances of the Lord." [^35] Those who did so had the promise of God, "with an immutable covenant," that all things would work together for their good, [^36] and that they would "obtain mercy." [^37] Significantly, the volume containing the published revelations and inspired writings of Joseph Smith was named The Doctrine And Covenants, and its earliest forerunner was entitled "The Articles And Covenants Of The Church Of Christ." [^38] It therefore was natural for the Prophet to instruct the Saints "on points of duty, such as observing covenants." [^39]

The Object of Covenant Society

The great object of Zion's covenant society was to elevate man, as a free and responsible creature, to be an heir through Christ of all that the Father possessed. In the divine patriarchal order, Christ, as the Firstborn, was the sole heir of the Father's kingdom, holding the birthright in that eternal family order. [^40] But man could become a joint-heir through Christ in the Father's kingdom.

This was the most exalting relationship possible for a living being to attain. An heir inherited and thereby owned jointly all that belonged to the Father. It could be said that an heir had his name on the same eternal account with Jesus Christ, with an equal right to draw upon the divine intelligence, power, and wealth which constituted the Father's vast kingdom. He could use it to develop his individual stewardship and increase his power and righteous influence on earth and in eternity.

The Nature Of Covenant Society

Requisites Within Man

The Prophet taught that covenant society could exist only when it rested upon a foundation of free and open union. For this reason, the work of establishing such a society had to begin deep in the fiber of men's souls. There, in the inner being of man, the elements of true peace, union, strength, and vitality had to be developed, upon which the outward or tangible system could be built. There could be no peace between two when there was not peace in one, just as there could be no concert in two when there was no concert in one. When an individual is not individual, he is not at peace with himself and in harmony with the infinite. Here, according to the Saints, was the place to begin. A Latter-day Saint writer observed: "No system that has not within it the elements of power, or unity, or greatness, in its embryonic state, or when passing through a process of development, can possess them when it attains to its full strength and stature." [^41]

Individualism

The spirit of freedom must burn as a fire within the soul of man in a true covenant society, supported by a dynamic philosophy of freedom and human dignity. This was true of Zion's covenant society. Mature individualism was a cardinal principle within the system. Man was not to "counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh." [^42] The divine decree was: "Ye shall not esteem one flesh above another, or one man shall not think himself above another." [^43] Instead, each man was to stand as an independent agent under God. To this end the gospel had been restored: "that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world." [^44] The Prophet was inspired to correct a biblical passage which dealt with man's relationship to his fellow beings in a true Christian society. It concluded: "Therefore, let every man stand for himself, and not another; or not trusting another." [^45]

Joseph Smith taught these principles repeatedly to the Saints and his associates. "Every man lives for himself," the Prophet declared. [^46] "No man can be exalted in the celestial kingdom unless he be independent," Brigham Young therefore concluded. [^47] "Every mortal being must stand up in an intelligent, organized capacity, and choose or refuse the good, and thus act for himself. All must have that opportunity, no matter if all go into the depths of wickedness." [^48] Again:

Those men, or those women, who know no more about the power of God, and the influence of the Holy Spirit, than to be led entirely by another person, suspending their own understanding, and pinning their faith upon another's sleeve, will never be capable of entering into the celestial glory, to be crowned as they anticipate; they will never be capable of becoming Gods. They cannot rule themselves, to say nothing of ruling others, but they must be dictated to in every trifle, like a child. . . . They never can hold sceptres of glory, majesty, and power in the celestial kingdom. Who will? Those who are valiant and inspired with the true independence of heaven, who will go forth boldly in the service of their God, leaving others to do as they please, determined to do right, though all mankind besides should take the opposite course. [^49]

John Taylor, who succeeded President Young in the leadership of the Church, was equally emphatic:

I was not borne a slave! I cannot, I will not be a slave; I would not be a slave to God; I'd be his servant, friend, his son. I'd go at his behest; but would not be his slave. I'd rather be extinct than be a slave. . . . I'm God's free man; I will not, cannot be a slave! [^50]

George Q. Cannon also asserted that he "would not abate one iota, not a hair's breadth," in sustaining every man's right "to follow the dictates of his own conscience, as long as, in so doing, he does not trespass upon the rights of his fellow man." [^51] He therefore exhorted the Saints to maintain the principle of freedom, but to learn the truth for themselves by means of the Holy Spirit:

Do not, brethren, put your trust in man though he be a Bishop, an Apostle, or a President. . . . When men and women depend on God alone and trust in Him alone, their faith will not be shaken if the highest in the Church should step aside. . . .

Therefore, seek after the Holy Spirit and the unfailing testimony of God and His work upon the earth. Rest not until you know for yourselves. [^52]

Respect for the Just Rights of Others

The free members of Zion's covenant society had to respect and give voluntary deference to the just rights and interests of others, recognizing that there could be no true freedom without an equivalent obligation, and that man's responsibility to his fellow man was commensurate with the freedom which he enjoyed. This meant two things: first, that a free man imbued with covenant ideals had the obligation to uplift the downtrodden in ways that preserved the recipient's individuality and personal dignity; and second, that thereafter each person had to treat others with the respect and consideration that he expected for himself, in the transactions of life. Otherwise, the free and open union which was necessary to establish a covenant society could not exist. A revelation which gave insights into Zion's covenant society admonished the Saints: "Let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one." [^53]

When the principle of covenant was extended to all spheres of society, the requirement to esteem a brother as one's self applied of necessity to economic matters, as well as to other relationships of life. Otherwise true and full union could not exist, for economic inequalities and injustices would destroy the free and open union which was necessary to a covenant society. A revelation therefore admonished each person among the Saints to "esteem his brother as himself" in such matters, that they might "be one." [^54]

Charity

Zion's covenant society could exist permanently only if its members were imbued with charity, the pure love of Christ, sufficient to motivate them to live outside themselves in service to others. This was a dynamic and progressive relationship which required man to act not only in ways that were just, but beneficial, to others. Thus the Prophet corrected a passage in the apostle Peter's writings to read: "Charity preventeth a multitude of sins." [^55]

Purity of Heart

Man had to be pure in heart if, as a free individual, he was to achieve the social union required to build a covenant society. Jesus made it clear to the Nephites that purity was prerequisite to true union, [^56] and Joseph Smith stressed the same point. If the Saints were to "act in concert . . . according to the ancient Priesthood," he explained, they had to "be a select people, separate from all the evils of the world—choice, virtuous, and holy." [^57] True social union could exist only among a free and holy people. Again the Prophet went to the root of the matter: "Without controversy, that friendship which intelligent beings would accept as sincere must arise from love, and that love grow out of virtue, which is as much a part of religion as light is a part of Jehovah." [^58]

Industry and Frugality

Industry and frugality were cardinal principles within Zion's covenant society, not merely sanctioned, but enjoined upon man by the law of God. Of necessity, covenant society was a dynamic and on-going relationship, and its purpose was diminished if it was not designed to achieve some positive end or blessing. Alma admonished: "See that ye refrain from idleness." [^59] To the Saints in this dispensation, the Lord declared: "Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garment of the laborer." [^60] Again: "Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another; cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated." [^61] Another revelation therefore warned: "The idler shall be had in remembrance before the Lord." [^62]

Liberality

Liberality, with wisdom, was another cardinal principle of Zion's covenant society, particularly in alleviating the conditions of the poor. Those who refuse to contribute to the poor, the Prophet admonished: "Away with your meanness, and be liberal." [^63] A blessing which he gave through the Urim and Thummim to Newel K. Whitney exhorted the faithful but shrewd bishop in the Church to overcome "all the narrow- mindedness of his heart and all his covetous desires" and to "deal with a liberal hand to the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, the widow and the orphan." Of the results that would follow the application of such a policy when wisely administered, the blessing said: "And it shall come to pass that according to the measure that he meteth out with a liberal hand unto the poor, so shall it be measured to him again, by the hand of his God, even an hundred fold." [^64]

In establishing the basis for a new and more meaningful society, Joseph Smith proposed to start with the issue of motivation. He defined correct social principles and showed their relationship to the law of Christ, which had as its purpose the joy and development of the individual. In the development of the new order, the heart of man had first to be changed so that he would be honest, merciful, and liberal in his dealings with his fellow man. Jacob, a Nephite prophet, said to his people:

Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you.

But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. [^65]

As one means of giving expression to the philosophy of liberality, Bishop Newel K. Whitney was instructed to prepare a "sumptuous feast" which lasted for three days. Of it, Joseph Smith wrote:

This feast was after the order of the Son of God—the lame, the halt, and the blind were invited, according to the instructions of the Savior. . . . The company was large, and before we partook we had some of the songs of Zion sung; and our hearts were made glad by a foretaste of those joys that will be poured upon the heads of the Saints when they are gathered together on Mount Zion, to enjoy one another's society, when there will be none to molest or make us afraid. [^66]

Mrs. Whitney later said of the influence of this feast upon her husband:

He often referred to it afterwards and testified of the great blessing he felt in associating with the meek and humble whom the Lord "delights to own and bless." He said it was preferable and far superior to the elegant and select parties he afterwards attended, and afforded him much more satisfaction. [^67]

The Accumulation of Wealth

Joseph Smith taught that when the desire to accumulate wealth was expressed within the framework of the principles of true covenant society it was in harmony with the principles, standards, and ideals of the gospel of Christ. "Improvement belongs to the spirit and plan of the heavens," Brigham Young declared. [^68] He added that it was the duty of the Church to teach man "how to live, and how to become healthy, wealthy and wise," that he might thereby be elevated to "the higher plan of the Gospel." [^69]

The problem of wealth, as Latter-day Saints saw it, was not found in man's desire to accumulate earthly goods, but the need for man to use and control wealth properly. John Taylor explained that the desire to possess and accumulate wealth was "as correct as any other principle," if man could "understand it, control it, and rightly appreciate the possessions and blessings" he enjoyed. [^70] The Prophet likewise taught: "Be charitable and liberal with your substance, for it is only a secondary consideration—the use you make of it is the primary consideration." [^71]

Those who practiced the law of God in past ages, Erastus Snow observed, were made "prosperous"; and similar results were expected from its modern application. [^72] Orson Pratt recalled that before the Church was one year old in this dispensation a revelation promised that under the law of God the Saints would "become the richest of all people." [^73] But this could not fully be realized, George Q. Cannon stressed, until they were organized according to the complete law of Zion. [^74] With this view, Sidney Rigdon wrote:

Let industry and enterprise be encouraged, not merely as appendages of our religion; but as an identity with it, as part of it, without which the other parts would be of little consequence; yea, may I not say, let them get riches; however some might be ready to say in opposition to this, that it is impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven; admit it, but does this argue that those who have sacrificed their all for the kingdom of heaven's sake and entered in, should not get rich after they get there, no verily; for the Savior has said in language not to be misunderstood, "That he that forsaketh father or mother, wife or children, houses or lands, for my sake and the gospel's shall have in this world an hundred fold, and in that which is to come eternal life." [^75]

Self-aggrandizement

Zion's covenant society was based upon the premise that man should develop himself and expand his influence and power. Though some denounced the principle of self-aggrandizement as being wrong, Joseph Smith taught that it was "a correct principle." But he made it clear that it could "be indulged upon only one rule or plan, . . . to elevate, benefit and bless others first." "If you will elevate others," he explained, "the very work will exalt you." [^76]

Upon this principle God exalts and glorifies Himself. "This is my work and my glory [i. e., how I acquire glory]," the Lord informed Moses—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^77] Jesus employed the same principle to acquire a fulness of the Father's glory, for He "received grace for grace"; that is, He received grace from the Father as He gave grace to others. [^78]

Joseph Smith taught that man can apply the same principle and receive the same results. Having stated that man's purpose in the gospel is to be glorified in Christ as Christ is glorified in the Father, the above revelation said to the Saints: "Therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." [^79] Another revelation taught that this principle underlies man's service to others through the priesthood. Having declared that power in the priesthood can be exercised only by persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, and love, it said of the by-product of such actions by man: "Thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." [^80]

Social Union

As a system which espoused the ideal of ardent individualism, Zion's covenant society was based upon the principle of social union. A revelation said of the principle of union in its economic expression in Zion: "If ye are not one ye are not mine." [^81] John Taylor explained: "We are seeking to establish a oneness, and that oneness under the guidance and direction of the Almighty." [^82] Because such union, based upon true freedom and individualism, was a vital element within Zion's covenant society, Brigham Young asserted that those who were opposed to it were "opposed to God." [^83]

Joseph Smith continually encouraged the Saints to make a "long and strong pull all together," contending that only through a union of effort could they realize their best interests. [^84] "All must act in concert, or nothing can be done," he said. [^85] "The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always flow from faithfulness and concerted effort never attend individual exertion or enterprise." [^86] Again he said of the benefits of free and open union:

Unity is strength. "How pleasing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" Let the Saints of the most high ever cultivate this principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only to them individually, but to the whole Church—the order of the kingdom will be maintained, its officers respected, and its requirements readily and cheerfully obeyed. [^87]

Latter-day Saints held that the whole plan of the gospel was designed to promote free and open union among men. "The command to 'Be One,'" Orson Pratt declared, "embraces all other commands." He explained: "There is no law, statute, ordinance, covenant, nor blessing, but what was instituted to make the Saints one." Union "is the ultimate end and aim of the great plan of salvation." [^88]

Brigham Young observed that "a gathering and social spirit seems to be the order of heaven—of the spirit that is in the Gospel we have embraced." [^89] The message of the new dispensation appealed to the urge for union and was designed, he said, "to gather a people that will be of one heart and of one mind." [^90] Though each individual and administrative unit within the system was to be independent in its sphere, the kingdom of God was to be bound symmetrically together into one intelligent system in which there would be "union in religion, morals, politics, and everything else." [^91]

Great blessings were expected from the establishment of the new system of freedom and union. John Taylor said:

Then we shall grow, and prosper like a green bay tree. Then will riches, honor, and power flow to the Latter-day Saints in far greater abundance than they have yet done; then you and your offspring will be the blessed of the Lord. This is what we are after, and when we have attained to this ourselves, we want to teach the nations of the earth the same pure principles that have emanated from the Great Eloheim. [^92]

Freedom and Union Combined

Ordinarily the elements of freedom and union are antithetical when combined in society. Like pugilists they stand in opposite corners of the system and make war against each other. Free men develop divergent interests and opinions, so that a society which sustains freedom as its primary objective lacks union. On the other hand, a system dedicated primarily to union often curtails the actions of the individual, destroying freedom. Hence the effort to combine both freedom and union is difficult, if not impossible, in ordinary social systems.

The genius of Zion's covenant society consisted of its ability to combine the highest ideals of individualism with a dynamic element of social union that would result in greater progress and security than could be found in a purely open society. To achieve social union without impinging upon man's freedom, Joseph Smith accepted the challenge which James Madison considered but discarded: to give men the same general opinions, passions, and interests. Significantly, several Book of Mormon prophets quoted the following passage from Isaiah and applied it to Zion's covenant system: "Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion." [^93] Abinadi added prophetically: "The time shall come when all shall see the salvation of the Lord: when every nation, kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and shall confess before God that his judgments are just." [^94] This, too, was the ideal of the Saints. "If this people would live their religion, . . . it would not be many years before we could see eye to eye," Brigham Young affirmed; "there would be no difference of opinion, no difference of sentiment, and the veil that now hangs over our minds would become so thin [as a result of the spiritual blessings that would follow the building up of the divine order] that we should actually see and discern things as they are." [^95]

The Way To Free And Open Union

The Requirement of Divine Means

Joseph Smith made it clear that the Saints could achieve a state of free and enlightened union within Zion's covenant society only by acting on divine principles and utilizing the truth and power of God which was given to man in the gospel. A revelation declared that it was necessary that the Saints be "united according to . . . the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom." [^96] Such union could not be achieved merely by appealing to an ideal.

Having observed that union was "the grand and ultimate object" of the plan of life and salvation, Orson Pratt marked out the way by which it could be achieved. "God has revealed a plan of adoption, by which . . . imperfect beings may be made members of His own [Christ's] family," he said. "Through faith, repentance, baptism, the forgiveness of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, the imperfect sons and daughters of Adam become the sons and daughters of God; and being born of God, and all baptized with the same Spirit into the same body, they begin to feel alike, think alike, and act alike, in many ways." Here was the beginning of the divine plan of free and open union. "This," Elder Pratt stressed, "is a first approximation towards a oneness." [^97]

To perfect the divine program of free and open union, Elder Pratt explained that Christ had "revealed laws for the government of His family." "Being weak, and only having obeyed the first principles of the celestial law, . . . divisions of feelings" could develop among the Saints, and the "seeds of division" being sown would "begin to sprout, and grow." "Strict laws" would help "counteract these divisions." [^98] Those divine laws included the ones on which the social and economic order of Zion would be built, and those of the divine patriarchal order, which will be discussed later in this volume.

Finally, Elder Pratt explained that God had "ordained authorities to teach His laws and minister in all things to make the Saints one." Those officers had the responsibility "to strengthen and succor the weak; to root out all evil-speaking; and to check every sinful thing on its first appearance." [^99] Of the effect of the divine program upon those who would accept and apply it, Elder Pratt said:

Those who give diligent heed, will become habituated to keep the law of God, and will understand their duties, and perform them with cheerfulness and delight. Such will become more and more assimilated in their feelings; their love towards each other, and towards God, and His word, will grow stronger and stronger; and thus by habit they learn obedience to the law of oneness, until they are ready and willing to do anything which that law requires. [^100]

The Role of the Holy Spirit

Mere laws and regulations were not sufficient to produce the enlightened and open union required to establish Zion's covenant society. In addition, dynamic, enlivening, and unifying spiritual powers had to be given to man through the Holy Ghost, sufficient to bind free individuals together on the principle that light cleaves to light and truth has a natural affinity to truth; these powers prompt man to fulfil his covenant obligations to God and his fellow man. This meant that to establish Zion's covenant society man had to come up to the spiritual standard which was made possible by the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The order of the kingdom of God was the order of creation: first spiritual and second temporal. It was not without significance that Latter-day Saint thought showed a direct correlation between the influence of the Spirit of God and the desire in man to establish his relationships with others on the principle of free and open covenant. The Book of Mormon affirmed that spiritual powers working in the heart of man by reason of his faith in Christ brought "to pass . . . the covenants" which God made with those who respond to the message of salvation. [^101] A revelation said of the Spirit's influence in leading man to the true covenant relationship of the gospel:

The Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world. . . . And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father. And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for your sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world. [^102]

Joseph Smith held that man as a mortal being, who required the quickening action of the Spirit of God to give him life and the power to think, analyze, reason, and comprehend the things within his reach, [^103] was also dependent upon Christ for the light and the life by which he could rise in the scale of intelligent existence to higher and higher social arrangements. Only by recognizing this basic fact could man see the way to true freedom and social union. Those who would not heed the spiritual monitor within themselves—because of disbelief, spiritual blindness, ignorance, sin, or rebellion—were in bondage and could not finally be free. [^104] Nor could they achieve a proper foundation for social union without the influence of the Holy Spirit. On the latter point, John Taylor said:

Men have had their varied social communities, religious and other theories; but they do not know the secret springs of the human heart. They do not know the operations of the Spirit of the living god. They cannot bind a conglomerate mass of men sufficiently together, they will not where they cannot amalgamate them. Nothing less than the inspiration of the Almighty will do it. [^105]

The Holy Spirit given to man through Jesus Christ was the source of all the distinct elements upon which a true covenant society could be developed and sustained. First, Joseph Smith said that the free agency of man was based ultimately upon the atonement of Christ, [^106] and that man was free only by the sustaining grace of the great Redeemer and by the influence of the Spirit of God which was sent forth through Christ as the light and the life of the world. That Spirit was the spirit of freedom within those who received it to a significant degree. [^107]

Second, the qualities and attributes by which man was induced to deal justly and equitably with his neighbor came to him from God through the Holy Spirit. The prophet Mormon stressed this fact in a classic statement on the influence of the Spirit in the life of man. "That which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually," he explained; "wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God." [^108] He then added with emphasis: "For every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ." [^109]

In Latter-day Saint thought, there was no such thing in truth as unrestricted freedom—freedom without concomitant responsibilities and consequences. Lehi taught that man was free only to choose liberty and eternal life through the great mediation of Christ, or captivity and spiritual death through the power of the adversary. [^110] To attain liberty and eternal life, man had to follow that path which brought him into full union, by covenant and through the power of the Holy Spirit, with Christ. To this end the Spirit enlightened man to a sense of his rightful obligations toward others. A revelation admonished Hyrum Smith: "Put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit." [^111] "The power that predominates here has a tendency to lead us in the paths of virtue and rectitude and to unite us together," Wilford Woodruff explained as he spoke of the Holy Spirit's influence in developing the basic qualities by which free and open union could exist among men. "It will lead us to obey the law of heaven and to carry out those principles that we are taught day by day." [^112]

Third, the Holy Spirit matured in man that pure love of Christ which was called charity, [^113] without which a free individual could not feel disposed to comply with the requirements by which a true covenant society could be sustained. Covenant society was founded upon the premise that free man could be induced to live outside himself in service to others. But it was only as he acquired pure love through the Holy Spirit that he would do so. When the Nephites built up a true covenant society in their midst after Christ's ministry among them, there were no contentions among the people because of the "love of God" which dwelt in their hearts. [^114] So long as they retained that pure love through faith and by righteousness, they sustained the covenant order and were given the blessings of its uplifting program.

Fourth, to fallen man whose mortal body had within it corrupt elements which made war against the righteous desires of his spirit, the virtue required to establish and sustain a true covenant society was a gift of God through the Spirit. [^115] Only among the sanctified could a true covenant society be maintained.

Fifth, the Holy Spirit, as stated in the preceding chapter, awakened in man a desire for self-improvement, industry, and progress. Without these traits and qualities, man could not establish a true covenant society.

Finally, through the Holy Spirit free man was given the truth and light by which he could achieve true union and brotherhood without abrogating freedom or destroying personal dignity. "If the light of God was revealed to six men in the same degree, they would comprehend the principles presented before them . . . exactly in the same way," Charles W. Penrose explained; "and if six men can be united in comprehending truth exactly alike, six million or any number of men can be united so as to see and comprehend the truth exactly in the same way, and this was the effect of the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, the Revealer, the Spirit of life and light." [^116] This kind of union was the result of the expression of human will enlightened and inspired by truth. It was a unity that was ideal in individualism, where free men respected the just rights of others and were united in covenant by the attraction of truth communicated to them through the Holy Spirit, and were sustained in fulfilling their covenant obligations by that enlightening and regenerating power.

Testimonies That the Spirit Promotes Union

Both the scriptures and the Saints testified of the Holy Spirit's role in Zion's system of free and enlightened union. On this basis Jesus was one with the Father, [^117] and in the same way the Saints were to be one in Christ: [^118] "I in them," Jesus said to the Father, "and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one." [^119]

Many prominent figures among the Saints also bore consistent testimony that social union was possible when free men utilized the enlightening power of the Holy Spirit made available through the Melchizedek Priesthood and its sacred ordinances. "Union flows from the Spirit, through the Priesthood," an epistle of the Twelve to the Saints declared in 1841; "which Spirit, and power, and Priesthood, can only exist with the humble and meek of the earth." [^120] "If we possess the Spirit that flows from God," John Taylor observed, "we shall possess the spirit of kindness and love and affection, that will eventually bind us in the bonds of eternal union." [^121] George Q. Cannon also stressed that it is "one of the peculiarities of the Holy Ghost to unite the hearts of those who receive it and to make them one." [^122] By this means it is possible, Wilford Woodruff affirmed, for the Saints to "see alike, feel alike, and be alike and become one." [^123] It mattered not how many people were involved. "What if all the world should embrace the Gospel?" the Prophet inquired. "They would then see eye to eye, and the blessings of God would be poured out upon the people, which is the desire of my whole soul." [^124]

When the Saints responded to the Prophet's teachings and enjoyed a degree of free and open union through the manifestations of the Spirit, Joseph Smith reported: "We sang the praise of God in animated strains, and the power of union and love was felt and enjoyed." [^125] Of another occasion, the latter-day Seer said: "I verily realized that it was good for brethren to dwell together in unity, like the dew upon the mountains of Israel, where the Lord commanded blessings, even life forevermore." [^126] Of a third occasion he said:

This has been one of the best days that I ever spent; there has been an entire union of feeling expressed in all our proceedings this day: and the Spirit of the God of Israel has rested upon us in mighty power, and it has been good for us to be here in this heavenly place in Christ Jesus: and although much fatigued with the labors of the day, yet my spiritual reward has been very great indeed. [^127]

When the restored gospel was proclaimed in foreign land, this divine principle of union operated to amalgamate converts who came from many different cultures, so that Charles W. Penrose could say:

The power that binds us together is the power of the Holy Ghost, the power of the Comforter, the power of the spirit of revelation. This power is in our hearts . . . . This sea of humanity, composed of people of all nations, has been acted upon by the power and gift of the Holy Ghost. That is where our unity comes in; it is our obedience to law and to truth, not to man. [^128]

Because Joseph Smith made the principles of free and open union the basis of a whole new system of social relationship, his nephew, Joseph F. Smith, reasoned that if the Saints were "in possession of the Spirit," the harmony among them would "be superior to the harmony" that could be hoped for "in any other organization whatever." [^129] It was because of "the incorrect organization of society" and the "lack of cohesive power" that other systems failed to solve the problems of peace and union, George Q. Cannon concluded. It required the "wisdom, power and Spirit of the Almighty" to achieve these goals. In Elder Cannon's opinion, God had "chosen his people, the Latter-day Saints, to solve these knotty problems that have troubled the brains and afflicted the children of men for so many centuries." [^130] John Taylor agreed. Why had the Saints been given this vital principle of free and open union, he inquired? "For the building up of something that is called Zion." [^131] In a very real sense, they possessed the key to universal peace.

The Saints were unequivocal in asserting that they held the key to true peace and union. Others had tried to unite the human family through various schemes and programs, John Taylor observed, but "they never had accomplished it," and they "never will." Without the key to divine spiritual powers and the understanding to utilize properly the blessings of the Spirit, it was not possible to achieve true social union. Thus, Elder Taylor concluded, "We are brought back to where we started, the necessity of sending forth the Gospel." [^132] After pointing to the lack of union in other systems and to man's failure to meet the challenge of social union, he said on another occasion:

There is no adhesive principle sufficiently powerful to unite the people of any portion of the earth, similar to the one that has sprung forth in our day and right among this people; if there is anything of that sort abroad in the world, I am not acquainted with it. Then it follows, as a natural consequence, that if there is nothing to unite the people together they are deficient in some principle, doctrine, faith or practice. Philosophy has not united the people together; politics has never done it; no social principles have ever accomplished it. [^133]

Joseph Smith held that by teaching the Saints to apply the enlightening principles and powers of the gospel in their lives their social relationships could be greatly improved and the task of governing and directing the affairs of society significantly simplified and minimized. "How do you govern such a vast people as this?" Stephen A. Douglas once asked him.

"Oh," replied the Prophet, "it is very easy."

"Why," said Douglas, "but we find it very difficult."

"But it is very easy," the latter-day Seer rejoined, "for I teach the people correct principles and they govern themselves." [^134]

The most essential of these "correct principles" were an understanding of the true nature of man and his relationship to God, and the process by which man acquires truth from God, personal revelation.

Brigham Young agreed that it was "one of the simplest things in the world" to control and direct a people, provided they were properly organized and actuated by the Holy Spirit. He said:

Is there any particular art in making this people obedient? There is just one. If you Elders of Israel can get the art of preaching the Holy Ghost into the hearts of the people, you will have an obedient people. This is the only art required. Teach the people truth, teach them correct principles; show them what is for their best good and don't you think they will follow in that path? They will. [^135]

Again President Young explained the nature of this "very mysterious principle," the real source of what was erroneously termed his "one-man power":

To Saint and sinner, believer and unbeliever, I wish to offer one word of advice and counsel, by revealing the mystery that abides with this people called Latter-day Saints; it is the Spirit of the Almighty that binds them together; it is the influence of the Holy Ghost that makes them love each other like little children. . . . This mystery, the great mystery of "Mormonism," is, that the Spirit of the Lord binds the hearts of the people together. Let the world look at it. . . . Who gives me power, that "at the pointing of my finger," the hosts of Israel move, and at my request the inhabitants of this great territory are dispersed; at my command they are here? Who gives me that power? Let the world inquire. It is the God of heaven; it is the Spirit of the Holy Gospel; it is not of myself; it is the Lord Jesus Christ, trying to save the inhabitants of the earth. [^136]

Union and the Fruits of the Spirit

The fruits of the Holy Spirit—love, peace, joy, longsuffering, etc. [^137]—played an important role in promoting free and open union among men. Union among the Saints was based upon this foundation. "We call to remembrance the ties with which we are bound to those who embrace the everlasting covenant," the Prophet and some associates wrote to the Saints in Missouri, "and the fellowship and love with which the hearts of the children of our Lord's kingdom should be united." [^138] According to Benjamin F. Johnson, "the Prophet's teaching of love was not to work upon the sympathies and sensibilities of the people, but by his great example and self-sacrifice, and in showing us that while all the world was against us, our only hope was in our union, and that union was only possible as the fruit of our love for each other." [^139]

But the love referred to by Joseph Smith went beyond that which could be developed by man alone. It was a sacred fruit of the Holy Spirit. The Prophet spoke of "a love from God" that was "without prejudice" and that gave "scope to the mind" so that those who partook of it could conduct themselves "with greater liberality" towards those not of their faith than they could "exercise toward one another." [^140] He held that man's deepest inner needs could be realized only when pure love born of the Spirit promoted that kind of union which was based upon mature individualism. One who was capable of such love was at peace with himself and with the world. But though he possessed an inner union and peace that developed self-esteem and strengthened self-confidence, he had genuine respect for the welfare of others. Mature love born of the Spirit did not stop with the individual, but broke through the self-centered tendencies of unregenerated man and motivated the individual to live outside himself in unfeigned service to others. When pure love found a congenial element within another, it responded to that kindred attribute, and established a natural affinity. Where there was no reciprocation, pure love was left to mourn and hunger for the bareness of the world. But still it reached out and never retreated within itself. And when it was misunderstood and rebuffed it prayed, "Father forgive them, for they know not what they do."

The Lord admonished the Saints repeatedly to build Zion upon a foundation of faith and pure love. "No one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love," an early revelation declared, "having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care." [^141] In setting forth the basic program of Zion's economic system, another revelation instructed: "Thou shalt live together in love." [^142] Again, from a later revelation: "See that ye love one another; cease to be covetous, learn to impart one to another as the gospel requires." [^143] Erastus Snow explained: "The grand principle upon which the Gospel of life and salvation is founded and on which Zion is to be built, is brotherly love and good will to men." [^144] The Prophet earlier declared: "Friendship is one of the grand fundamental principles of 'Mormonism'; [it is designed] to revolutionize and civilize the world, and cause wars and contentions to cease and men to become friends and brothers." Friendship, he observed, is like a blacksmith "welding iron to iron; it unites the human family with its happy influence." [^145]

That Joseph Smith achieved considerable success in uniting the Saints in their covenant relationships cannot be denied. "If a skilful mechanic, in taking a welding heat, uses borax, alum, etc., and succeeds in welding together iron and steel more perfectly than any other mechanic, is he not deserving of praise?" he inquired. "And if by the principles of truth I succeed in uniting men of all denominations in the bonds of love, shall I not have attained a good object?" [^146] Again he said:

Sectarian priests cry out concerning me, and ask, "Why is it this babbler gains so many followers, and retains them?" I answer, it is because I possess the principle of love. All I can offer the world is a good heart and a good hand. [^147]

Clarifications On Freedom And Union

Union vs. Conformity

Emphasis upon union was not to be a stress upon conformity. "I want the liberty of thinking and believing as I please," Joseph Smith insisted. "It feels so good not to be trammelled." [^148] With persuasion and exhortation the Saints were encouraged to learn and apply the principles which led to personal development and, eventually, to the fulness of celestial intelligence and power. But force was never to be applied in Zion. "There was no coercion used with me further than the force of truth recommending itself to my mind," John Taylor explained. "If this is called compulsion, it is not the compulsion of man, but the operation of the spirit of God, which you received through obedience to the Gospel." [^149] Again he said:

We know of no such principle as coercion; it is a matter of choice. The principle that I spoke of before—that is, men receive the Holy Ghost within themselves is the cementing, binding, unifying power that exists among the Latter-day Saints. [^150]

Man's independence was not to be sacrificed, but enhanced, under Zion's divine program of social union. John Taylor explained that the "intelligence communicated by the Holy Ghost" made it possible for the Saints to "know for themselves, and stand as the rock of ages, invulnerable, immovable and unchangeable." [^151] No sacrifice of individuality was here implied. Instead, if the Saints were "really of one mind," Brigham Young said, they would "be as independent as ever the children of Zion could be." [^152] He referred to "the principles of union and oneness" which existed among the Saints, asserting that it was upon these principles that they were "blest and made free." [^153] George Q. Cannon agreed. "There is no more independent people lives upon the face of the earth than the Latter-day Saints," he declared. Yet almost in the same breath he referred to the unity among them and said: "This entire people can be moved by a hair when it is in the right direction." [^154]

Union and Diversity

Social union which was free and open permitted and encouraged diversity among those within the union. It was a living relationship. Therein the thread of social control was greatly refined and, as Brigham Young explained, the Saints were permitted to develop "the same variety that we see in all the works of God." [^155] Within such a system, people could support and complement each other while their individual personalities blossomed into myriad gifts and talents. Zion's covenant society was designed to cultivate man "to perfection as a social and individual being." [^156] Or, as Parley P. Pratt observed, the divine system provided the way for the Saints to "unite in their efforts, both temporally and spiritually, to build up themselves as a people, and each other as individuals." [^157]

Benefits Of Covenant Relationships

The Free Sharing of Christ's Gifts

In Latter-day Saint thought, man's heirship in the Father's kingdom had its basis in the principle of covenant, and many great and important benefits came to man from that covenant relationship. "The great object of covenanting with the Lord Jesus Christ is to become one with him," a Latter-day Saint writer explained, "that each may enjoy all the blessings, privileges, glory, honour and power which either may be capable of imparting or receiving." [^158] It was said, therefore, of the Nephites who accepted the full law of God: "They were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift." [^159]

By entering into a covenant union with Christ and sustaining that relationship, one acquired access to all the benefits which the Redeemer could bestow upon him in the divine plan of life and salvation. These included a remission of personal sins by the power of the atonement which He made, the truth and power which were given to man through the Holy Ghost and which lead ultimately to eternal life in the presence of God, and the blessings of association and growth in the Lord's Church. On the other hand, each covenanting person brought to Christ in sacred consecration all that he was and all that he had. Meager though they may have been when compared to the Lord's gifts to man, these consecrations added to Christ's kingdom and increased His power on earth and in eternity.

Enlargement of the Scope of Man's Freedom

Zion's covenant society provided a way to expand the scope of man's freedom to its full dimension in human affairs. A society which merely espoused the ideal of freedom had to utilize the principle of majority rule in its social actions, and to that extent it limited freedom by reason of the fact that social actions based upon that principle result in a form of tyranny over the minority. Under such a system, freedom therefore was limited to the extent that there were opposing minority elements in its social actions.

In Zion's covenant society, the principle of majority rule did not have to be the basis of social actions. At least the existence of minority elements was greatly reduced. The divine system operated on a higher plane, with enlightening spiritual powers from God directing or sanctioning administrative actions; members within the society were entitled to a confirming witness by the Holy Spirit that the actions were of God. [^160] It followed that administrative directives supported by the free and open union of all left no room or need for minority dissent. If dissent existed, it meant that either the officials were not being guided by the Holy Spirit or that the dissenting individuals were not in tune with the confirming witness. To the extent that the principles of the system were applied, therefore, the scope of man's freedom was enlarged.

When the free element within society was enlarged on the basis of open and enlightened union, all the many and varied benefits of such union were also given to those within the system. To the blessings of greater freedom were added the benefits of greater union.

Within the kingdom of God, social and economic activities were not to be carried out through the political state, but within the climate of freedom provided by the state and according to the program of Zion which was based upon the principle of mutual covenant. If a person were out of tune spiritually and decided not to sustain the principles of Zion, he of necessity lost some of his blessings and was liable to the penalties prescribed by the system. In serious cases of covenant breaking, the recalcitrant individual could be severed from the society. But he would still retain the guarantees of freedom and legal justice which were secured by the state.

Elevation of the Scale of Man's Progression

Through Zion's covenant relationships where man became a joint heir in the Father's kingdom, the contracting parties could acquire benefits which they could not attain alone, and they could establish a basis for progress which otherwise would be impossible to achieve. The new and everlasting covenant of marriage was a case in point. Neither partner could, in a separate state, acquire the benefits which flowed from that union, nor could he progress in ways which were made possible by that union. Nor would the aggregate benefits and progress of both single persons equal that which they could acquire within that sacred marriage union. It was only within the new and everlasting covenant of marriage that man and woman could find true fulfilment in their physical and spiritual needs. Thereby they were elevated from the status of single individuals to the higher one of fathers and mothers physically and spiritually, and in the power to beget spirit children in the resurrection. By the lawful expression of the powers of procreation, they could have an increase of children and descendants in this world, and an eternal increase in the world to come. They could be exalted in righteousness over their posterity within the divine patriarchal order to endless ages of time, and also acquire a continuing increase of glory and power in the resurrection forever.

So also could man progress socially and economically in ways that were otherwise closed to him except by entering into covenant or contractual relationships. There was power for progress in covenant relationships in all areas of life, particularly when the union was free and open, and each individual was given a just share of the benefits which flowed from the concerted effort.

Establishment of Standards of Conduct

Within Zion's covenant society, free man could readily establish and maintain the moral, ethical, and spiritual standards by which he desired to live, and he could secure to himself the blessings of decency and respect which resulted from upholding those standards. The procedure was simple. By covenant each man pledged to sustain the standard of conduct which was set by the law of God. If he then failed to do so, he would be labored with in love and by persuasion. But if he still neglected or refused to sustain the standard, his privileges in the system could be restricted, and in serious cases of trangression he could be severed from the society.

Achievement of Social Justice

It was only on the basis of true covenant principles that complete social justice could be achieved by man. In Zion's covenant society, each man covenanted to uplift the downtrodden for Christ's sake, then deal justly with others as brothers under the law of Christ, in all relationships of life. Within that union they were also to share equally in the blessings of Christ, according to their worthiness. This meant that they promised to establish and sustain a social order which would give each man an equal opportunity to acquire and enjoy the blessings of life and of the earth. The person who failed to sustain his covenant obligations thereby cut himself off from Christ—from a remission of personal sins, from the gifts and blessings of the Holy Spirit, and, ultimately, from eternal life in the presence of God where there was a continual increase of glory forever. Though Zion's covenant society opened the way for great progress and for a great accumulation of wealth and power, no man could acquire enough to make it profitable to severe the covenant union which he had with Christ as the primary heir in the Father's kingdom.

Summary

The kingdom of God was based fully upon the principle of mutual covenant, from the initial covenant of baptism to the capstone covenant of the divine patriarchal order. There were church covenants, a secular covenant, and covenants which pertained to the perfected family order. On the basis of such relationships the Saints were to become independent as individuals, and Zion was to become independent as a society. Those who received and applied all of the covenants of the divine system would be exalted to the state of heirs in the Father's kingdom.

Within Zion's covenant society the Saints were to develop as individuals with due regard for the just interests of others. To establish such a system they had to be pure in heart and, as a result of their purity, have true charity for others. They were to be industrious, frugal, and liberal. Within the framework of those principles, it was appropriate for man to accumulate wealth and expand his influence and power. Covenant society was also based on social union, so that freedom and union were combined within the system.

But only through the influence of the Holy Spirit could the necessary qualities of character and spiritual traits be developed in man to establish a true covenant society. To this the Prophet and his associates continually testified. The unity thus achieved was not conformity, and it fostered diversity in gifts and talents among the Saints. In this way they shared freely the blessings of Christ; and, in turn, they gave freely of their talents and services to others. Through open and enlightened union, man's scope of freedom could be enlarged, his scale of progression could be elevated, mutual standards could be sustained, and the great ideal of social justice could be achieved.

Footnotes

And the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin. And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me. For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin. And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me.—D&C 84:49-52.

When we are compared with other communities in the world, it might be said of us that we are a united and happy people, for we enjoy a degree of union and the blessings resulting from that union that other communities do not enjoy. But this does not show that we do not fall far short of the perfect union that should cement the Saints of the Most High together.—Ibid., VI, p. 78.

A more determined and unyielding people I never met with. The men whom I associate with, why you might as well try to bend a bar of steel as to bend them: they will not bend, and yet they can be led by a hair. But they must know that what they are advised to do is right. . . .

What is it, then that makes this people united? It is the outpouring, as I testify, of the Spirit of God. Others [the uninformed] will say it is something else, but I say it is the Spirit of God, and these are the fruits of that Spirit as borne testimony to by ancient Prophets and Apostles. They said it would be so. Jesus prayed in the last great prayer that he offered unto his Father that his disciples might be one even as he and his Father were one. This was the great distinguishing character of his Church.—Ibid.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, IV, p. 207.
[^2] Ibid., V, p. 555.
[^3] Ibid., p. 550.
[^4] See Volume I of this study, with particular emphasis on chapter five and those which follow.
[^5] HC, III, p. 386. Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, he said on another occasion: "That priesthood is as eternal as God Himself, having neither beginning of days nor end of life."—Ibid., V, p. 555.
[^6] JD, VII, p. 84.
[^7] HC, IV, p. 598.
[^8] Ibid., III, pp. 386, 389.
[^9] Ibid., p. 389.
[^10] Ibid., IV, p. 610.
[^11] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^12] Ibid., IV, p. 207.
[^13] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^14] Ibid., IV, p. 210.
[^15] Ibid., V, p. 257.
[^16] D&C 50:27. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Power of the Priesthood."
[^17] HC, V, p. 27.
[^18] Ibid., p. 555. Of the act of ordination a revelation said: "Every elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains him."—D&C 20:60.
[^19] MS, IX (November 1, 1847), p. 321.
[^20] The Western Standard, San Francisco, California (October 18, 1856), pp. 225-226.
[^21] HC, IV, p. 541.
[^22] See Alma 13:3-8.
[^23] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Men are Called of God by Prophecy."
[^24] D&C 21:1; 107:92; 124:94; 127:12; 135:3; HC, II, p. 417.
[^25] HC, III, pp. 28, 389; V, pp. 215-216, 231-232, 427. See also Revelation 19:10.
[^26] Moses 6:35-36.
[^27] I. R., John 1:42.
[^28] Mosiah 8:16.
[^29] See JD, I, p. 137.
[^30] Ibid., p. 135.
[^31] Ibid., p. 134.
[^32] Manuscript statement by Joseph Smith, January 5, 1841, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 180.
[^33] HC, IV, p. 207.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^36] Ibid., VI, p. 478.
[^37] Alma 13:6-7.
[^38] Alma 13:19.
[^39] D&C 107:2-4. (Italics in the original.)
[^40] D&C 84:19.
[^41] D&C 107:18-19. For a discussion of this subject, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Blessings Of The Second Comforter."
[^42] Manuscript statement by Joseph Smith, January 5, 1841.
[^43] HC, V, p. 554.
[^44] The Prophet wrote by revelation: "There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood." D&C 107:1.
[^45] HC, VI, p. 478.
[^46] That is, the Patriarch to the Church and the patriarchs in the several branches or stakes of the Church.
[^47] D&C 107:13.
[^48] D&C 107:14.
[^49] D&C 84:26-27; 107:14.
[^50] HC, VI, p. 250. See chapter fourteen in this volume, the section entitled "Noah's Place In The Patriarchal Order."
[^51] HC, VI, p. 250.
[^52] JD, XXI, p. 372.
[^53] D&C 84:18.
[^54] HC, V, p. 555.
[^55] Ibid., p. 2.
[^56] Ibid., p. 555.
[^57] D&C 84:40.
[^58] I. R., Genesis 14:27.
[^59] I. R., Genesis 14:30-31.
[^60] D&C 84:33-41.
[^61] HC, V, p. 424.
[^62] HC, V, p. 28.
[^63] Ibid., pp. 28-29.
[^64] Ibid., II, p. 478.
[^65] D&C 21:6.
[^66] D&C 43:9-10.
[^67] See the above discussion on heirship in light of Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Endowment of Zion with Glory Through Temple Ordinances."
[^68] HC, V, p. 258.
[^69] D&C 9:8-9.
[^70] HC, I, p. 339.
[^71] Ibid.
[^72] D&C 21:5. These instructions were not to apply only to Joseph Smith. Speaking of John Taylor as President of the Church, a revelation given through him said: "I will honor him, and he shall speak forth the words that I will reveal unto him, . . . and ye shall listen to his words as my words, saith the Lord your God."—Revelation given through John Taylor, June 27, 1882, at Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^73] D&C 43:2-3, 5, 7. See also D&C 28:1-7.
[^74] HC, II, p. 477.
[^75] Ibid., I, p. 338.
[^76] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "Purposes Of Gift Of The Holy Ghost."
[^77] D&C 46:27.
[^78] 1 Corinthians 12:28.
[^79] Walter Rauschenbusch, Christianizing the Social Order (New York, 1944), p. 181.
[^80] James Madison, The Federalist, Nos. XLVII and XLVIII.
[^81] James Madison to Thomas Ritchie, December 18, 1825, The Complete Madison: His Basic Writings, ed. Saul K. Padover (New York, 1953), p. 46.
[^82] D&C 121:36.
[^83] D&C 20:45; 46:2; Moroni 6:9.
[^84] D&C 46:27-31.
[^85] John Emerich Edward Dalberg Acton, 1834-1902.
[^86] D&C 84:33.
[^87] HC, IV, p. 209.
[^88] D&C 121:36-37.
[^89] D&C 50:27-29.
[^90] Power could be used in the government of God to punish offenders of the civil law.
[^91] D&C 50:26.
[^92] D&C 121:41-46.
[^93] HC, II, p. 478.
[^94] Ibid., IV, p. 479.
[^95] Ibid., II, p. 478.
[^96] Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past (Boston, 1883), p. 397.
[^97] C. C. Cambreleng, cited in Schlesinger, The Age of Jackson, pp. 306-307.
[^98] The economic impulse is one of the most powerful forces in society; it divides society into contending groups. See chapters eight and nine for Zion's program of free and open union in economic matters.
[^99] Harold D. Lasswell and Abraham Kaplan, Power and Society (New Haven, 1950), pp. 250-251.
[^100] HC, V, p. 285.
[^101] R. M. MacIver, The Web of Government (New York, 1947), p. 55.
[^102] HC, I, p. 368.
[^103] Ibid.
[^104] Parrington, op. cit., II, p. 158.
[^105] HC, IV, p. 165.
[^106] D&C 26:2.
[^107] D&C 20:65.
[^108] HC, I, p. 338. [^130]
[^109] Moroni 7:16.
[^110] Ibid., p. 77. When the Saints moved as a body from New York State to Ohio, men were appointed to "look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief," and "to govern the affairs of the property" of the Church. These men, said the revelation which instructed the Saints to move, were to be "appointed by the voice of the church."—D&C 38:34-36. Officers in the Church were also appointed only by the consent of the people. See, for example, D&C 41:9; 124:144.
[^111] See, for example, D&C 115:3-4; 127:12; 128:21; 136:2.
[^112] JD, IX, p. 10.
[^113] Ibid., p. 11.
[^114] Ibid., VI, p. 100.
[^115] Ibid., XV, p. 216.
[^116] Ibid., X, p. 58.
[^117] HC, IV, p. 571. See also D&C 46:7, 27.
[^118] HC, IV, p. 573.
[^119] Ibid., p. 571.
[^120] Ibid., pp. 571-572, 573.
[^121] Ibid., p. 573.
[^122] See Autobiography of Peter Cartwright (New York, 1857), pp. 48-51: Catherine C. Cleveland, The Great Revival in the West (Chicago, 1918), pp. 88-103; Richard McNemar, The Kentucky Revival (New York, 1846), p. 63.
[^123] HC, IV, p. 580.
[^124] Ibid. See also JD, XI, pp. 3-4; Autobiography of Levi W. Hancock, typewritten copy from the original in Brigham Young University Library, p. 42: Journal History, July, 1831; John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints (St. Louis, 1839), pp. 16-17; E. D. Howe, History of Mormonism (Painesville, Ohio, 1840), pp. 105-107.
[^125] D&C 50:13-22.
[^126] D&C 50:23-25.
[^127] D&C 50:27, 30-35.
[^128] Nelson Manfred Blake, A Short History of American Life (New York. 1952), p. 263.
[^129] 2 Nephi 18:19. Orson Pratt wrote to the Saints in 1853:
[^130] JD, XIII, pp. 97-99.
[^131] Ibid., XX, p. 133.
[^132] Ibid., XVIII, pp. 209-210.
[^133] Ibid., X, pp. 124-125. See also pp. 129-131. Of the unity among the Saints, Brigham Young said in 1859:
[^134] Related by John Taylor, Howard Coray, and Benjamin F. Johnson: Ibid., pp. 57-58; Howard Coray folder, d 2043, fd. 2, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Benjamin F. Johnson, "An Interesting Letter," unpublished letter from Johnson to George S. Gibbs, April to July, 1903, Brigham Young University Library, p. 17. Elder Johnson identified the inquirer as "a church dignitary, I think a Catholic Bishop." But Elder Coray, who was a clerk in the Prophet's office at Nauvoo, stated that it was Douglas. In his statement, he appears to be recounting first-hand information.
[^135] JD, XII, p. 257.
[^136] Ibid., I, p. 145. See Ibid., VII, p. 54; XII, p. 34, for other statements by Brigham Young. All this was implied in a revelation, January 2, 1831, which stated: "I have a great work laid up in store: for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand."—D&C 38:33.
[^137] See Volume II of this study, chapter nine entitled "The Spiritual Life Of The Gospel."
[^138] HC, II, p. 4
[^139] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 17.
[^140] HC, III, p. 304.
[^141] D&C 12:8.
[^142] D&C 42:45.
[^143] D&C 88:123.
[^144] JD, XVII, p. 75.
[^145] HC, V, p. 517.
[^146] Ibid., p. 499.
[^147] Ibid., p. 498.
[^148] Ibid., p. 340.
[^149] JD, XXII, p. 8.
[^150] Ibid., XXII, pp. 63-64.
[^151] Ibid., p. 52.
[^152] Ibid., XII, p. 29 (misnumbered as p. 404): XV. p. 220.
[^153] Ibid., VI, p. 136. See also p. 204.
[^154] Ibid., XXII, p. 366. President Cannon continued:
[^155] Ibid., XI, p. 305; XII, p. 35. For a similar statement by Lorenzo Snow, see Ibid., XVIII, p. 375.
[^156] Ibid., XXII, p. 26.
[^157] Ibid., I, p. 303.
[^158] MS, XV (August 13, 1853), p. 536.
[^159] 4 Nephi 1:3.
[^160] This feature of the system will be discussed at length in chapter six which deals with the principles of priesthood government in Zion.
