Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

6

Priesthood Government in Zion

Let no man think he is ruler; but let God rule him that judgeth.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith taught that the Melchizedek Priesthood, as the basis of the kingdom of God and the source from which the kingdom was developed in all its features, was patterned "after the order of the Son of God." That priesthood was "the grand head" and held "the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth," he explained, "and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^1] The Prophet therefore stressed: "The Melchizedek Priesthood . . . is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam." [^2] When, through the priesthood, the divine system was fully developed, the millennial order would be established upon the earth.

Brigham Young also called the Holy Priesthood "a perfect system of government." [^3] It was capable of giving true and enlightened direction to every phase of human life. And within the kingdom which was derived from the priesthood, the sacred elements of a free society—the dignity of man, confidence in his perfectibility, the assumption that all aspects of organized society existed for his benefit, and consent and popular decision in the affairs of society—could be maintained and enhanced.

The Nature Of The Priesthood

The Idea of the Priesthood

To understand Joseph Smith's concept of the priesthood one must comprehend his view of God, the creations of God in eternity, and man's relationship to Deity. [^4] Being the off-spring of God, man was a creature of the universe and occupied myriads of spheres in varying degrees of progression and glorification throughout the orderly cosmos. The creation, population, and redemption of worlds had been going on from eternity, and within this vast system there was a divine order of government which was called the Holy Priesthood. Associated with it was a principle of revelation and of power which centered in God, by which all things within His vast kingdom were governed. "The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years," the Prophet declared. "The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent." [^5] With this view, Orson Pratt observed: "This is only a little branch of the great tree of the Priesthood, merely a small branch receiving authority from heaven, so that the inhabitants of the earth may be benefited as well as the inhabitants of the eternal world; but the great trunk of the tree of the Priesthood is in heaven." [^6]

This meant that the priesthood "not only administers on earth," the latter-day Seer taught, "but also in eternity." [^7] Two facts derived from this statement. First, the powers of the priesthood which a man received continued with him in eternity. "Men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven," he explained. This not only made them "ministers here, but in eternity." [^8] Second, faithful bearers of the priesthood in past ages were very much concerned with the work of God on earth in the latter days. "These men are in heaven, but their children are on the earth. Their bowels yearn over us," the Prophet declared. "All these authoritative characters will come down and join hand in hand in bringing about this work." [^9] The "heavenly Priesthood" would "unite with the earthly" to bring to pass the mighty purposes of God in the last days. [^10]

The Prophet taught that as a divine system centering in God, the priesthood was a source of revelation. "There are certain ordinances which belong to the Priesthood," he observed, "from which flow certain results." [^11] Fundamentally, it was "the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time." [^12] This meant that those who received the priesthood had the right "to receive revelation." [^13] "Thus we behold the keys of this priesthood consisted in obtaining the voice of Jehovah," the latter-day Seer concluded. [^14] "If we do not get revelations," he stressed, "we do not have the oracles of God." [^15]

The priesthood was also a system of divine power. One who was properly ordained was "possessor of all things," a revelation declared; "for all things are subject unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son." [^16] More specifically, the power of the priesthood was that of the Holy Ghost, or that which Christ manifested to man through the Holy Ghost. That power was "necessary to make and to organize the Priesthood," the Prophet explained; no man could "be called to fill any office in the ministry without it." [^17] In referring to the several orders of the priesthood, he said again: "The Holy Ghost is God's messenger to administer in all those priesthoods." [^18]

Because they viewed priesthood in this light, the Prophet's associates defined it as the right and responsibility given to man to utilize the intelligence and power of God to act officially in His name. "It is the power of God delegated to intelligences in the heavens and to man on the earth," John Taylor explained. [^19] George Q. Cannon therefore observed that bearers of God's priesthood were "recipients of the power which He bestows to enable man to act in His stead and to transact that which was necessary to be transacted to fit and prepare His people to enter into His presence." [^20]

The Method of Ordination

Joseph Smith wrote: "We believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." [^21] Because the priesthood was an eternal system having its origin with God in the beginningless past, ordination thereto had its basis in the wisdom and foreknowledge of God. Man's ordination did not have its beginning when he received the laying on of hands for the bestowal of the priesthood on earth, but in a prior appointment made in the spirit of prophecy before he came here. [^22] Man's ordination was correlated with his foreordination to that call. [^23]

The Central Powers of Priesthood

the keys and powers of the priesthood on earth centered in God's prophet, and in the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. All those officers were sustained by the Saints as prophets, seers, and revelators. [^24] Joseph Smith taught that any person who had a true testimony of Jesus, by the revelation of the Holy Ghost, was a prophet, for that testimony was the spirit of prophecy. [^25] But those in the central offices named above were sustained as prophets, with the responsibility of testifying of Jesus and of giving the word of the Lord to the people. As such, they were also revelators. A revelator was one who revealed the will and law of God to the people.

In some respects, the role of seer went beyond that of prophet and revelator. The word seer derives from the word see and refers to the quickening of man's spiritual eyes by the power of the Holy Ghost, so that he can see visually that which God manifests unto him. Anciently the Lord instructed Enoch to anoint his eyes with clay, and when he did, he saw "things which were not visible to the natural eye." Consequently, there went a saying abroad: "A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people." [^26] To Peter, Jesus said, "Thou art Simon, the son of Jona, thou shalt be called Cephas, which is, by interpretation, a seer, or a stone." [^27] "A seer is a revelator and a prophet also," a Nephite missionary explained; "and a gift which is greater can no man have." [^28]

The above gifts and powers were incorporated in the office of apostle, along with all other rights and powers which pertained to the kingdom of God. This Joseph Smith taught. [^29] Brigham Young also said: "All the Priesthood, all the keys, all the gifts, all the endowments, and everything preparatory to entering into the presence of the Father and of the Son, are in, composed of, circumscribed by, or I might say, incorporated within the circumference of, the Apostleship." [^30] It followed that the apostleship was the foundation of the Church of Christ, the system which would eventually develop the kingdom of God upon the earth in its fulness. President Young explained:

We will commence with the Apostleship, where Joseph commenced. Joseph was ordained an Apostle. . . . After he was ordained to this office, then he had the right to organize and build up the kingdom of God, for he had committed unto him the keys of the Priesthood, which is after the order of Melchisedec—the High Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God. And this, remember, by being ordained an Apostle.

Could he have built up the Kingdom of God, without first being an Apostle? No, he never could. [^31]

Orders Of The Priesthood

The Place and Purpose of Melchizedek Priesthood

"All Priesthood is Melchizedek," Joseph Smith declared, "but there are different portions or degrees of it." [^32] He explained:

The Melchizedek Priesthood . . . is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven. . . . All other Priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it. [^33]

The Prophet made it clear that the Melchizedek Priesthood did not have its origin in Melchizedek, the great High Priest of the Church in the days of Abraham, or center ultimately in him. "Its institution was prior to 'the foundation of this earth,'" he declared, "'or the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy.'" [^34] He explained further: "The Melchizedek Priesthood was no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God." [^35] Again: "The Priesthood of Melchizedek . . . is after the order of the Son of God." [^36]

The Book of Mormon expressed the same view. In speaking of "the high priesthood of the holy order of God," Alma declared that it was "after the order of his Son, which order was from the foundation of the world; or in other words, being without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity." [^37] Thus, men other than Melchizedek had been given this priesthood. "Now, there were many before him, and also there were many afterwards," Alma said of Melchizedek, "but none were greater; therefore, of him they have more particularly made mention." [^38]

It followed that the Melchizedek Priesthood has not always been called by that name. By revelation Joseph Smith wrote:

Why [it] . . . is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God.

But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^39]

Concerning the primary purposes of the Melchizedek Priesthood, a revelation said: "And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." [^40] Such knowledge was not that which was acquired by theological understanding alone, but by personal revelation, including as a major factor the knowledge acquired by the Second Comforter. In another revelation, the Prophet wrote more pointedly: "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new convenant." [^41]

The Three Grand Priesthood Orders

The "different portions or degrees" of the Melchizedek Priesthood [^42] were arranged into systems called "orders of the priesthood," each structured according to a given organizational design and in possession of specific rights and powers. The Prophet taught that there were "three grand orders of priesthood"—the Melchizedek, the Aaronic or Levitical, and the Patriarchal. [^43] The first, with the second as an appendage, functioned as the basis of the Church [^44] and government of God, and the third was the perfected order in which man could receive a fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and be exalted as a priest and a king in eternity.

The Melchizedek Order

There was a difference between the Melchizedek Priesthood and the Melchizedek order of that priesthood. The Melchizedek order was an ecclesiastical system of the Melchizedek Priesthood adapted to a program of offices, quorums, and councils, and as such was the basis of the Church and its organization. Without the ecclesiastical order of the Melchizedek Priesthood the true Church could not exist upon the earth. Joseph Smith declared emphatically: "All men are liars who say they are of the true Church without the revelations of Jesus Christ and the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which is after the order of the Son of God." [^45] The several offices in the ecclesiastical order of the Melchizedek Priesthood were those of Apostle, Patriarch, [^46] High Priest, Seventy, and Elder. Priesthood bearers were also organized into respective quorums, and for administrative purposes some were called to serve in presiding councils. All these derived their power and authority from the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood and made up its ecclesiastical order.

The Aaronic or Levitical Order

The second grand order of the priesthood designated above was that of the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood. It was "called the Priesthood of Aaron, because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed, throughout their generations." [^47] It was also called the Levitical Priesthood because in the days of ancient Israel it was given generally to the tribe of Levi. But it was designated further as the Lesser Priesthood, because it was "an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^48] This priesthood had authority to administer "outward ordinances," including the preparatory gospel by which believers were introduced simultaneously into the Church of Jesus Christ and the divine patriarchal order. [^49]

As an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood with the task of preparing man for the "greater revelation of God," the Aaronic Priesthood was also designated as "the Priesthood of Elias"—that priesthood through which the spirit of Elias, or the spirit of the divine patriarchal order, was made manifest to bring responsive souls into the celestial family of Christ. [^50] Though little was known of that order of the priesthood before the days of ancient Israel, the Prophet once said of it: "When God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world." [^51] Apparently the functions of the Priesthood of Elias were carried on from the beginning, whether as a direct function of the Holy or Melchizedek Priesthood or by an established appendage. Erastus Snow seems to have held the latter view. "The Levitical Priesthood referred to was not a new Priesthood," he said as he referred to the tribe of Levi's appointment to that authority. "We do not understand it to be an order of the Priesthood instituted at the time Israel was in the wilderness of Sinai, but that it had been from the beginning a part of the Holy Priesthood, or branch of the same Priesthood." [^52] A revelation to Joseph Smith also stated that this "priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God." [^53]

The Patriarchal Order

The patriarchal order of the Melchizedek Priesthood was given to the faithful in the temple, or house of the Lord. "Go to and finish the temple, and God will fill it with power," Joseph Smith explained to the Saints, "and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood." [^54] Since the Prophet made it clear that all priesthood was Melchizedek, it followed that this was the Melchizedek Priesthood organized according to an eternal family order, rather than according to offices, quorums, and councils that comprised the Church as an instrument to build up the divine patriarchal order. The program given in the temple introduced man to "the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood" in which he could acquire "the fullness of those blessings . . . prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim [i.e., the Gods] in the eternal worlds." [^55]

The Oath And Covenant Of The Priesthood

The design of Zion's covenant society, which was to make faithful saints heirs through Christ in the Father's kingdom, was to be accomplished through the oath and covenant of the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^56] An oath is a solemn attestation in support of a declaration or a promise, and a covenant is an agreement entered into by two or more persons or parties. This oath and covenant was made by the Father—not by man, except as man received the covenant upon ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^57]

When Melchizedek received the High Priesthood in ancient times, it was said: "He was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch." [^58] By revelation, Joseph Smith stated further: "For God having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself; that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world." [^59]

These statements indicated that God promised by an oath and covenant which could not be broken that a bearer of the Melchizedek Priesthood who faithfully magnified his calling would be given power from heaven to accompany his ministry. In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord declared:

Whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken [i. e., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic], and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies.

They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God.

And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord:

For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.

But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come. [^60]

Life exists in more than a physical sense. The Holy Spirit is a living substance. And those who received the priesthood, which gave them power to minister the Spirit to others, became the sons of great priesthood figures such as Moses and Aaron, who held the keys of the priesthood and stood as fathers in the priesthood to later generations.

But more than that, those who received the Melchizedek Priesthood were promised by the oath and covenant of the Father that they would obtain all that He had. Such a person would be an heir in the Father's kingdom, and inherit and own jointly with other heirs all that the exalted Man of Holiness possessed—His total wealth, glory, and power. But ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood alone did not make man an heir. It merely opened the door to that relationship, which man could then achieve by receiving all the sacred covenants and rites of that priesthood and proving faithful thereto. Joseph Smith explained: "All men who become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fulness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole." [^61]

Man received the Melchizedek Priesthood by ordination, which gave him the right to administer the forms and programs of the gospel under the direction of those who held keys in the kingdom. In doing so by faith, his administrations could be directed by the power of the Holy Ghost and accompanied by that divine influence. But to be an heir, he had to receive all the rites and ordinances of the temple by which those who proved faithful were given a fulness of the priesthood and were made priests and kings in the divine patriarchal order forever. Only when he had made sure his calling and election to a place of exaltation in the Father's kingdom could a man finally realize the full blessings promised in the oath and covenant of the priesthood. Should he then turn completely away from that covenant, he would become perdition, and there would be no forgiveness in this world or in the world to come.

The Nature Of Priesthood Government

Man's Relationship to God

Priesthood government gave man a form of society based upon his true relationship to God. While preserving man's freedom and personal dignity, it was designed to develop in him the divine attributes and powers which lead to eternal life in the presence of God. Since Christ was the center of such life for man, the divine system of necessity centered in Him. It was a true theocracy. And since it was the purpose of Christ to make all true believers His children in eternal life, that divine order had finally to become a patriarchal structure.

Church, or Zion, a Living Body

Because the priesthood opened up channels through which spiritual powers of life were extended to man, the system which was derived from the priesthood became a living body, not merely an ingeniously designed religious and social order. All parts of the society were animated by spiritual forces sufficient to give life, union, and vitality to the whole body.

Because of the enlightening spiritual powers within it, the Prophet referred to the Church as a living organism "strictly analogous to the human system"—a "compact body composed of different members," each of which was quickened and sustained by the Holy Spirit. [^62] Like the human body, there was also an interdependence of one office and function upon the others within the system. He said:

Paul [the Apostle], after speaking of the different gifts, says, "Now ye are the body of Christ and members in particular; and God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all Teachers? Are all workers of miracles? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?" It is evident that they do not; yet are they all members of one body. All members of the natural body are not the eye, the ear, the head or the hand—yet the eye cannot say to the ear I have no need of thee, nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee; they are all so many component parts in the perfect machine—the one body; and if one member suffer, the whole of the members suffer with it; and if one member rejoice, all the rest are honored with it. [^63]

Since each member of the Church had the gift of the Holy Ghost and was to be blessed by sharing in the joys that came from the respective gifts and offices of other members, the latter-day Seer concluded: "If a Priest [in the Aaronic Priesthood] understands his duty, his calling, and ministry, and preaches by the Holy Ghost, his enjoyment is as great as if he were one of the [First] Presidency." "Therefore," he continued, "in viewing the Church as a whole, we may strictly denominate it one Priesthood." [^64]

Great spiritual blessings were to be realized by upholding this divine order, for thereby the gifts and blessings of the Holy Spirit could be given to the Saints through the various priesthood channels within the Church. On this basis the Lord promised to "disperse the powers of darkness" from before them. [^65] Having commanded the Saints to instruct and edify each other that they might "know how to act and direct" the Church according to these divine principles, another revelation explained: "And thus ye shall become instructed in the law of my church, and be sanctified by that which ye have received, . . . that inasmuch as ye do this, glory shall be added to the kingdom which ye have received." [^66] By receiving the higher ordinances of the gospel and implementing the full program of the kingdom, the Saints could be made joint heirs through Christ of all that the Father had. As heirs they would be endowed with the glory and power of God. [^67]

The Principle of Revelation

The principle of personal revelation to each member and officer of the Church was a basic expression of the spiritual powers which were derived from the priesthood, and in many ways it was the foundation upon which the new order was built. "Jesus in His teachings says, 'Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it,'" Joseph Smith emphasized: "What rock? Revelation." [^68]

There were two types of personal revelation: first, the Lord gave new truth or instruction to the inquiring individual, utilizing any of the methods of communication from the Spirit of revelation, to open vision, or the ministry of angels; and, second, God merely confirmed man's thinking as he studied and pondered issues and decisions which confronted him. "You must study it out in your mind," Oliver Cowdery was told as an illustration of this type of revelation; "then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." "But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings," the explanation continued, "but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong." [^69]

The Prophet implied that the latter type of revelation was to be used more frequently in the general operations of the kingdom. "We never inquire at the hand of God for special revelation," he said, "only in case of there being no previous revelation to suit the case." [^70] Continuing, he explained:

It is a great thing to inquire at the hands of God, or to come into His presence; and we feel fearful to approach Him on subjects that are of little or no consequence, to satisfy the queries of individuals, especially about things the knowledge of which men ought to obtain in all sincerity, before God, for themselves, in humility by the prayer of faith; and more especially a Teacher or a High Priest in the Church. [^71]

The doctrine of revelation assumed, first, that there was but one person through whom guidance was to be given for the kingdom of God as a whole, namely, the Prophet and President of the Church. "His word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith," the Lord declared. [^72] Again:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand.

And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations. . . .

And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments. . . .

For verily I say unto you, that he that is ordained of me shall come in at the gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed. [^73]

Second, every officer had the right and responsibility to receive revelation for the direction of his or her office or calling within the system. Having explained that "revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church are to come through the Presidency," Joseph Smith added: "It is also the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church." [^74] Here, as he indicated, the scope of one's revelation was commensurate with the jurisdiction of his office or calling. "It is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves," the Prophet explained; ". . . but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction; for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom." [^75]

Finally, each person within the system was entitled to receive revelation from God to direct his or her own life and to meet the challenge of individual problems. This was one of the benefits that came from receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^76]

But each man's right to receive revelation for himself and family was subject to checks against the improper use of that gift. "Unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts," a revelation explained, "lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God." [^77] The principle of control was the same as that which the Apostle Paul voiced when he wrote: "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." [^78] Within the Church the gifts and revelations of the Spirit which were given to the members were subordinate to those of the Apostles and Prophets and other priesthood leaders.

Power

The challenge of controlling and rightly exercising power is as old as life. No association of living things can exist without some kind of a power relationship. It is also true that power is the product of organization. The well-structured aggregation of living numbers or elements creates power. The more perfect the organization the greater the power which is derived from it. But "power," as one writer observed, "is the most subtle intoxicant known." [^79] James Madison warned that it was of "an encroaching nature," [^80] and that "all power in human hands" was likely to be abused. [^81] The important issue, then, is how a system controls and exercises power—the end which it serves and the means by which it seeks to achieve that end.

Within Zion as a living body there was a great aggregation of power. But the Prophet wrote: "The rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven." [^82] The exercise of power through the priesthood was made subordinate to the direction of the Holy Spirit. Priesthood bearers were to be "directed and guided by the Holy Spirit." [^83] They, with all saints, were to "ask in Spirit," with the promise that they would "receive in Spirit." [^84] Under this arrangement, power was sanctified and made to uplift and bless man. Lord Acton [^85] is credited with the saying that all power corrupts, and that absolute power corrupts absolutely. But in Zion power was sanctified so that both the administrator and the recipient could be purified by its influence. A revelation therefore said of those who received the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods: "Whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods . . . and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." [^86]

In Zion power was exercised according to righteous principles. Joseph Smith explained: "The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue with those who received ordination only as their righteousness continued." [^87] Again he wrote, by revelation:

The powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, or vain ambition, or to exercise control or domination or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. [^88]

To the end that power might truly be exercised in righteousness, administrators had to be living in spiritual union with Christ, sustained in the remission of their personal sins through repentance and by the grace of Christ, and blessed by the purifying power of the Holy Spirit. A revelation which declared that the power of God—"the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ"—was made subordinate to one who was properly ordained, stated: "But no man is possessor of all things except he be purified and cleansed from all sin." It then promised: "And if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done." [^89]

Power in Zion was limited to uplifting man and serving his best interests. Under no condition could coercion be exercised. [^90] Though a man in authority was given respect, he was obligated to serve. "He that is ordained of God and sent forth," a revelation declared, "the same is appointed to be the greatest, notwithstanding he is the least and the servant of all." [^91] Of the correct use of power, Joseph Smith wrote in another classic statement:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. [^92]

The right and obligation to rebuke, as expressed above, did not constitute a departure from the principles of persuasion and love; it was made necessary, Joseph Smith stated, by "the perverseness of the brethren, for their temporal as well as spiritual welfare." [^93] To rebuke in the right way was difficult. "When a corrupt man is chastened he gets angry and will not endure it," the Prophet explained. [^94] Such a course, therefore, was "not calculated to gain the good will of all, but rather the ill will of many." Nevertheless, he concluded: "I frequently rebuke and admonish my brethren, and that because I love them, not because I wish to incur their displeasure, or mar their happiness." [^95] When rebukes were given according to righteous principles, they were not only to be made in love, but were to be followed by an increase of love toward the chastened individual.

Adherence to righteous principles and submission to the influence of the Holy Ghost fostered the proper and just control and exercise of power. When Charles Francis Adams and Josiah Quincy visited Nauvoo, Illinois, in May, 1844, the latter commented, after viewing the city and the adoration of its inhabitants for the Prophet: "It seems to me, General, that you have too much power to be safely trusted to one man."

"In your hands or that of any other person, so much power would, no doubt, be dangerous," Joseph Smith replied. "I am the only man in the world whom it would be safe to trust with it. Remember, I am a prophet!" [^96]

Some of the new social arrangements and relationships which were possible in Zion, and which could not be achieved in other systems, concerned the element of power. "The struggle for power," one writer rightly observed, "is as eternal as the division of society." [^97] But Joseph Smith contended that a free society need not rest upon division. There was to be no struggle for power in Zion's system of social union. [^98]

On the assumption that divisions are inherent in society, social scientists concede that "the balancing of power is a component of every social process." [^99] The need to balance power is made necessary by a lack of true social and economic union, and because individuals and groups seek improperly to aggrandize themselves or assert their selfish interests. But Joseph Smith went to the root of the issue by setting forth a system that achieved social union and justice. On that premise, he declared, "It is a false principle for a man to aggrandize himself at the expense of another." [^100] It was unchristian—contrary to the great principle that man should love his neighbor as himself. A truly Christian society would set forth the way to achieve true social and economic union and justice. And in the exercise of power, it would operate on the basis of what was right and just, not on what was expedient or on who was involved in the immediate issue.

Still another area in which human relations were modified in Zion had to do with the element of familiarity between the people and those who directed the system. It is often accepted as a fact that "authority can neither arise nor be preserved without the establishment and the maintenance of distance between those who command and those who obey." [^101] But Joseph Smith declared: "There should exist the greatest freedom and familiarity among the rulers in Zion." [^102] Again he said concerning all those within the system: "It is needful, brethren, that you should be all of one heart, and of one mind, in doing the will of the Lord." [^103]

Lincoln was a great leader because, as Parrington said, "he never forgot that he was one with those he led." [^104] The Prophet sought to exercise power with others rather than over others. He espoused the view that the farther society left behind the need for artificial devices and the more it based its sanctions upon mutual respect, consideration, and the uplifting influence of enlivening spiritual and moral forces, the more free and united the people would be. To the degree that leaders were humble and energetic sources of truth and light, they would promote free and open union among the people, rather than merely give direction to the affairs of society. As these principles were applied, the people in turn would acquired confidence in their leaders and be stimulated to develop the spontaneity and personal initiative in doing good which were necessary to the successful operation of the system. Zion was to be a social order based upon ardent individualism matured to its logical consummation of full freedom, responsibility, and brotherly union.

This was an exalted view of society, and the qualifications for leadership therein were great. But the members were also not without obligation. The Prophet wrote:

In order to conduct the affairs of the Kingdom in righteousness, it is all important that the most perfect harmony, kind feeling, good understanding, and confidence should exist in the hearts of all the brethren; and that true charity, love one towards another, should characterize all their proceedings. If there are any uncharitable feelings, any lack of confidence, then pride, arrogance, and envy will soon be manifested; confusion must inevitably prevail, and the authorities of the Church set at naught. [^105]

Consent

The principle of consent was a cardinal and indispensable element of the society of Zion. "All things," a revelation declared, "shall be done by common consent in the Church." [^106] Another revelation instructed: "No person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." [^107] Once a person was in office he had also to act according to the consent of others whose lives his actions influenced. The Prophet therefore wrote that high priests in the Church were "not to exercise monarchial government, or to appoint meetings for the Elders without their consent." [^108]

The principle of consent was an integral part of the program of the Church from the beginning. Before the Church was organized, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were instructed to assemble those who had been baptized and have them "decide by vote" if they would accept them as leaders. [^109] "We proceeded, according to previous commandment, to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God, and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a Church," the Prophet wrote. "To these several propositions they consented by a unanimous vote." [^110]

The procedure was theocratic for placing prospective officers and teachers before the Saints for their vote. Divine direction and human consent were combined in the new system. It was the Church of Jesus Christ, which gave the Lord the right to direct its affairs. But it was also the Church of the Latter-day Saints. [^111] Both God and man were to have their rights and prerogatives preserved and given proper expression within the organization. John Taylor explained:

The proper mode of government is this—God first speaks, and then the people have their action. It is for them to say whether they will have his dictation or not. They are free: they are independent under God. The government of God is not a species of priestcraft . . . where one man dictates and everybody obeys without having a voice in it. We have our voice and agency, and act with the most perfect freedom; still we believe there is a correct order—some wisdom and knowledge somewhere that is superior to ours: that wisdom and knowledge proceeds from God through the medium of the holy Priesthood. We believe that no man or set of men, of their own wisdom and by their own talents, are capable of governing the human family aright. [^112]

These theocratic principles were to be carried out under the enlightening influence of the Holy Spirit, both in regard to the nominations which were presented to the people and in the giving of consent. John Taylor observed:

When God dictates through the channel that he has placed upon the earth, he directs through the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and this way manifests his will to those whose right it is to know it. In this way he makes known the things of his kingdom and the principles that are necessary to the salvation of the people. Then all the congregation lift up their hands as a token before God that they sanction what is presented, and then the voice of the people is the voice of God. He first dictates, and then we sustain his nomination. Thus we have the wisdom of God associated with the concurrence of man; and God being governed by the Spirit of truth, and the Saints possessing and being guided by the gift of the Holy Ghost, it is the voice of God and the voice of his people under his direction, and God and his people are one, as Jesus said—"I in them, and thou in me, that we all may be one." This is the way we look at things. [^113]

The idea was not merely to sustain a person in office by reason of his gifts, talents, and abilities as a leader or teacher, but more fundamentally to sustain him as a channel of revelation and divine guidance to those who were under his jurisdiction. This was not a system of trusting in the arm of flesh, talented though it may have been, but of sustaining a person who, by faith, dedication and righteousness, became a revelator to those over whom he presided. Only in this way could the Church become a living body.

The Spirit of revelation not only provided for intelligent guidance and promoted union among the Saints, but it gave the means of checking the unrighteous use of power and authority. Being a living system with divine forces of truth enlightening the whole kingdom, each person therein had the means of discerning by the Spirit whether or not the course taken by the authorities was right or wrong. Brigham Young said:

The First Presidency have of right a great influence over this people; and if we should get out of the way and lead this people to destruction, what a pity it would be! How can you know whether we lead you correctly or not? Can you know by any other power than that of the Holy Ghost? I have uniformly exhorted the people to obtain this living witness, each for themselves: then no man on earth can lead them astray. [^114]

Authority and Freedom

There were vital and significant difference between society as a strictly mechanical system (a robot) and a living body. A mechanical system had to be authoritarian; arbitrary power had to move each limb and joint of the system. But there was life and union throughout all parts of the living body. There was a principle of authority in the living body, but authority and freedom were reconciled without the use of arbitrary force, in ways that were not possible in a strictly mechanical system.

In Zion, the right of the central offices to direct was combined with decentralized priesthood authority in the local offices and quorums, and with the enlightened exercise of freedom by the people. The divine system was authoritarian only in the sense that its central officers enunciated truth and men freely united to sustain the source from which they received the words of life. Though established channels of revelation provided a source of authority, the people were free to obey or disobey the counsel they received and to accept or reject the truth and power which were available to them. If, however, they seriously violated or neglected their covenant obligations, they could be reprimanded or expelled from the system.

The Prophet and his associates held that this kind of an order could exist only when the members of the system freely and intelligently sustained those in authority over them. But this was possible only when the authorities actually ministered truth and life to the people, and counselled them in paths which promoted true happiness and progress. The appeal of truth and life had to be strong enough to promote unity and cause men freely to sustain the authority of the system. To this end, those in authority had to have an actual legal right to revelation from God. The system had to be literally centered in God and had to draw truth, life, and power from His presence to benefit the people. John Taylor explained:

The position we occupy is this: the Holy Ghost, which has been given to all who have obeyed the Gospel, and have lived faithful to its precepts, takes of the things of God and shows them forth through a living Priesthood to a people enlightened and instructed by the Spirit of revelation from God, and the people thus enlightened, instructed and blessed by the Spirit of light, voluntarily and gladly sustain the Priesthood who minister unto them. [^115]

True theocracy, therefore, was government by the power and influence of divine truth and light. On another occasion Elder Taylor likened the flow of living spiritual powers from their divine Head to a stream of water flowing from its source to nourish plant and animal life along its course. "How easy it is to govern the people in this way!" he exclaimed. "The streams of life flow from the Great Fountain through the various channels which the Almighty has opened up, and they spread . . . throughout the world, wherever there are any Saints that have yielded obedience to the commandments of God." He added: "The fountain is inexhaustible, and the rivers of life flow from the fountain unto the people." [^116]

Discerning Spiritual Manifestations

Joseph Smith stated that he and priesthood authorities in general had "an imperative duty" to discern between true and false spiritual influences, and to detect that which was degrading. [^117] "Nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God," the Prophet declared. Of the "terrible power and baneful effects" of false spiritual influences, he said: "Long pilgrimages have been undertaken, penances endured, and pain, misery and ruin have followed in their train; nations have been convulsed, kingdoms overthrown, provinces laid waste, and blood, carnage and desolation are habiliments in which it has been clothed." [^118] In "every age, and almost among all people," various degrading spiritual powers had been manifested. [^119]

Why did such things prevail? The Prophet explained: "The learned, the eloquent, the philosopher, the sage, the divine—all are ignorant." They had no "key to unlock, no rule wherewith to measure, and no criterion" by which to test and judge such things. Consequently, they imagined that when there was "anything like power, revelation, or vision manifested, that it must be of God." [^120] But this was not true. Who, then, could determine the false from the true? "We answer," he declared, "that no man can do this without the Priesthood, and having a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed." No person could detect the adverse spirit except "by possessing intelligence" which was "more than human, . . . having unfolded through the medium of the Priesthood the mysterious operations of his devices." [^121]

Revivals and camp meetings in the Prophet's day were often attended by degrading spiritual influences which caused people to fall upon the ground, jerk, bark, or dance in wild uncontrollable motions. [^122] "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has also had its false spirits," the latter-day Seer reported; "and as it is made up of all those different sects professing every variety of opinion, and having been under the influence of so many kinds of spirits, it is not to be wondered at if there should be found among us false spirits." [^123] A major instance took place among some new converts to the restored gospel at Kirtland, Ohio, before the program of the Church was set up among them. "Many false spirits were introduced, many strange visions were seen, and wild, enthusiastic notions were entertained," Joseph Smith recalled; "men ran out of doors under the influence of this spirit, and some of them got upon the stumps of trees and shouted, and all kinds of extravagances were entered into by them." [^124] But these incidents resulted in a revelation being given which set forth vital points on the subject and stated the rights and responsibilities of the priesthood in handling them.

The revelation invited the elders to reason on the issue in light of the fundamental principles of the gospel which they had received:

Wherefore, I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained?

To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth.

And then receiveth ye spirits which ye could not understand, and received them to be of God; and in this are ye justified?

Behold ye shall answer this question yourselves; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto you; he that is weak among you hereafter shall be made strong.

Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth. doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

And if it be by some other way it is not of God.

And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

If it be some other way it is not of God.

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. [^125]

The contrast was clear. The Comforter by which priesthood bearers ministered the gospel to others was the Spirit of truth. "That which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness," the revelation continued. "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." This was the way true spiritual growth occurred, through the blessings of the priesthood which had been given that the Saints might "know the truth" and "chase darkness" from among them. [^126]

The revelation finally focused attention upon the control of darkening spiritual powers. Having stressed that one who was properly ordained to the priesthood was "possessor of all things . . . in heaven and on the earth," in that by righteousness there was subject to him "the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ," it instructed:

As ye are appointed to the head, the spirits shall be subject unto you. Wherefore, it shall come to pass, that if you behold a spirit manifested that you cannot understand, and you receive not that spirit, ye shall ask of the Father in the name of Jesus; and if he give not unto you that spirit, then you may know that it is not of God.

And it shall be given unto you, power over that spirit; and you shall proclaim against that spirit with a loud voice that it is not of God—

Not with railing accusation, that ye be not overcome, neither with boasting nor rejoicing, lest you be seized therewith.

He that receiveth of God let him account it of God; and let him rejoice that he is accounted of God worthy to receive.

And by giving heed and doing these things which ye have received, and which ye shall hereafter receive—and the kingdom is given you of the Father, and power to overcome all things which are not ordained of him. [^127]

Through this revelation and the instructions which the Prophet gave, the Saints learned vital lessons which served them well. Beginning in 1848, modern spiritualism spread throughout the United States and England, and later throughout the world. By 1852, "several hundred thousand Americans, including some of the most prominent personalities of the day," were involved in spiritualist activities of "table tipping, rapping, and automatic writing." [^128] But the movement made few, if any, serious inroads among the Saints. The position of the Church was expressed as early as 1829, in a corrected passage from Isaiah found in the Book of Mormon which stated: "When they say unto you: Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and mutter—should not a people seek unto their God for the living to hear from the dead?" [^129]

Summary

The kingdom of God was a perfect theocracy; its rights and powers had their origin with God. The Holy Melchizedek Priesthood was the basis of the system. Within it there were three orders of priesthood—the Melchizedek, the Aaronic or Levitical, and the Patriarchal—and each drew its rights and powers from the Melchizedek Priesthood. In conferring that priesthood upon man, God did so with an oath and a covenant which stipulated that by faithfulness man could rise to the exalted state of an heir in the Father's kingdom. But to this end, he also had to receive all the ordinances of the kingdom.

Because the kingdom was vitalized by living spiritual powers, it was in very deed a living body. Revelation for the whole body was given through the Prophet and President of the Church. But every officer and member was entitled to revelation to guide him in his respective duties. By associating power with the Holy Spirit, power was sanctified. Its expression was also strictly limited according to righteous principles; it could be used only to uplift and bless men. Furthermore, officers could only minister by the expressed consent of the members. Because priesthood was actually a channel through which truth and light were given to man, the spontaneous action of the Saints in sustaining the authorities reconciled freedom with authority in the system. Since the kingdom centered in living spiritual powers, it was vitally important that the Saints discern between true and false spiritual manifestations. They were taught to do so through revelations which the Prophet received and through practical experience.

Footnotes

Have nothing to do with those persons who deal with familiar spirits, under the names of "Mesmerism," "Electro Biology," "Spirit Rappings," "Table Movings," "Writing Mediums," etc.; for they will darken your minds, and bring you to destruction; they are the spirits of wickedness let loose upon this generation because of their wickedness.—Pratt, The Seer, I (November, 1853), p. 167.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, IV, p. 541. The Apostle Paul wrote that God placed first in the church "apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues," and that the formerday Saints were "built upon the foundation of apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone."—1 Corinthians 12:28; Ephesians 2:20. See also Ephesians 4:11-14.
[^2] Lectures on Faith, No. 7; Ephesians 4:8-11. For a statement concerning the Lectures on Faith, see Volume II of this study, p. 20.
[^3] D&C 107:92.
[^4] D&C 20:2; 21:1; 107:92.
[^5] See D&C 20:2; HC, I, pp. 61, 77.
[^6] HC, I, pp. 242-243, 267.
[^7] Unpublished revelation to Joseph Smith recorded in the handwriting of Sidney Rigdon, received January 7, 1832, at Amherst, Ohio, in Newel K. Whitney Collection, Brigham Young University.
[^8] HC, I, p. 334. See also D&C 81:1-2; 90:6.
[^9] D&C 107:22. See also HC, II, p. 477. D&C 107:23-24; HC, II, pp. 373-374.
[^10] D&C 107:8-9.
[^11] See HC, II, pp. 373-374. Brigham Young pointed this fact out to the people when Sidney Rigdon, who had been a counselor in the First Presidency, sought the leadership of the Church at the death of Joseph Smith. "If Elder Rigdon wants to act as his [Joseph Smith's] counselor," he stated, "he must go beyond the veil where he is."—Ibid., VII, p. 233.
[^12] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^13] Ibid., II, p. 373.
[^14] See ibid., pp. 180-200.
[^15] Ibid., p. 374.
[^16] Ibid., p. 376. At a later time Joseph Smith also specified that "the Twelve should . . . stand in their place next to the First Presidency."—Ibid., IV, p. 403. See also p. 449.
[^17] Ibid., II, p. 417.
[^18] D&C 107:24. [^170]
[^19] MS, IX (November 1, 1847), p. 321.
[^20] D&C 102:30; 107:33, 34, 36, 38; 124:127, 139.
[^21] D&C 124:128. Orson Pratt explained:
[^22] HC, II, p. 200. See also pp. 334, 417, and 432 for other statements by the Prophet on these responsibilities of the Twelve.
[^23] D&C 107:23.
[^24] HC, I, p. 283.
[^25] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Purposes Of The Second Comforter." For the Lord's promise, see Matthew 28:20.
[^26] HC, II, pp. 195-196.
[^27] D&C 18:27. See also verses 28 and 38.
[^28] 3 Nephi 13:25-34.
[^29] HC, II, pp. 181-182, 201-204.
[^30] D&C 107:34. Speaking of the Seventy, the Prophet said: "They are subject to the direction and dictation of the Twelve, who have the keys of the ministry."—HC, II, p. 477. See also p. 432.
[^31] D&C 107:93-94.
[^32] D&C 107:26.
[^33] D&C 107:25.
[^34] D&C 107:95-96. For a statement by the Prophet on this subject, see HC, II, p. 221. See also p. 222.
[^35] HC, II, p. 477.
[^36] Ibid., pp. 431-432.
[^37] Ibid., IV, p. 129.
[^38] D&C 107:94.
[^39] HC, II, p. 221.
[^40] D&C 107:30-31.
[^41] D&C 107:27. The revelation did provide, however, that a majority could "form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to be otherwise."—D&C 107:28.
[^42] See the manuscript report of the Prophet's action, December 18, 1833, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in part in TPJS, pp. 38-39.
[^43] D&C 124:94.
[^44] See a statement by John Taylor which makes this point clear, in TS, V June 1, 1845), pp. 920-922, where Elder Taylor set forth "the true doctrine of the church in regard" to this office.
[^45] HC, III, p. 380. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "Source of Regenerating Power."
[^46] TS, V (June 1, 1845), p. 921.
[^47] Joseph Smith declared: "No standing High Council has authority to go into the churches abroad, and regulate the matters thereof, for this belongs to the Twelve."—HC, II, p. 220.
[^48] Ibid., p. 124.
[^49] For a report of some of the actions of this council, see ibid., pp. 122-126, 136, 137, 164, 308, 364-367, 481, 483, 484, 522.
[^50] D&C 38:38; 42:9, 36.
[^51] D&C 107:37. When the High Council at Kirtland was organized in February, 1834, the First Presidency of the Church presided over that body directly, as presidents of the council. See D&C 102:3, also JD, XXII, p. 201, for a statement by John Taylor on the subject. For this reason the High Council at Kirtland was ranked in administrative structure above the High Council in Zion during that period. See HC, II, pp. 374, 376, 382. But this was because the Prophet was President of the High Council at Kirtland, and Kirtland was at that time headquarters of the Church. But Kirtland was designed to be a stake of Zion, and except for Joseph Smith's direct role as President of the High Council at Kirtland that body would therefore have been subordinate to the High Council in Zion.
[^52] HC, II, p. 124.
[^53] Ibid., p. 308. He added: "But I yet live, and therefore God requires more at my hands."—Ibid.
[^54] Ibid., pp. 125, 126. The Prophet indicated the order of authority between the First Presidency and the Presidency of the Church in Zion when he reported: "The High Priests, Elders, Priests, Teachers, Deacons and members present, then covenanted with hands uplifted to heaven, that they would uphold Brother David Whitmer, as president in Zion, in my absence; and John Whitmer and William W. Phelps, as assistant presidents or counselors; and myself as First President of the Church; and to uphold one another by faith and prayer."—Ibid., pp. 125-126.
[^55] Oliver Cowdery was made Associate President (sometimes designated as Assistant President), "to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President," December 5, 1834. See Manuscript History of the Church, Book A, 1, December 5, 1834, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also HC, II, p. 176.
[^56] After the Twelve and Seventy were organized and the issue of their place in the administrative structure of the Church came up, Joseph Smith ranked the presiding quorums as follows: the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, the First Quorum of the Seventy, the High Council in Kirtland, and the High Council in Zion. See HC, II, pp. 375-376. See also pp. 373-374.
[^57] David Whitmer, An Address To All Believers In Christ (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 55. One reason why David Whitmer was a logical choice for this position was that he had been ordained an apostle. See D&C 18:9; JD, VI, p. 320. He was not, however, made a member of the Quorum of the Twelve.
[^58] In the program of the divine patriarchal order, the office of Presiding Bishop belonged by right to the firstborn line of the sons of Aaron.
[^59] The office of the Presiding Bishopric was not fully developed until after the High Council in Zion was disorganized as the Saints were driven from Missouri in 1839. However, during the earlier period David Whitmer was President of the Church in Zion, which gave him jurisdiction over Edward Partridge, the Bishop in Zion. And the intent was that other bishops in the Church were to give an account of their activities to Bishop Partridge. See D&C 72:5-6.
[^60] See D&C 107:15.
[^61] D&C 58:17-18.
[^62] D&C 107:69, 72, 74-75.
[^63] This applied to those who were living within the stakes of Zion. Elsewhere those who were called to preach the gospel made this initial judgment.
[^64] These points will be discussed in conjunction with the treatment of the law of consecration and stewardship in later chapters of this volume.
[^65] See, for example, D&C 72:17.
[^66] D&C 107:72.
[^67] D&C 41:9. See also D&C 42:10; 57:7.
[^68] See D&C 52:24; 58:14, 24.
[^69] D&C 72:1-8.
[^70] D&C 72:5, 6.
[^71] HC, III, p. 48.
[^72] D&C 124:141. It is not known if Vinson Knight was ordained and served in this office. For a discussion by John Taylor of the office of the Presiding Bishop, see JD, XXII, pp. 199-200.
[^73] HC, IV, p. 552. See also pp. 567-568, 570, 602-607. This organization is now named "Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."
[^74] "A Short Sketch of the Rise of the Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo," TS, I (April 1, 1843), p. 155; HC, V, pp. 320-322.
[^75] Helen Mar Whitney, "Life Incidents," Women's Exponent, Salt Lake City, Utah, IX (August 15, 1880), p. 42.
[^76] MS, I (August, 1840), p. 95.
[^77] Mary Ann Winters said:
[^78] The Relief Society was continued, except for some disruption, from Nauvoo to the Great Salt Lake Basin.
[^79] For a discussion of the City of Zion and its supporting cities, see chapter ten.
[^80] D&C 94:1.
[^81] D&C 104:48.
[^82] See D&C 41:9; 42:10; 72:5-8; HC, II, pp. 28-33. During this early developmental period of the Church, the First Presidency presided over the High Council at Kirtland directly. There was no Stake Presidency chosen to administer the affairs of the council and the stake under the direction of the Prophet.
[^83] Since the Saints had been driven out of Jackson County, Missouri, those who settled at Far West were under the direction of the Presidency of the Church in Zion, the High Council in Zion, and the Bishop in Zion. See HC, II, pp. 481, 505, 523, 524.
[^84] Ibid., III, p. 38.
[^85] See ibid., IV, pp. 233, 236.
[^86] D&C 107:74.
[^87] HC, III, p. 48.
[^88] For the organization of stakes in Joseph Smith's day, see ibid., II, pp. 28-31, 514; III, p. 38; IV pp. 12, 233, 236.
[^89] Joseph Smith declared: "No standing High Council will ever be established only in Zion, or one of her stakes."—Ibid., II, p. 220.
[^90] Ibid., V, p. 389.
[^91] Ibid., II, p. 31.
[^92] Ibid., p. 25.
[^93] Ibid., V, p. 411.
[^94] Ibid., II, p. 370.
[^95] Ibid., p. 141.
[^96] Ibid., pp. 25-26.
[^97] D&C 107:39. An evangelist is a patriarch. See HC, III, p. 381.
[^98] From John Taylor's explanation, in TS, V (June 1, 1845), pp. 920-922.
[^99] The fact that a square was a city is clear from the Prophet's statement in the same communication: "When this square is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days; and let every man live in the city, for this is the city of Zion."—HC, I, p. 358.
[^100] Ibid., p. 368.
[^101] D&C 107:87-88.
[^102] Don Carlos Smith, the Prophet's brother, was appointed President of the High Priests' Quorum at Kirtland, January 15, 1836, and retained that office until his death, August 7, 1841. HC, IV, pp. 12, 393. Charles C. Rich was also sustained as President of the High Priests' Quorum in Missouri, August 15, 1837.—Ibid., II, p. 507.
[^103] Speaking of the Seventies, Joseph Smith said: "Seventies are not called to serve tables, or preside over churches, to settle difficulties, but are to preach the Gospel and build them up, and set others, who do not belong to these quorums, to preside over them, who are High Priests."—Ibid., II, p. 431-432. See also ibid., IV, p. 129.
[^104] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^105] See D&C 84:19-24; 107:18-19.
[^106] HC, I, p. 338. See also D&C 107:10, 12.
[^107] HC, I, p. 338.
[^108] D&C 20:67.
[^109] D&C 107:10.
[^110] D&C 107:89-90; 124:137.
[^111] D&C 124:137.
[^112] D&C 52:39.
[^113] The Relief Society, the Sunday School, the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations, and the Primary.
[^114] D&C 20:65.
[^115] D&C 107:74.
[^116] D&C 107:39.
[^117] See HC, IV, p. 12.
[^118] Ibid.
[^119] See ibid., pp. 246, 305. Though Joseph Smith devised the Nauvoo Charter and made it a unique document, he apparently used the charter of the city of Springfield, Illinois, as a basic pattern from which to work. Some parts of the two documents are identical in wording. The term ward is found in the Springfield charter and apparently was borrowed by the Prophet from that document.
[^120] Ibid., p. 12.
[^121] D&C 128:3.
[^122] HC, I, p. 368.
[^123] D&C 68:14; 107:14, 68.
[^124] D&C 68:15. Literal descendants of Aaron who had a legal right to the bishopric had also to be appointed by the First Presidency. See D&C 68:20. This aspect of the Aaronic Priesthood will be discussed in chapter fourteen of this volume.
[^125] D&C 107:15.
[^126] D&C 107:87.
[^127] D&C 20:46-47.
[^128] D&C 20:49.
[^129] D&C 84:30.
