Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

7

The Church of Jesus Christ

He [Christ] gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ;

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the statute of the fulness of Christ.—PAUL THE APOSTLE.

In stating the beliefs of the Saints, Joseph Smith wrote: "We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive Church, viz: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc." [^1] Those offices were divine gifts given of God to the Church. [^2] In the grand design of the kingdom, the Church was an instrument to build up and perfect the kingdom of God on earth, which included establishing Zion as a divine and eternal patriarchal order. The Church had three administrative levels: the general, the stake, and the local, where individual congregations were called branches and wards. On each administrative level there were offices and councils designed to carry on the functions of that level of the Church. There was also a judicial system by which transgressors were tried and by which misunderstandings and contentions were settled.

General Offices Of The Church

The First Presidency

Administratively the organization of the Church centered in the office of the President, who was to have "all the gifts of God" which could be given to those who held the priesthood on earth. [^3] He was to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, a prophet, and an apostle of Jesus Christ. [^4] Joseph Smith was accepted as the First Elder in the Church on the day it was organized, [^5] and later sustained as President of the High Priesthood, on January 25, 1832. [^6]

Assisting the President and sharing in his gifts and keys were two counselors. These three presidents comprised the First Presidency of the Church. The earliest known reference to this presiding body is in a revelation given to Joseph Smith, January 7, 1832, which stated:

Unto the office of the presidency of the high priesthood I have given authority to preside, with the assistance of his counselors, over all the concerns of the church;

Wherefore, stand ye fast—claim your priesthood in authority, yet in meekness, and I am able to make you abound and be fruitful; and you shall never fall, for unto you I have given the keys of the kingdom; and if you trangress not, they shall never be taken from you. Wherefore, feed my sheep. Even so. Amen. [^7]

The First Presidency was officially organized March 18, 1833, with Joseph Smith as President, and Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams as counselors. [^8] In speaking of this body, a revelation said: "Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen {i. e., sustained} by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." [^9] Again:

The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

The Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church. [^10]

The counselors in the First Presidency were subordinate to the President and were dependent upon him for the keys and powers which they exercised. When the President was taken away in death or removed from office there was to be a dissolution of the First Presidency of the Church. [^11]

Having the right to preside, the First Presidency was the channel through which revelation and guidance was given for the whole Church. "The Presidents or Presidency are over the Church," Joseph Smith explained; "and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency." "This," he added, "is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of this Priesthood." [^12]

The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

"Next to the {First} . . . Presidency" stood the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. [^13] This presiding body was organized in February, 1835. [^14] Of the place of this quorum in the administrative structure of the kingdom of God, Joseph Smith said: "The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency, . . . and where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." [^15] Thereupon the Prophet arranged "the several quorums" in their proper order, beginning with "the {First} Presidency, then the Twelve." [^16]

Members of the Twelve were also sustained as Prophets, Seers, and Revelators unto the Church. [^17] In referring to the administrative power of the Twelve, a revelation said: "They form a quorum, equal in authority and power to the three presidents {the First Presidency} previously mentioned." [^18] But it was only when the First Presidency was disorganized by the death or removal of the President from his office that the Quorum of the Twelve could preside over the kingdom of God.

As a presiding council holding the keys of the kingdom of God on earth under the direction of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve had the right and responsibility to direct the work of building up the kingdom in all aspects of its program. [^19] (When the government of God was established, they would have authority to direct the political functions of the kingdom.) In addition, the Quorum of the the Twelve was to be a "Traveling Presiding High Council," [^20] holding "the keys," the Lord declared in a revelation, "to open up the authority of my kingdom upon the four corners of the earth." [^21] Speaking of "the power, authority, and virtue of their apostleship," Joseph Smith said:

They are the Twelve Apostles, who are called to the office of the Traveling High Council, who are to preside over the churches of the Saints, among the Gentiles, where there is no presidency established; and they are to travel and preach among the Gentiles, until the Lord shall command them to go to the Jews. They are to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the Kingdom of heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature. [^22]

The Twelve had as their central spiritual obligation the calling to be "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling." [^23] To give a special witness required that they receive a special testimony. Joseph Smith characterized ancient seers and prophets as those "who saw the mysteries of godliness." [^24] He made it clear that Christ's promise to His apostles, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world," was an assurance that they would have the blessings of the Second Comforter to attend them in their ministry. [^25] In his charge to the Twelve when that body was organized in 1835, Oliver Cowdery said:

It is necessary that you receive a testimony from heaven for yourselves; so that you can bear testimony . . . that you have seen the face of God. . . . When the proper tme arrives, you shall be able to bear this testimony to the world. When you bear testimony that you have seen God, this testimony God will never suffer to fall, but will bear you out; although many will not give heed, yet others will. You will therefore see the necessity of getting this testimony from heaven.

Never cease striving until you have seen God face to face. Strengthen your faith; cast off your doubts, your sins, and all your unbelief; and nothing can prevent you from coming to God. Your ordination is not full and complete till God has laid His hand upon you. We require as much to qualify us as did those who have gone before us; God is the same. If the Savior in former days laid His hands upon His disciples, why not in latter days? [^26]

The primary qualifications of an apostle centered in the realm of the Spirit and had to do with his dedication to Christ and his spiritual union with the Master. By revelation the Lord declared: "The Twelve are they who shall desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart." [^27] In delivering the Sermon on the Mount to the Nephites after His resurrection, Jesus made it clear that part of that great discourse pertained exclusively to the Twelve and set forth the standard of dedication, faith, reliance, and selflessness required of those who were called to be Special Witnesses of the Master. To the Nephite Twelve, Jesus said:

Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?

Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?

Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?

And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin;

And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.

Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, even so will he clothe you, if ye are not of little faith.

Therefore take no thought; saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.

But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient is the day unto the evil thereof. [^28]

The Seventy

The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve were the two major presiding bodies over the kingdom of God on earth. No other council or quorum had the same scope of the authority as that which they held. But under their direction other presiding councils were organized. The First Quorum of the Seventy, a missionary organ in its primary responsibility, was organized the same month as the Quorum of the Twelve, [^29] with the intent that it would act "under the direction of the Twelve" in proclaiming the restored gospel to the world. [^30] With seven presidents [^31] constituting the First Council of the Seventy, this body formed "a quorum, equal in authority to that of the Twelve special witnesses or Apostles." [^32] Here again, however, equality in authority did not constitute equality in holding the functioning keys of the kingdom. But in words like those to the Twelve, a revelation said: "The Seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be special witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling." [^33]

Seventies other than those in the first quorum were to be called. Concerning the First Council of the Seventy, a revelation said: "These seven presidents are to choose other seventy besides the first seventy to whom they belong, and are to preside over them; and also other seventy, until seven times seventy, if the labor of the vineyard of necessity requires it." [^34] Administratively all seventies were subject to the First Council of the Seventy in their proselyting activities. But in his regular responsibilities as a member of the Church at home, each man was subject to his respective stake and ward authorities.

Joseph Smith made it clear that the seventies were members of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and that they were "to be taken from the quorum of Elders." They "are a sort of traveling council or Priesthood," he said, "and may preside over a church or churches, until a High Priest can be had." [^35] Again he explained: "The Seventies are not called to serve tables, or preside over churches, to settle difficulties, but are to preach the Gospel and build them up, and set others, who do not belong to these quorums, to preside over them, who are High Priests." [^36]

Though the duties of the seventies were "more particularly to preach the Gospel, and build up churches, rather than regulate them," the Prophet taught that they did have some administrative authority in the latter area:

If a high priest should be remiss in his duty, and should lead, or suffer the church [over which he presided] to be led astray, depart from the ordinances of the Lord, then it is the duty of one of the Seventies, acting under the special direction of the Twelve, being duly commissioned by them with their delegated authority, to go to the church, and if agreeable to a majority of the members of said church, to proceed to regulate and put in order the same; otherwise, he can have no authority to act. [^37]

Organizationally each quorum of seventy had seven presidents to preside over it. "And the seventh president of these presidents," a revelation said of the First Quorum, which was a pattern for other quorums, "is to preside over the six." [^38] This order of ranking presidents was suited to the work which the seventies were to perform. Several members of the First Council of the Seventy might be traveling throughout the world at a given time. Whenever they met, the senior president would automatically be the presiding officer. Meanwhile the senior president of those at home could direct the affairs of the central office of the seventy according to established policies and under the direction of the Twelve. Again, when a quorum of seventy was sent out to proselyte in a given area, its over-all program could be directed by the senior president. But under his direction each president could direct the activities of nine other seventies, thus making the quorum an efficient instrument to spread the message of the restored gospel.

Consideration had to be given to the family needs of those seventies who were preaching the gospel away from home. Here, the Prophet stated, they had "a right, by virtue of their offices, to call upon the churches to assist them." [^39] It may be suggested that this need could be met, when the full law of Zion was established, by having a seventy's family draw upon the storehouse to supplement its temporal needs when a seventy, as head of a household, was engaged in proselyting activities.

Union Among the Authorities

The First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the First Quorum of the Seventy constituted the central leadership of the Church after the two last-named bodies were organized in 1835. Of the principles upon which they were to operate, a revelation said: "The decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord." [^40]

Acting on these principles, members of these presiding quorums were to function in an atmosphere of free and open union made possible by the power of the Holy Spirit. "Every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the unanimous voice of the same," the above revelation declared: "that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions, in order to make their decision of the same power or validity one with the other." [^41] Nowhere but in a living system which exalted intelligence on a foundation of freedom was it possible to achieve such a standard of union.

The Patriarch to the Church

In building up the divine patriarchal order, it was necessary to designate officially, by revelation, the tribe of Israel—the unit of the divine family order under Jacob, or Israel—to which each Saint would belong in the perfected kingdom of God, on earth and in eternity. This right and power centered in the office of Patriarch to the Church, but it was shared by other patriarchs.

Joseph Smith established the office of Patriarch to the Church by ordaining his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., to that calling, December 18, 1833. [^42] The Patriarch was sustained by the Saints as a prophet, seer, and revelator. [^43] He did not preside over the Church, but served as the Patriarch to the Church. [^44]

In fulfilling their responsibilities, the Patriarch to the Church and other patriarchs throughout the Church were to bless each member and declare his lineage. If the individual was not an actual descendant of Israel by blood, patriarchs had power to assign him to a given tribe in which he would then hold membership by adoption. Through the regenerating power of the Holy Ghost, such a person could be purged of "the old blood" and become actually the seed of Abraham. [^45] Admonitions and prophecies were also vital elements in a patriarchal blessing, designed to aid the recipient to best fulfill the purposes of life on earth and in eternity.

The labors of the Patriarch to the Church were to be more particularly "connected with the church in Zion." There he was to "take the lead, priority, or presidency of the Patriarchal office." In the event that a "council of Patriarchs" was held comprised of other patriarchs in the Church, "he as a matter of course would preside by right of office." [^46]

The High Council in Zion

Joseph Smith apparently expected the High Council in Zion (the High Council in the Center Place of Zion) to be a fourth presiding body in the perfected administrative structure of the Church, with jurisdiction over organized stakes, but not over the affairs of the Church outside of those ecclesiastical units. [^47] He organized the High Council in Zion on July 3, 1834 [^48] before the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Quorum of the Seventy were organized; but unfortunately the Saints were not permitted to build up the Center Place of Zion in Missouri, and for this reason that council had but a short existence. [^49] But evidence indicates that the Prophet intended to give the High Council in Zion general jurisdiction over the Center Place of Zion and its supporting stakes. The following points support this conclusion:

First, the Center Place of Zion was not a stake or a separate entity within the system, but the administrative hub of Zion under which the Lord's covenant people were eventually to be "gathered in one." [^50] The fact that the Center Place of Zion was to be the central administrative unit of the system implies that the High Council in Zion was to have jurisdiction over that central unit and all its supporting stakes, as one great system.

Second, a revelation indicated that the High Council in Zion was to have equivalent power administratively to the Quorum of the Twelve in its directives to the several stakes of Zion. It said: "The high council in Zion form a quorum equal in authority in the affairs of the church, in all their decisions, to the councils {i.e., administrative directives} of the Twelve at the stakes of Zion." [^51] This did not mean that the High Council in Zion had equal authority to the Twelve, but that its right to direct the functions of the several stakes was to be equally respected.

Third, when the Prophet organized the High Council in Zion with David Whitmer at its head, he strongly implied, if he did not state categorically, that that body had a general jurisdiction over the Church. "I . . . told them that if I should now be taken away, I had accomplished the great work the Lord had laid before me, and that which I had desired of the Lord," he reported; "and that I had done my duty in organizing the High Council, through which council the will of the Lord might be known on all important occasions, in the building up of Zion, and establishing truth in the earth." [^52] The death or removal from office of the Prophet would disorganize the First Presidency. But with the High Council in Zion organized there would be an administrative body with general jurisdiction over the Church, by which Zion (including her stakes) could be built up and truth established in the whole earth. Because Joseph Smith viewed the High Council in Zion as having this kind of jurisdiction he stated that with the organization of that body he had "established" the Church on "a permanent foundation" so that if he were "taken away, it would have been enough." [^53]

Fourth, when Joseph Smith organized the High Council in Zion, he made it clear that that body was an administrative unit with general jurisdiction over the Church: he appointed David Whitmer to be his successor in the leadership of the Saints, in the event he was taken away. By virtue of his position as President of the High Council in Zion, David Whitmer was sustained as "the president of the church in Zion," [^54] not merely as a Stake President. Since the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Quorum of the Seventy had not yet been organized, this meant that there was a short period of time—from July 3, 1834, until February 14, 1835—when the High Council in Zion stood in an administrative position next to the First Presidency. It also meant that from July 3, 1834, until December 5, 1834, at which time Oliver Cowdery was made the Associate President of the Church, [^55] David Whitmer, as President of the High Council in Zion, was the Prophet's rightful successor. [^56] Years later Whitmer said of Joseph Smith's action in appointing him to be President of the Church in Zion:

In July, 1834, he ordained me his successor as "Prophet, Seer and Revelator" to the Church. He did this of his own free will and not at any solicitation whatever on my part. I did not know what he was going to do until he laid his hands upon me and ordained me.

It is in your records, and there are men now living who were present in that council of elders when he did it, in the camp of Zion, on Fishing River, July, 1834. [^57]

The Presiding Bishopric

The Presiding Bishopric was another important body on the general administrative level of the Church. [^58] Being subordinate to the First Presidency and to the Quorum of the Twelve (and to the High Council in Zion, when it was organized [^59]), this body supervised the functions of the Aaronic Priesthood of the Church [^60] and directed the temporal activities of the Saints.

One of the most important responsibilities of a bishop was to be a judge in Israel. A revelation said: "Whoso standeth in this mission is appointed to be a judge in Israel, like as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children; and to judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the prophets of God." [^61] Again, from another revelation:

A bishop must be chosen . . . to be a judge in Israel, to do the business of the church, to sit in judgment upon transgressors upon testimony as it shall be laid before him according to the laws, by the assistance of his counselors, whom he has chosen or will choose. . . .

Thus shall he be a judge, even a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a stake of Zion, or in any branch of the church where he shall be set apart unto this ministry, until the borders of Zion are enlarged and it becomes necessary to have other bishops or judges in Zion or elsewhere. And inasmuch as there are other bishops appointed they shall act in the same office. [^62]

Bishops were called to serve on each administrative level of the Church. As a judge, a bishop had several responsibilities. First, since the Church had the task of building up the divine patriarchal order as an eternal system, he was to judge if the Saints were worthy to receive the ordinances and blessings of that divine family order, from the ordinance of baptism by which they could become sons and daughters in the eternal family of Christ, [^63] to the sacred rite of eternal marriage by which the faithful could be exalted. Second, a bishop was empowered to judge economic matters under the law of consecration and stewardship, including the allocation of stewardships to the Saints, the determination of what constituted surplus production by each steward, and the steward's worthiness to draw funds from the storehouse to operate and expand his stewardship. [^64] Third, a bishop had the right to judge matters concerning the general operation of the Church in the area of his jurisdiction, including the issuing of certificates of membership and the transfer of such certificates as the Saints moved from place to place. [^65] Finally, a bishop was required to sit in judgment upon transgressors and to pass judgment upon them according to the laws of the Church. [^66]

The office of Presiding Bishop, with one bishop supervising the activities of the other bishops in the Church, developed with the effort to establish the Center Place of Zion. In February, 1831, Edward Partridge was called to be "a bishop unto the church." [^67] This was a general administrative position under the Prophet. Later Bishop Partridge was sent to Missouri to direct the temporal activities of the Saints in the Center Place of Zion, [^68] and Newel K. Whitney was called to serve as bishop in the area of Kirtland, Ohio. [^69] The revelation which called him to serve directed the Saints in that area to "render an account" of their stewardships unto Bishop Whitney. It then added: "These things shall be had on record, to be handed over unto the bishop in Zion." [^70] These instructions foreshadowed the development of the office of Presiding Bishop.

Other evidence indicates that the scope of authority given to the Bishop in Zion was of a general, rather than a limited, nature. When a meeting of Church authorities was held July 26, 1838, at Far West, Missouri, a resolution was passed which stated: "That the Bishop of Zion receive all consecrations from those living east, west, and south, who are not in the jurisdiction of a Bishop of any other stake." [^71]

Even though the Saints were driven from Missouri where the Center Place of Zion was to be built, the office of Presiding Bishop was retained in the Church. Having called other bishops to serve, a revelation given at Nauvoo, Illinois, said: "I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H. Smith, and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over the bishopric." [^72]

Auxiliary Organizations

Auxiliary organizations were also begun as staff offices to assist the priesthood on the various administrative levels of the Church—general, stake, and local. The first of these was "The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," organized March 17, 1842. [^73] A youth organization known as "The Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo" was also started, in January, 1843, with Heber C. Kimball largely responsible for its formation. At the Prophet's suggestion the youth of the Church were to be organized for the purpose of assisting the needy and improving themselves by participating in various activities for their mutual development. [^74] Had this organization not been disrupted by the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo, it would probably have become the major youth organization of the Church.

Sunday schools also were organized. At Kirtland, Ohio, they were held in the temple and in private homes. [^75] In England, in 1840, when Brigham Young was President of the European Mission and Parley P. Pratt was editor of the Millennial Star, the latter advised: "Let the elders gather the people together, old and young, every Sabbath day, in the streets, if no more convenient place offers, and teach them the first principles of the gospel of Christ." [^76] Early in June, 1844, Joseph Smith made an effort to give definite organization and direction to this program, and to establish the Sunday School on a regular basis among the Saints, but here again his untimely death and the exodus of the Saints from Illinois disrupted his plans. [^77] Both the youth organization and the Sunday School were begun anew in the West under the direction of Brigham Young; [^78] and to those auxiliaries which had been started initially in the days of the Prophet, the Primary Association was subsequently added to teach the gospel to the children of the Church one day a week other than Sunday.

The Stake Organization

The Place of a Stake

Zion was to be composed of a Center Place, called the City of Zion, and supporting units called stakes, except for small groups of Saints who were organized into branches. A study of the administrative system of Zion in the days of Joseph Smith indicates that originally and ideally a stake of Zion was to comprise a city of Zion of from fifteen to twenty thousand people. [^79] Joseph Smith was instructed by revelation to start building "the city of the stake of Zion, . . . in the land of Kirtland," Ohio. [^80] Again, he was told in regard to the new economic program to be developed there: "After you are organized, you shall be called the United Order of the Stake of Zion, the City of Shinehah [Kirtland]." [^81]

Each stake, or city, was given a stake presidency, high council, and bishop to direct the affairs of the Saints. This was the general order established at Kirtland, Ohio, [^82] Far West, Missouri, [^83] Adam-ondi-Ahman, Missouri, [^84] and in six other early stakes which were organized. [^85] Consistent with this policy, a revelation explained that a bishop was to serve "among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a stake of Zion, or in any branch of the church where he shall be set apart unto this ministry." [^86] The fact that bishops were to be stake officers was also evident from a report of a meeting of priesthood authorities at Far West, Missouri, where it was resolved that "the Bishop of [the Center Place] Zion receive all consecrations from those living east, west, and south, who are not in the jurisdiction of a Bishop of any other stake." [^87]

The Stake Presidency

A stake presidency consisted of three high priests, a president and two counselors, who were chosen and set apart to the work under the direction of the First Presidency of the Church and sustained by the members of the stake. [^88] They were to be men of wisdom and sound judgment, impartial and just, qualified by natural endowments and the inspiration of God to preside as fathers and pastors of the people. The stake presidency directed all operations of the stake, and both priesthood and auxiliary organizations were subordinate to their authority.

The Stake High Council

In each stake of Zion, twelve high priests were called and set apart to form a standing High Council. [^89] With the Stake Presidency at its head, the High Council was both an administrative and judicial body, with power to direct all the general affairs of the stake.

Joseph Smith spoke repeatedly of the role and responsibility of councilors. "The way to get along in any important matter is to gather unto yourselves wise men, experienced and aged men, to assist in council," he said. "Handsome men are not apt to be wise and strong-minded men; but the strength of a strong-minded man will generally create coarse features, like the rough, strong bough of the oak." [^90] But more than a strong mind was necessary. Having organized the first High Council at Kirtland, the Prophet said: "I urge the necessity of prayer, that the Spirit might be given, that the things of the Spirit might be judged thereby, because the carnal mind cannot discern the things of God." [^91] A man had also to purify his heart. "No man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure," he declared on another occasion; ". . . we are frequently so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions." [^92]

Joseph Smith stressed that those sitting in council "should see and observe all things appertaining to the subject, and discern the spirit by which" others were governed. Councilors were also to "keep order and not let the council be imposed upon by unruly conduct." [^93] He explained: "Each should speak in his turn and in his place, and in his time and season, that there may be perfect order in all things; and that every man, before he makes an objection to any item that is brought before a council for consideration, should be sure that he can throw light upon the subject rather than spread darkness, and that his objection be founded in righteousness." This could "be done by men applying themselves closely to study the mind and will of the Lord, whose Spirit always makes manifest and demonstrates the truth to the understanding of all who are in possession of the Spirit." [^94] Still again the latter-day Seer instructed members of the council "not to seek to excel, but speak according to truth and equity." They were "to chase darkness from their minds, and be exercised on the subject upon which they were to speak, in order that they might touch upon points of doctrine, bring hidden things to light, and make dark things clear." [^95]

To illustrate the way a High Council should function, Joseph Smith made reference to the operation of such bodies in ancient times as they had been shown to him by revelation, stating:

In ancient days councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the council by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time. It was understood in ancient days, that if one man could stay in council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep; one praying, another not; one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking on something else. [^96]

Stake Patriarchs

In addition to the Patriarch to the Church, other patriarchs were to be ordained to serve in the several stakes of the Church. Of these a revelation said: "It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation." [^97] These patriarchs had the "same right to bless" as the Patriarch to the Church, and their administrations were "just as legal as his." [^98]

Stake Bishops

Joseph Smith stated that in each stake or city of Zion a bishop was to be called to direct the temporal affairs of the Saints. Having sent a city plat to the brethren in Missouri, giving the general plan to be used in laying out cities of Zion, the Prophet wrote: "When Zion is once properly regulated there will be a Bishop to each square [i. e., city [^99] of the size of the one we send you with this; but at present it must be done according to wisdom." [^100]

Unfortunately Joseph Smith was not permitted to build up Zion to the point that the divine program was "properly regulated." Therefore the full and detailed role of a stake bishop was not made clear. But the fact that a bishop was to be president of a quorum of forty-eight priests [^101] suggests that other bishops were to be called to function within a stake or city of Zion.

High Priests

In each stake, men holding the office of high priest in the Melchizedek Priesthood were organized into a quorum with a presidency to direct the activities of the quorum. [^102] In addition to their quorum responsibilities, high priests served as individual officers or as members of councils in performing the duties of their calling. The major function of a high priest was to preside over designated responsibilities within the Church. [^103] Of this office the Prophet said: "A High Priest is a member of the same Melchizedek Priesthood with the [First] Presidency, but not of the same power or authority in the Church." [^104] The right to preside over designated responsibilities did not encompass all the rights and powers of the priesthood. In addition, there was the right and power to open the gospel program to all nations and establish the Church among all people of the earth, the power to perform all the ordinances of the house of the Lord by which a man and his wife could be exalted within the divine patriarchal order, and the power to place the final seals and blessings of the priesthood upon the faithful within that eternal family order. These and other powers a high priest did not have by virtue of his ordination to that office.

Because the primary purpose of the Melchizedek Priesthood was to mature man spiritually and organize him according to the law of heaven so that he could be sanctified and return to the presence of God to be endowed with glory, [^105] the duty of a high priest was to minister primarily "in spiritual and holy things, and to hold communion with God." [^106] That they might fulfil the responsibilities of their office, high priests were to "be better qualified to teach principles and doctrines than the Elders." [^107] They were to "be ordained by the direction of a high council or general conference" of the Church. [^108] Of their authority a revelation said: "High Priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the [First] Presidency, in administering spiritual things, and also in the office of an elder, priest (of the Levitical order), teacher, deacon, and member." [^109]

Elders

Those ordained to the office of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood were organized into quorums of ninety-six men each, presided over by a president with two counselors. [^110] Elders' quorums were responsible to the Stake Presidency for the conduct of their affairs. As "standing ministers" to the Church, [^111] primarily within the stakes of Zion, they were to help "watch over" the Church. [^112]

Stake Auxiliary Organizations

Though the Prophet began to develop the auxiliary organizations of the priesthood, he did not establish them on each of the administrative levels of the Church. This was done, however, at a later time, and accordingly the four auxiliary organizations, [^113] with their respective boards, came to be part of each stake organization.

Local Organizations

Branches of the Church

Initially the term branch was used to designate any organized group of Saints below the level of a stake. A revelation stated that no person was to be ordained to any office in the Church, where there was "a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." [^114] Bishops could function in branches, [^115] and the Twelve were "to ordain evangelical ministers," or patriarchs, "in all large branches of the church." [^116]

The Ward

The term ward did not come into use as the name of a local congregation within a stake until after the Saints settled at Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1839. [^117] The name is not scriptural, and the Prophet may have considered it but a temporary feature of church organization until the full and perfect order of Zion was established. In the city of Nauvoo, which composed the Nauvoo Stake, several bishops were appointed to care for the temporal needs of the Saints, and their areas of jurisdiction were called wards. [^118] But in the perfect order of Zion, as stated in the discussion of the stake organization, there was to be a bishop over each stake, or city of Zion, and he was to spend his full time as a steward over that office, supervising the economic activities of the Saints within the city. The record does not indicate further details concerning the inner organization of a stake under the full program of Zion.

The name ward was derived from the municipal units within the city of Nauvoo, [^119] where each ward was used to designate a bishop's jurisdiction within the city, or the Nauvoo Stake. [^120] Joseph Smith also used these municipal units for ecclesiastical purposes when he introduced the practice of baptism for the dead. To record such ordinances, he suggested that there "be a recorder appointed in each ward of the city" to tend to this function. [^121] When the Saints moved West they retained the name ward to designate the basic unit of the Church; after the stake at Salt Lake City had developed to include thirty-six wards, they also modified the practice of making each city a stake of Zion.

Local Bishops

Since the jurisdiction of bishops was to be determined "according to wisdom" until the perfect order of Zion was established, [^122] their sphere of activity was determined by the immediate circumstances of the Saints. Even before local bishops were appointed over the several wards of the city of Nauvoo, revelations stated that, besides the Presiding Bishop, other bishops were to be called to administer the "outward ordinances" of the gospel and direct the temporal affairs of the Saints in the area of their jurisdiction. A bishop was to be "a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a stake of Zion, or in any branch of the church." [^123] Of these bishops, a revelation said: "Wherefore they shall be high priests who are worthy, and they shall be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, except they be literal descendants of Aaron." [^124] As high priests, they could also preside over the spiritual affairs of their respective units.

Offices in the Aaronic Priesthood

Consistent with the fact that it was the responsibility of the bishopric to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood, [^125] a local bishop was given jurisdiction over those who were ordained to the lesser priesthood in his ward. This included the role of president of a quorum of forty-eight priests of the Aaronic Priesthood, with the responsibility to "sit in council with them, to teach them the duties of their office, as given in the covenants." [^126]

"The priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and administer the sacrament," a revelation explained, "and visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties." [^127] Priests in the Aaronic Priesthood were also to "take the lead of meetings" when there was no elder present. [^128] In performing their duties, priests were to assist the bishop in his responsibilities.

There were offices in the Aaronic Priesthood other than those of bishop and priest. Concerning them, a revelation said: "The offices of teacher and deacon are necessary appendages belonging to the lesser priesthood." [^129] Being appendages, the offices of teacher and deacon were subordinate to the higher offices of the Aaronic Priesthood. Teachers and deacons could be ordained by those who held the office of priest. [^130] "But," a revelation clarified, "neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands [to ordain or give the gift of the Holy Ghost]." [^131]

Under the direction of the bishop, teachers and deacons were organized into quorums with their respective presidencies. [^132] "The duty of the president over the office of the teacher," a revelation declared, "is to preside over twenty-four of the teachers, and to sit in council with them, teaching them the duties of their office, as given in the covenants." [^133] Of the president of a deacons' quorum, it said: "The duty of a president over the office of a deacon is to preside over twelve deacons, to sit in council with them, and to teach them their duty, edifying one another, as it is given according to the covenants." [^134]

Teachers and deacons were to perform vital functions on the local administrative level of the Church. Of their duties a revelation said:

The teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them:

And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking;

And see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members do their duty.

And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest—

And is to be assisted always, in all his duties in the church, by the deacons, if occasion requires. . . .

They are . . . to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come unto Christ. [^135]

Teachers and deacons were not to travel throughout the Church or the world in performing their duties, but "to watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church." [^136] Those holding the office of teacher, accompanied by appointed holders of higher priesthood offices, were to visit the homes of the Saints as official representatives of the Bishop, to strengthen them in the gospel, to encourage them to fulfil their church obligations, and to assist them to establish their lives upon the eternal program of the divine patriarchal order. In this capacity, a home teacher was to invite people to come unto Christ, to promote love and union in the home, and to help establish the family upon the divine program by which they could be bound together in eternity and exalted in the celestial kingdom in the resurrection.

Ward Auxiliary Organizations

As stated earlier in this chapter, Joseph Smith did not establish auxiliary organizations on each administrative level of the Church. But this was done later. Accordingly, the respective auxiliary organizations came to be a part of each ward organization as aids to the priesthood in the great work of teaching, edifying, and perfecting the Saints.

Conferences Of The Church

Conferences were to be held by the Church, throughout the several areas of the Church, as an important means of doing "whatever church business" was "necessary to be done at the time." [^137] A revelation explained: "The several elders comprising this church of Christ are to meet in conference once in three months, or from time to time as said conference shall direct or appoint." [^138] It further stipulated: "It shall be the duty of the several churches, composing the church of Christ, to send one or more of their teachers to attend the several conferences held by the elders of the church." [^139]

Soon after the Church was organized, Joseph Smith established the practice of holding a general conference of the whole Church from time to time. [^140] As the program of the Church was developed more fully, those conferences were held annually and semi-annually, and stake conferences were held on a quarterly basis. Later, conferences were also held annually in the several wards of each stake.

Church Courts

Checking Beginnings of Conflict

Checks on the misuse of power were built into the Church, or Zion, along with the judicial machinery to settle disputes that might arise. Nevertheless, emphasis was placed upon preventing, rather than merely settling, conflicts. Here the law of Christ was applied. A revelation in February, 1831, said:

If thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled.

And if he or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a meeting, and that not before the world.

And if thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before many.

And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of God.

If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her who he or she has offended, and to God, that the church may not speak reproachfully of him or her.

And thus shall ye conduct in all things. [^141]

Those serving as priesthood teachers to the homes of the Saints [^142] were to assist in checking the commencement of conflict. In laboring to put down iniquity in the Church and see that there was no "hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking," [^143] they were to act "as the scriptures direct." [^144] In one scriptural passage, Jesus instructed His disciples:

If they brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church. [^145]

In accordance with these instructions, home teachers could act initially as those whom an offended person took with him to help reconcile the offense committed by another. They might also be officers through whom a final appeal could be made to the Church, in the event the offer of reconciliation was rejected by the offending person. Having received their report, the Bishop could then take formal action on the case.

Outline of Court System

The judicial system of the Church provided for appropriate courts on each administrative level of the Church—local, stake, and general. In ascending jurisdiction, the major courts of the Church were the local Bishop's Court, the Stake High Council Court, and the Council of the First Presidency Court. In addition, there were special courts which could be called to deal with issues outside the regular operation of the system. A person found guilty of a charge, who felt that he had been unjustly dealt with, could appeal his case from a lower to a higher court.

Zion's judicial system had no jurisdiction over non-members of the Church; nor could a non-member bring a member to trial before church tribunals. [^146] Such cases were left to the courts of the land. Furthermore, no authority within the Church had power "to try men on the right of property or life, to take from them this world's goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon them." [^147] The power of church courts was limited to decisions concerning fellowship and standing. The Saints, however, were bound by covenant to support their judicial processes, even in the settlement of economic difficulties under the law of consecration and stewardship; and should one fail to do so of his own free will, he could be severed from the society and brought before the tribunals of the land for a final settlement of the case. [^148]

Members violating the laws of the land were to be dealt with by that law, although they might also be tried in an ecclesiastical court to determine their standing in the Church. [^149]

The Local Bishop's Court

The local Bishop's Court, consisting of the bishop assisted by his counselors, [^150] held original jurisdiction over cases within the area over which the bishop presided, with power to inflict the extreme penalty of excommunication upon lay members and upon those who were ordained only to the Aaronic Priesthood. A bishop could also disfellowship (temporarily suspend the rights and privileges of church membership) or place on probation those who held the Melchizedek Priesthood, pending the further action of a higher court with greater powers. As a common judge in Israel, a bishop therefore had power to prevent abuse of church standards by all people over whom he held jurisdiction. Legitimate appeals from the Bishop's Court could be made in all cases.

The Stake High Council Court

A Stake High Council with the Stake Presidency at its head was empowered to act as a judicial body, with original jurisdiction in all cases it desired to act upon within the stake, and appellate jurisdiction over all cases originating in the Bishop's Courts within the stake. In preparing for judicial action, the high councilors drew numbers from one to twelve. Those who drew even numbers were placed on one side of the council table, with the responsibility of seeing that the accused person's interests were properly represented and considered. Those who drew odd numbers were placed on the other side of the council table and given the task of seeing that the interests of the accuser, or of the Church, were properly represented and considered. [^151]

Before each case was heard, the council considered its nature and gravity. In cases that were not difficult, two councilors were appointed to speak on the evidence and testimony which would be presented, one councilor representing each side of the issue in contention. Those who drew the smallest numbers in the above drawing—one from each side of the council table—were assigned to this responsibility. More difficult cases could require as many as three councilors from each side to speak (those drawing the six smallest numbers), but in no case were more than six councilors to speak. [^152]

In speaking, the appointed councilors were "to present the case . . . in its true light before the council," and every man was "to speak according to equity and justice." [^153] This was a different approach than that taken by lawyers who endeavored to win their case, right or wrong, or to sustain as much of their claim as possible, should the first objective fail to be realized. [^154]

In the presentation of evidence and testimony, the accuser and the accused had a right to speak for themselves. A decision was then to be rendered by the Stake President, after consulting with his counselors. The official instructions on procedure stated:

After the evidences are heard, the councilors, accuser and accused have spoken, the president shall give a decision according to the understanding which he shall have of the case, and call upon the twelve councilors to sanction the same by their vote.

But should the remaining councilors, who have not spoken, or any one of them, after hearing the evidences and pleadings impartially, discover an error in the decision of the president, they can manifest it, and the case shall have a re-hearing.

And if, after a careful re-hearing, any additional light is shown upon the case, the decision shall be altered accordingly.

But in case no additional light is given, the first decision shall stand, the majority of the council having power to determine the same. [^155]

Here, as in other areas, the machinery of the Church, or Zion, was designed to promote and sustain the basic ideals of the gospel. By righteous action in accordance with the above procedures, the High Council Court was expected to preserve the rights of the individual, determine justice, and assist to bring unity and accord out of conflict. George A. Smith therefore declared that "there never was a more correct organization of a court on earth" than a High Council Court. All other courts in the world were "boobies" in comparison. Zion's judicial system revealed "its own authenticity and divine origin." [^156]

The Council of the First Presidency Court

The highest regular tribunal within the Church was the Council of the First Presidency Court, consisting of the First Presidency of the Church assisted by twelve high priests organized after the judicial pattern of a Stake High Council Court. [^157] This tribunal had original jurisdiction if it so desired, as well as appellate jurisdiction, over all cases arising within the society. Should a member of the Presiding Bishopric of the Church be tried for malfeasance of office, it was specified that his case was to be heard only before this tribunal. [^158] Local bishops, however, could be tried by the Stake Presidency and High Council in their respective stakes. [^159]

Special Courts

Special tribunals could also be organized when necessary. The revelations mention three such judicial bodies, viz., the Presiding Bishop's Court, the Council of High Priests' Court, and the Traveling High Council of the Twelve Apostles Court. The Presiding Bishop's Court consisted of the Presiding Bishop with his two counselors and twelve high priests especially chosen for the occasion and organized according to the pattern of a High Council Court. This was to be a tribunal extraordinary from which there was to be no appeal, to be convened if it was necessary to try a member of the First Presidency of the Church for crime or malfeasance of office. [^160] Having explained the power of this court, a revelation said: "Thus, none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all things may be done in order and in solemnity before him, according to truth and righteousness." [^161]

The Council of High Priests' Court abroad was another extraordinary council that could be organized as an ad hoc judicial body in areas outside the regularly organized stakes and missions of the Church, to adjust important difficulties or to meet serious emergencies. [^162] Such tribunals were to be called only "on the most difficult cases of church matters," the decision to organize them being made by the "traveling or located High Priests" in the area. Though the Council of High Priests' Court was to be organized and conducted after the pattern of a Stake High Council Court, it did not possess the same powers as a regular High Council Court. Those who called these tribunals therefore were required "to transmit, immediately, a copy of their proceedings, with a full statement of the testimony accompanying their decision, to the High Council of the seat of the First Presidency of the Church." Should either of the parties in conflict be dissatisfied with the decision of the tribunal, an appeal could be made to the First Presidency with the provision that a re-hearing would be granted and conducted as though no previous decision had been made. [^163]

When abroad, the Traveling High Council of the Twelve Apostles could sit as a judicial body. The decisions of this body, if made in righteousness, were to be final and to admit to no appeal. But if evidence was shown that they had acted in unrighteousness, the case could be "called in question by the general authorities of the church." [^164] Presumably such a decision could be reviewed and reversed by the Council of the First Presidency Court.

The General Assembly

There was a way to correct, or reverse, a decision by a presiding council in the event the council was in error or the decision was made in unrighteousness. Having spoken of the Quorum of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the First Quorum of the Seventy, a revelation said: "In case that any decision of these quorums is made in unrighteousness, it may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums, which constitute the spiritual authorities of the church; otherwise there can be no appeal from their decision." [^165] Joseph Smith also spoke of this feature of Church administration, stating that "if the Twelve erred they were accountable only to the General Council of the authorities of the whole Church, according to the revelations." [^166]

Mission Of The Church

Joseph Smith did not consider the Church to be an end in itself, but the means to develop all the programs by which the more perfect patriarchal order of the kingdom could be established. With the Apostle Paul, he implied that the Church, with its inspired officers, was to remain till the Saints came "in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." [^167] By revelation the Lord made it clear that the full stature of Christ which the Saints could acquire was that of an exalted being within the divine patriarchal order. "If ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation," Christ said of those who embraced the law of the eternal family order; "that where I am ye may be also." He then explained: "This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent." [^168]

The relationship of the Church to the divine patriarchal order could be likened to that of a construction crew to a temple. When the temple is finished, there is no further need for the builders. But the temple will continue in its functions. So it was with the Church and the divine patriarchal order. In making his calling and election sure, a faithful man was not guaranteed an office in the priesthood or a position in the Church in eternity, but exaltation as a husband and a father within the eternal family of Christ. [^169] In the judgment, the major issue would not be the position a person occupied in the Church, but the degree to which he had become sanctified as a husband and a father within the divine family order, and the extent that he had assisted others to come to Christ and establish their lives upon the principles and program of that celestial order.

Though there were two preliminary organizations in the over-all program of the kingdom of God—the Church and the government of God—Joseph Smith made it clear that in the perfected kingdom all spiritual, social, economic, and political functions would center in the divine patriarchal order, as integral programs within the celestial family of Jesus Christ. In building this eternal order, the Church was expected to accomplish several things:

First, the Church was the organization through which the restored gospel was to be taught to the people of the earth, that believers might be born of water and of the Spirit into the eternal family of Jesus Christ.

Second, the Church was designed to watch over the family of Christ—to edify, sanctify, and mature spiritually those who took upon themselves the name of Christ, that they might grow up in the divine attributes and powers of glory to become like Jesus in the resurrection.

Third, the Church had the task of building temples and of administering the sacred rites and covenants by which the children of Christ could be organized into specific family units within the divine patriarchal order. Through ordinances performed vicariously for those who died without receiving the opportunity to hear the gospel, the patriarchal order could also be extended back through previous generations and connected, eventually, to the great patriarchs in the early ages of the world.

Fourth, through the Church the Saints were to be taught the great social and economic principles of Zion's law and established in their temporal activities upon that law.

Fifth, the Church would eventually provide the foundation upon which the government of God would rest, and be the means of establishing that great system of political freedom and justice.

Sixth, the Church would perfect the divine patriarchal order by helping to integrate all the social, economic, and political programs of the kingdom into that eternal system. Through the work performed by priesthood quorums, auxiliaries, and home teachers, those who had received the sacred rites and covenants of the temple could also be perfected as true fathers and mothers in their homes and taught to fulfil all their responsibilities as members of that eternal family.

Finally, the Prophet and President of the Church, and those to whom he delegated the proper keys, could place the seal of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood upon sanctified couples and families within the divine patriarchal order, thus making sure their calling and election to those sacred family relationships within that order for eternity.

Summary

The Church was composed of several offices, as gifts of God to edify and perfect the Saints. On the general administrative level, all authority centered in the President and his two counselors. Next to the First Presidency stood the Quorum of the Twelve, then the First Quorum of the Seventy. The work of giving patriarchal blessings to the members of the Church centered in the Patriarch to the Church. In addition to these offices, Joseph Smith organized the High Council in Zion, to sit at the Center Place of Zion and direct the program of Zion there and in the several supporting stakes of Zion. He also called a presiding bishop to supervise the Aaronic Priesthood of the Church and direct the temporal activities of the Saints. Finally, the Prophet introduced auxiliary organizations as aids to the priesthood.

Stakes were also organized as supporting units to the City of Zion. Each stake was to be a city of Zion, with a stake president and his two counselors as presiding officers, assisted by a high council. A bishop and a patriarch were also to function as stake officers. Within each stake were a quorum of high priests and several quorums of elders, with auxiliary organizations developed to assist in the work of the stake.

Branches were small, temporary administrative units of the Church. Wards were also developed as local congregations, though the place they would occupy in the fully developed system was not made clear. At Nauvoo, bishops were called to preside over the several wards within the city or stake. In their work, they were assisted by the several quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood, and by auxiliary organizations. As a major means of doing the work of the Church, Joseph Smith began the practice of holding conferences on a periodic basis. A court system was also organized. By utilizing all of the above organizations, the Church was expected to build up the kingdom of God and establish the divine patriarchal order on earth in preparation for an eternal existence.

Footnotes

The Twelve had duties to perform, both abroad and at home. Having fulfilled important duties abroad, they were not relieved from the duties specified in the commandment, to act at home, and they have been, from that time to this, in the midst of the people of God, at home, at the gathering places.—JD, XIX, p. 114. See also HC, II, p. 417; JD, XIX, pp. 226, 233; XXII, pp. 36-37.

Evidence indicates that for a time before he received this position, Oliver Cowdery was out of favor due to transgression, and for this reason Joseph Smith waited until December, 1834, to take the above action. This delay opened the way for David Whitmer to attain a position in the Church above Oliver Cowdery. For a discussion of the reasons for the delay in Oliver's appointment, see Robert Glenn Mouritsen, "The Office Of Associate President Of The Church Of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints," unpublished Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972.

During a period of great opposition to the Prophet in 1837, which resulted from his starting the practice of plural marriage and the difficulties incident to the financial collapse of the nation's economy, at least four members of the Quorum of the Twelve, several of the Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and many influential elders at Kirtland met in an upper room at the Kirtland Temple. "The question before them," Brigham Young reported, "was to ascertain how the Prophet Joseph could be deposed, and David Whitmer appointed President of the Church."—MS, XXV, p. 487. The fact that such an effort was made corroborates the report that David Whitmer had been appointed to succeed the latter-day Seer in the event of his removal from office. The effort to replace the Prophet was inconsistent, however, for two reasons: First, he had not fallen from his prophetic calling. Second, by 1837 the Quorum of the Twelve had been organized and appointed to stand next to the First Presidency. The President of the Twelve, not David Whitmer, was the rightful successor of Joseph Smith. See HC, II, pp. 373-374, 375-376.

I was at a meeting in the grove on Mulholland Street. At the close Brother Joseph asked that the children bring their Testaments and hymn books and meet there the next Sabbath to have Sunday School. He said, "I don't know as I will be here, I will if I can, but Brother Stephen Goddard will be here and take charge of you. Won't you, Brother Goddard?"

I attended two Sabbaths, when those awful days of June, 1844, came, and terminated our gathering for that purpose.—Young Woman's Journal, XVI (Salt Lake City, 1906), p. 558. See also Relief Society Magazine, LV (November, 1916), p. 641, for another statement by Mary Ann Winters.

Having attended a Sunday School at Nauvoo, Mosiah Hancock said: "There were 14 scholars who attended that school. I was in the New Testament class taught by John Taylor." The Life Story of Mosiah Lyman Hancock, type-written copy in Brigham Young University Library, pp. 24-25.

And again, the process of laboring with members: We are to deal with them precisely as the Scriptures direct. If thy brother trespass against thee, take him between him and thee alone; and, if he make thee satisfaction, thou hast saved thy brother; and if not, proceed to take another with thee, etc., and when there is no Bishop, they are to be tried by the voice of the Church; and if an Elder, or a High Priest be present, he is to take the lead in managing the business; but if not, such as have the highest authority should preside.—HC, I, pp. 338-339.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 105:5. Brigham Young therefore observed that the Saints were to "gather out from Babylon, and establish the kingdom of God upon the principles of heaven."—JD, XVIII, p. 242.
[^2] D&C 38:17-32.
[^3] D&C 42:29-42, 53-55, 70-73. Other features of the divine law were given in later revelations.
[^4] D&C 104:18.
[^5] D&C 88:123.
[^6] D&C 104:14.
[^7] D&C 42:30-31.
[^8] See D&C 38:24-27; 42:30; 49:20; 70:14; 78:5-7; 82:17; 104:68-77.
[^9] When some brethren discussed Zion's economic program, it was concluded "that all who had received their endowments, had entered into that order."—Journal of Abraham H. Cannon, July 26, 1882.
[^10] D&C 104:37.
[^11] D&C 104:22, 24-25, 42.
[^12] JD, XII, p. 153.
[^13] See chapter six, the section entitled "The Oath And Covenant Of The Priesthood."
[^14] HC, I, p. 364.
[^15] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, December 31, 1834.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] These and related rights will be discussed at length hereafter.
[^18] D&C 70:8.
[^19] HC, III, p. 28.
[^20] Ibid., II, p. 295.
[^21] Ibid., VI, pp. 32-33. Joseph Smith's reference to the community Rigdon was associated with before his conversion to the restored gospel shows that there was a fundamental difference in the principles upon which it was based and those he himself entertained. The Book of Mormon, which some writers have laboriously but unsuccessfully tried to prove was written by Rigdon, contains principles in perfect accord with those found in the revelations of Joseph Smith. Hence, Rigdon could not have been its author. The Spaulding Manuscript, from which it was also alleged the Book of Mormon was copied, also sets forth the plan for a utopian society in principle much like Rigdon's community, but totally dissimilar to the system described in the Book of Mormon.
[^22] Ibid., pp. 37-38.
[^23] In 1838, Bishop Edward Partridge and others wrote a memorial to the State Legislature of Missouri, stating, "We have no common stock; our property is individual property."—Ibid., III, p. 223. Sidney Rigdon also denied that the Saints entertained common stock principles. See ibid., V, p. 281.
[^24] Leaflet written by Orson Hyde, August 1, 1848, in reply to a pamphlet written by Lyman Wight, in Journal History, August 1, 1848.
[^25] A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ (Independence, 1833) 44:26; D&C 42:29-31.
[^26] JD, II, p. 99.
[^27] See HC, I, p. 364.
[^28] D&C 72:15.
[^29] D&C 85:3-5. Speaking of the building of Zion, Joseph Smith continued:
[^30] Unpublished revelation to Joseph Smith, January 7, 1832.
[^31] D&C 42:29-31.
[^32] HC, I, pp. 363, 364.
[^33] Letter of Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, dated May 2, 1833, at Kirtland, Ohio, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^34] HC, I, pp. 365-366.
[^35] Journal History, under date.
[^36] D&C 51:3.
[^37] D&C 70:12.
[^38] D&C 26:2. See also D&C 20:63, 65, 66; 28:13; 38:34; 41:9; 51:12; 72:7; 104:64, 71, 72, 76; 124:144.
[^39] HC, I, pp. 364-365.
[^40] Ibid.
[^41] See JD, XX, p. 371.
[^42] See MS, XXVI (June 18, 1864), p. 390; HC, I, pp. 366-367.
[^43] D&C 51:4.
[^44] D&C 51:5.
[^45] Ibid.
[^46] Letter of Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, May 2, 1833.
[^47] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "Conditions Governing Those Who Make Their Calling and Election Sure."
[^48] It may be that this deed form was formulated by Partridge before he was fully aware of the rights of a steward within the system. This seems unlikely, however, since the initial revelation instructing him how to proceed in delegating stewardships mentions the important right which he omits from this document.
[^49] HC, I, pp. 366-367. The document used in the case of Joseph Knight, Jr., is the same as this one. Dated October 12, 1832, it is a copy of the original deed in Joseph Knight, Jr.'s care. Copy by Thomas Bullock, in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^50] See his deed of consecration in the preceding section of this chapter and compare the items he consecrated with those mentioned in the above document.
[^51] See "Lease of Inheritance to Joseph Knight, Jr., in Jackson county and loan of property there," October 12, 1832; copy of the original made by Thomas Bullock, Church's Historian's Library, Sat Lake City, Utah.
[^52] D&C 85:8.
[^53] For a discussion of this episode by Joseph F. Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency, see Improvement Era, X (October, 1907), pp. 929ff.
[^54] HC, III, p. 223.
[^55] D&C 104:54-57.
[^56] JD, XVII, p. 107.
[^57] D&C 104:57.
[^58] D&C 84:46-53; 93:29-32.
[^59] D&C 42:53.
[^60] D&C 51:4.
[^61] JD, XX, pp. 369-370.
[^62] D&C 42:54.
[^63] D&C 104:49.
[^64] Pratt, The Seer, II (July, 1854), p. 297.
[^65] See, for example, D&C 104:67-69.
[^66] A revelation spoke of surplus as a residue, which meant that which was left over. See D&C 42:33-34.
[^67] D&C 42:33-34.
[^68] D&C 70:8.
[^69] D&C 42:55.
[^70] D&C 70:9-11.
[^71] D&C 78:5-7.
[^72] D&C 70:14-16.
[^73] D&C 72:3-6. In another revelation the Lord stated:
[^74] See D&C 70:3-4.
[^75] D&C 72:4.
[^76] D&C 78:22.
[^77] See JD, XVII, p. 107.
[^78] Ibid., II, p. 101.
[^79] Ibid., XVII, pp. 32-33.
[^80] Ibid.
[^81] D&C 104:62.
[^82] JD, XVI, p. 4.
[^83] D&C 42:34-35.
[^84] D&C 82:17-19.
[^85] D&C 104:68-77.
[^86] D&C 82:18.
[^87] See, for example, Acts 2:44; 4:32; 3 Nephi 26:19; 4 Nephi 2-3, 25-26.
[^88] D&C 104:71.
[^89] D&C 104:73-75.
[^90] D&C 82:19.
[^91] JD, XVII, p. 179.
[^92] Exodus 22:25.
[^93] Deuteronomy 23:19. This law did not apply to those who kept not God's statutes, for by taking advantage of those liberal provisions outsiders could undermine the economic system which was based to some degree upon the divine principles of heirship and brotherhood. Those who did not contribute to the system could not share in its privileges. For this reason the ancient law qualified: "Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it."—Deuteronomy 23:20. When Israel departed from this divine law, Ezekiel charged: "Thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbors by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God."—Ezekiel 22:12.
[^94] HC, VI, p. 58.
[^95] D&C 70:20-22.
[^96] JD, XVII, pp. 107-108. See also ibid., XVI, p. 154.
[^97] Ibid., XVII, p. 244.
[^98] D&C 70:1-5.
[^99] Journal History, April 30, 1832.
[^100] HC, I, pp. 365-366.
[^101] See D&C 70:3-6.
[^102] D&C 104:64-66. If necessary, it could also draw upon the funds of a mercantile corporation called the United Firm. See HC, I, p. 366.
[^103] D&C 70:7-8.
[^104] See Journal History, April 26, 27, 30, and May 1, 1832; HC, I, pp. 267-270; B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, I, pp. 285-286.
[^105] See The Contributor, VI (January, 1885), p. 128; D&C 104:39-42.
[^106] This subject will be discussed in volume IV of this work.
[^107] HC, III, pp. 63-64: JD, XVII, pp. 60, 92.
[^108] Under the press of circumstances, these and other companies which were formed in northern Missouri seem to have developed into cooperative ventures and programs to help the poor, more than corporate stewardships. Hundreds of Saints had been driven at great loss by mobs from their lands in Jackson County, Missouri, while hundreds more had migrated from Ohio under adverse circumstances. Many of these and other migrant Saints needed assistance from their more fortunate brethren who, in general, were reluctant to consecrate when so much of what they gave went to assist others. Consequently, modifications of the program had to be made. John Corrill, a counselor to Bishop Partridge, said of these companies after he left the Church in 1838:
[^109] D&C 119:4. Alma stated that the law of tithing was the economic "order" of Christ, being "a type of his order" in eternity, or "it being his order" by which men could enter "into the rest of the Lord their God."—Alma 13:11-16. Brigham Young therefore explained that the law of tithing is "an eternal law that God has instituted for the benefit of the human family, for their salvation and exaltation."—JD, XIV, p. 89. For statements by John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff, see ibid., XXII, pp. 11-13, 207-208.
[^110] See D&C 119, where the revelation first deals with the principle of consecration and then discloses the law of tithing which was to be applied in the context of the law of consecration and stewardship.
[^111] D&C 119:4.
[^112] Of the administration of tithes, a revelation said: "Verily, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come, that it shall be disposed of by a council, composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the bishop and his council, and by my high council; and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord."—D&C 120.
[^113] HC, VII, p. 301.
[^114] The view is sometimes expressed that the law of consecration and stewardship is an all-embracing system and for this reason the law of tithing cannot function in connection with it. This false assumption rests upon the same kind of reasoning which concludes that, because the Saints had all things common under the law of consecration and stewardship, the divine program was communal in form. In this kind of reasoning, all things are bulked together without proper consideration to, or place for, the actual details of the system.
[^115] See 3 Nephi 26:19; 4 Nephi 2, 3, 25, 26.
[^116] See 3 Nephi 24.
[^117] 3 Nephi 26:2.
[^118] See 4 Nephi. Early information on the law of tithing in this dispensation indicates that it had a companion relationship to the law of consecration and stewardship. A revelation in 1831 mentioned both laws as essential parts of the economic program of Zion. Having referred to the law of consecration and stewardship, the Lord declared: "Verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people."—D&C 64:23. The next year another revelation declared that under the law of consecration the Lord would "tithe his people."—D&C 85:3. The Saints in Missouri therefore discussed the law of tithing, recognizing that it was a divine commandment even though they were then practicing the law of consecration and stewardship. See Journal History, September 11, 1833. In 1834, when the Church was still under the program of consecration, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery entered into a covenant with God to pay tithing. When some faithful brethren in the East complied with the requirement to consecrate their wealth to further the work of the Lord and purchase inheritances in Missouri (See HC, II, pp. 172-174), making it possible for the leaders to obtain a loan to pay some pressing debts of the Church, the Prophet said: "We agreed to enter into the following covenant with the Lord, viz.: That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts; that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor His people; after that, of all that He shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church, or as He shall command."—Ibid., p. 175. This law was known and applied to a degree among the Saints before 1838, when it was finally made clear by a revelation to the Prophet. In appealing to the Saints to live the law of God by which they were to contribute funds to pay the expenses of the Church, the Bishop and his counselors at Kirtland wrote in a general epistle to the Church in 1837:
[^119] HC, III, p. 44.
[^120] John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, 1891), pp. 60-61. This account is corroborated by William Swartzell, who reported, July 22, 1838, that Lyman Wight preached that after the "brethren had bought lots to suit themselves they should consecrate all money and property to the church so that [the] church can purchase lands within twelve miles from the center of the stake in every direction."—William Swartzell, Mormonism Exposed, p. 23. See also Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, p. 46.
[^121] Lee, op. cit., pp. 61, 62. Lee observed that events later showed that they voted "to please the priesthood," then acted "to suit themselves."—Ibid., p. 62. The failure of the Saints to fulfil their obligations to the law of Zion will be discussed in Volume IV of this study.
[^122] See HC, III, p. 44.
[^123] Statement by John Taylor, in JD, XXII, p. 11.
[^124] HC, III, p. 44.
[^125] D&C 119:1-4.
[^126] HC, III, p. 47.
[^127] Ibid., p. 48.
[^128] The failure of the Saints to live the full law of Zion will be treated in greater detail in the next volume of this work, also, the anticipated establishment of Zion's law.
[^129] Letter of John Smith, written from Nashville, Lee County, Iowa Territory, January 8, 1840, to George A. Smith at New York; original letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^130] HC, IV, p. 93.
[^131] D&C 20:58.
[^132] See D&C 107:62-63.
[^133] D&C 107:86.
[^134] D&C 107:85.
[^135] D&C 20:53-57, 59.
[^136] D&C 84:111.
[^137] D&C 20:62. The revelation said, for example: "The elders are to receive their licenses from other elders, by vote of the church to which they belong, or from the conferences."—D&C 20:63.
[^138] D&C 20:61.
[^139] D&C 20:82.
[^140] The first conference was held in June, 1830, and the second one was convened the following September. See HC, I, pp. 84, 110.
[^141] D&C 42:88-93.
[^142] D&C 20:47.
[^143] D&C 20:54.
[^144] D&C 20:80.
[^145] Matthew 18:15-17. Concerning this subject, Joseph Smith wrote:
[^146] HC, V, p. 336.
[^147] D&C 134:10. See also HC, III, p. 395.
[^148] See JD, XI, p. 258; XX, p. 105.
[^149] See D&C 42:79, 84-86; MA, I (August, 1835), p. 168.
[^150] See D&C 107:72-78.
[^151] See D&C 102:12-18.
[^152] D&C 102 : 13-14.
[^153] D&C 102 : 16.
[^154] Brigham Young cited the actions of a lawyer in a case which was then being tried in the civil courts. "Instead of setting before the jury the true merits of the case, and nothing else," he observed, "he never touched upon them, but avoided them at every turn and threw dust in their [i. e., the jury's] eyes, that they might give an unrighteous decision."—JD, III, p. 238. See also ibid., XI, pp. 257-259.
[^155] D&C 102:19-22.
[^156] JD, VIII, p. 63.
[^157] See D&C 102:27, 32; 107 : 78-80.
[^158] See D&C 68:13-24.
[^159] See JD, XXI, pp. 361-362 : XXII, pp. 193-200, for explanations by John Taylor on the trial of bishops.
[^160] D&C 107:76, 82-83.
[^161] D&C 107:84.
[^162] 162. These provisions were made before official missions of the Church were organized. Within the missions of the Church such matters are taken care of under the direction of the mission presidency.
[^163] 163. D&C 102:24-29.
[^164] 164. D&C 102:30-32.
[^165] 165. D&C 107:32.
[^166] 166. HC, II, p. 285.
[^167] 167. Ephesians 4:11-13.
[^168] 168. D&C 132:23-24. For an explanation of the term eternal lives, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Exaltation and Eternal Lives."
[^169] 169. D&C 132:19-24.
