Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

8

Zion's Law of Consecration and Stewardship

The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.—THE PSALMIST.

A revelation to Joseph Smith in 1834 stated that Zion's law of consecration and stewardship was based upon "the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom." [^1] That divine law was foreshadowed in a revelation to the Prophet at Fayette, New York, January 2, 1831, [^2] and it was revealed at Kirtland, Ohio, February 9, 1831, [^3] as a requirement of the restored gospel which the Saints had embraced. In a revelation, the Lord stated that the act of consecrating property was in fulfilment of "the law of my gospel." [^4] For this reason another revelation admonished the Saints: "See that ye . . . learn to impart one to another as the gospel requires." [^5]

As an essential part of the full gospel program, the law of consecration and stewardship was based upon the premise expressed in the following revelation: "I the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine." [^6] This meant that of himself man had no legal right to the earth and its wealth. But by consecrating himself and his possessions to God, and by complying with other divine requirements, man could become an heir through Christ of the Father's kingdom and be made a steward over a portion of the common possessions, in time and in eternity. His life would then be established upon eternal truths by which he could achieve a true and perfect relationship with God, his Father.

Basic Features Of Zion's Economic Law

The Covenant Principle

The law of consecration was based upon the principle of mutual covenant, particularly the sacred covenant of consecration. In the revelation which disclosed that law, the Lord said: "Thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support, that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken. And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me." [^7]

The law of consecration and stewardship was not a communal system. Instead, its roots were planted deep in the exalting principles of freedom, human dignity, and brotherhood which were expressed in the true gospel of Christ. By sacred covenant, free, mature, and conscientious men of faith consecrated their possessions to God, in obedience to the law of Christ to love their neighbor as themselves. Christ's law required, first, that they uplift the downtrodden, and second, that thereafter they give each man an equal right and opportunity to acquire the wealth of the earth and the spiritual blessings of the everlasting gospel. [^8] This was the dominant idea on which the system was based.

The Relationship to the Divine Patriarchal Order

The law of consecration and stewardship was the economic system of the divine patriarchal order which the Prophet later developed when he set forth the purposes and program of the temple. [^9] Because the new economic law was based upon the covenant of consecration, it could be said that it was the economic program of the Melchizedek Priesthood and pertained to the highest order of that priesthood, the divine patriarchal order. As such, it was designed to function within the framework of that eternal family. It was not without significance that a revelation said, on appointing Oliver Cowdery his stewardship in the divine order: "And this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed unto him, for a blessing unto him and his seed after him." [^10] Similar statements were made to Sidney Rigdon and Martin Harris; and to Bishop Newel K. Whitney the Lord added: "And inasmuch as he is faithful in keeping my commandments, which I have given unto him, I will multiply blessings upon him and his seed after him, even a multiplicity of blessings." [^11]

Brigham Young also associated the economic order with the family order of Zion:

I have looked upon the community of the Latter-day Saints in vision and beheld them organized as one great family of heaven, each person performing his several duties in his line of industry, working for the good of the whole more than for individual aggrandizement; and in this I have beheld the most beautiful order that the mind of man can contemplate, and the grandest results for the upbuilding of the kingdom of God and the spread of righteousness upon the earth. Will this people ever come to this order of things? Are they now prepared to live according to that patriarchal order that will be organized among the true and faithful before God receives His own? [^12]

Consecration and Heirship

Reference has been made to Joseph Smith's teachings that man could not become an heir in the Father's kingdom except by receiving the oath and covenant of the Melchizedek Priesthood and "the fulness of the ordinances" of God's kingdom. [^13] This included the need to embrace and apply the covenant of consecration. To Bishop Edward Partridge the Prophet wrote: "The fact is this, a man is bound by the law of the Church, to consecrate to the Bishop, before he can be considered a legal heir to the kingdom of Zion; and this, too, without constraint; and unless he does this, he cannot be acknowledged before the Lord on the Church Book." [^14]

Wilford Woodruff was one who consecrated his property in Clay County, Missouri. In his journal, he gave this explanation of his action: "Believing it to be the duty of the Latter-day Saints to consecrate and dedicate all their properties, with themselves, unto God, in order to become lawful heirs to the Celestial Kingdom of God, it was under such a view of the subject that I consecrated before the Bishop of the Church." [^15] He then recorded the covenant which he embraced and the purposes of that covenant:

Be it known that I, Wilford Woodruff, freely covenant with my God that I freely consecrate and dedicate myself, together with all my properties and effects unto the Lord, for the purpose of assisting in building up his kingdom, even Zion, on the earth, that I may keep his law and lay all things before the bishop of his Church, that I may be a lawful heir in the Kingdom of God, even the Celestial Kingdom. [^16]

As man became an heir by the act and program of consecration, he acquired certain basic rights within the divine economic order. Among these were two of major significance: first, each heir had the right to be a steward over sufficient of the Lord's property (or an income-producing responsibility) to support himself and his family on an equal economic standard with others in the society; second, each heir had an equal right with other stewards to draw funds from the Lord's storehouse, where surplus property and wealth were kept, to operate and expand his stewardship. [^17] A revelation which stipulated that all surplus profits of a literary firm were to be given to the storehouse therefore declared: "And the benefits shall be consecrated unto the inhabitants of Zion, and unto their generations, inasmuch as they become heirs according to the laws of the kingdom." [^18] These were the two central features of Zion's economic order, and upon them the whole system rested.

The Law of Consecration vs. Communal Orders

Because of the urge for social union, many men in Joseph Smith's day sought to establish ideal societies based upon the principle of common stock or communal ownership of property. Such principles the Prophet repudiated. When asked if the Saints believed in "having all things in common" as in such systems, he answered emphatically, "No." [^19] Again, when asked if the Saints could have "possessions and property without making them common stock," he reported: "I replied that . . . we had no common stock business among us; that every man enjoys his own property." [^20] In reporting that an English socialist lectured at Nauvoo, he said: "After he got through, I made a few remarks, alluding to Sidney Rigdon and Alexander Campbell getting up a community at Kirtland, and of the big fish there eating up all the little fish. I said I did not believe the doctrine." [^21] Later the Prophet preached "about one hour on the 2nd chapter of Acts, designed to show the folly of common stock." [^22] In these and other statements, he and his associates made their position clear. [^23] When Lyman Wight dissented from the Saints after the death of Joseph Smith and started a society on common stock principles, Orson Hyde wrote:

Why does Bro. Wight teach and enforce a doctrine that Joseph Smith never did nor never would sanction? Namely: a community of goods, or property thrown in together as common stock. Though this doctrine has sometimes been practiced by good men, the original purpose and design of God was to make men accountable for their stewardship, and therefore, "to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; and to every man according to his several ability." . . . The whole course and order of nature—the constitutional organization of man—the voice of the martyred prophet of the last days, and the eternal purpose of God, all stand opposed to Bro. Wight's "common stock" principles; and no people can prosper that enforce this as a law among themselves. [^24]

The System Of Consecration And Stewardship

The Act of Consecration

The mechanics of the law of consecration were relatively simple. To begin, each man was required to consecrate all his material wealth to God, through the bishop of the Church. A revelation instructed: "If thou lovest me, thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments; and behold, thou shalt consecrate all thy properties, that which thou hast unto me, . . . and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church." [^25] In this act the Saints applied their belief that the earth and all things thereon belonged to God. "We are only returning to the Lord His own property," Orson Pratt explained, "that which we became legally possessed of according to the laws of man, but not according to the laws of God, He never having directly given us the things which we claim as ours." [^26] In the action of consecration, the spirit of liberality was to prevail on the part of the individual in making the consecration, and on the part of the bishop in taking inventories of all properties consecrated. [^27]

The law of God given to the Saints through Joseph Smith stated that every man who went to Zion, in Missouri, was required to "lay all things before the bishop in Zion." [^28] The Prophet therefore wrote by revelation:

It is contrary to the will and commandment of God that those who receive not their inheritance by consecration, agreeable to his law, which he has given, that he may tithe his people, to prepare them against the day of vengeance and burning, should have their names enrolled with the people of God.

Neither is their genealogy to be kept, or to be had where it may be found on any of the records or history of the church.

Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts. [^29]

Consecrations were made to God, not to the bishop or to the society. This was important. A revelation said of Bishops: "The property, or that which they receive of the church, is not their own, but belongeth to the church; wherefore it is the property of the Lord." [^30] If all property and wealth were consecrated to the bishop, he would then own and control the wealth of the society. This would foster priestcraft and a socialistic order. But by the Saints consecrating their wealth to God, the bishop was made the servant both of God and the people in receiving and administering consecrated property. Such a procedure assured that both the bishop and the individual would be responsible agents under God, rather than mere pawns of society.

It was significant that the Saints were to consecrate their property to the Lord with "a covenant and a deed" that could not be broken. [^31] Their covenant of consecration made their act officially binding before God and the Church, and the deed bound it legally according to the law of the land. Zion's economic law, therefore, was founded both in the religious powers of faith and conscience and in the legal power of civil law, that by each it might be given sanction and protection.

Since the act of consecration was to be carried out according to the law of the Church and the law of the land, the requirements of both laws had to be met. Concerning the civil aspects of consecration, the Prophet and his counselors in the First Presidency wrote:

Be sure to get a form according to law for securing a gift. We have found by examining the law, that a gift cannot be retained without this. . . . You will remember that the power of agency must be signed by the wives as well as the husbands, and the wives must be examined in the matter separate and apart from the husbands, the same as signing a deed, and a specification to that effect inserted at the bottom, by the justice before whom such acknowledgement is made, otherwise the power of attorney will have no effect. [^32]

Concerning the act of consecration and the purpose of consecrated property, Joseph Smith said to Bishop Edward Partridge:

The law of the Lord binds you to receive whatsoever property is consecrated by deed. The consecrated property is considered the residue kept for the Lord's storehouse, and it is given for this consideration, for to purchase inheritances for the poor. This any man has a right to do, agreeable to all laws of our country, to donate, give or consecrate all that he feels disposed to give. And it is your duty to see that whatsoever is given is given legally. Therefore, it must be given for the consideration of the poor saints, and in this way no man can take any advantage of you in law. [^33]

Among the private papers of Bishop Partridge was the deed of consecration for Titus Billings, an early Latter-day Saint who was converted in Ohio and later settled in Missouri. It states:

BE IT KNOWN, THAT I, Titus Billings of Jackson county, and the state of Missouri, having become a member of the Church of Christ, organized according to law, and established by the revelations of the Lord, on the 6th day of April, 1830, do, of my own free will and accord, having first paid my just debts, grant and hereby give unto Edward Partridge of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, Bishop of said Church, the following described property, viz.:—sundry articles of furniture valued fifty-five dollars twenty-seven cents; also two beds, bedding and extra clothing valued seventy-three dollars twenty-five cents; also farming utensils valued forty-one dollars; also one horse, two wagons, two cows and two calves, valued one hundred forty-seven dollars.

For the purpose of purchasing lands in Jackson county, Mo., and building up the New Jerusalem, even Zion, and for relieving the wants of the poor and needy. For which I, the said Titus Billings, do covenant and bind myself and my heirs forever, to release all my right and interest to the above described property, unto him, the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church.

And I, the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, having received the above described property, of the said Titus Billings, do bind myself, that I will cause the same to be expended for the above mentioned purposes of the said Titus Billings to the satisfaction of said Church; and in case I should be removed from the office of Bishop of said Church, by death or otherwise, I hereby bind myself and my heirs forever, to make over to my successor in office, for the benefit of said Church, all the above described property, which may then be in my possession.

IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this ......... day of ................, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, eight hundred and thirty ............

In the presence of ....................................

......................................

Titus Billings,

Signed,

Edward Partridge. [^34]

Apparently these procedures were discussed and mutually accepted by the Saints. A conference held in Jackson County, Missouri, January 24, 1832, passed a resolution stating "That the Bishop of this Church, at the time of receiving moneys and other properties for the use of this Church, of any member of the same, shall give a receipt to the person at the time, covenanting for himself and his heirs, that such moneys or properties shall be expended for the use and benefit of this Church, according to the covenants and laws of the same, and that whatever amount of such moneys or properties may be in his possession should he be removed from his said office as Bishop by death or otherwise, shall be handed over to his successor." [^35]

The Delegation of Stewardship

As heirs in Zion, those who consecrated had the right to be stewards over designated portions of the common property. During the Protestant Reformation many Christians believed that the possession of wealth was a type of stewardship for which the individual was accountable to God. To them this was essentially a moral or religious concept with little, if any, practical application. But Joseph Smith elevated the stewardship of property to a functional position in the mechanics of society.

The basic rule for delegating stewardships required the bishop to appoint the "people their portions, every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs." [^36] These criteria were general and flexible enough to apply to the various kinds and conditions of income-producing property, and to the different vocational interests of men. Each steward was to be delegated sufficient income-producing property (or an income-producing responsibility) to enable him to sustain his family on a standard equal to that of others in the system.

There could be many kinds and varieties of stewardships. Some were directly involved in the production of goods and commodities; others rendered necessary service to society, or expressed a given talent with value in the market place. Stewardships could also be organized in partnerships, or with others, in a corporate structure. Finally, even though all the Saints were to live on a consecrated plane within the society of Zion, some were expected to give their full time to the more spiritual interests of the people. Of such a person a revelation said: "He who is appointed to administer spiritual things, the same is worthy of his hire, even as those who are appointed to a stewardship to administer in temporal things." [^37]

Since all things within the society of Zion were to "be done by common consent," [^38] the delegation of stewardships was to be carried out according to this principle. To Bishop Partridge, the Prophet explained:

The matter of consecration must be done by the mutual consent of both parties; for to give the Bishop power to say how much every man shall have, and he be obliged to comply with the Bishop's judgment, is giving to the Bishop more power than a king has; and, upon the other hand, to let every man say how much he needs, and the Bishop be obliged to comply with his judgment, is to throw Zion into confusion, and make a slave of the Bishop. The fact is, there must be a balance or equilibrium of power, between the Bishop and the people; and thus harmony and good-will may be preserved among you.

Therefore, those persons consecrating property to the Bishop in Zion, and then receiving an inheritance back, must reasonably show to the Bishop that they need as much as they claim. But in case the two parties cannot come to a mutual agreement, the Bishop is to have nothing to do about receiving such consecrations; and the case must be laid before a council of twelve High Priests, the Bishop not being one of the council, but he is to lay the case before them. [^39]

The Prophet's statement that heirs were to "reasonably show to the Bishop" that they needed as much as they claimed suggested that they were to propose what they felt they ought to receive as a stewardship. [^40] The negotiation was not to be a one-sided affair. Because Joseph Smith wrote the above letter before the High Council was organized, Lorenzo Snow suggested that the High Council, functioning in one of its official duties in the system, later superseded this body of twelve high priests acting as an appellate body. [^41]

The stewardships which were delegated to the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri, were small by today's standard. But they were sufficient for that period, and they could be enlarged upon according to the provisions of the system. The stewardship of Thomas B. Marsh consisted of about 30 acres of land, and that of Titus Billings 27 1/2 acres. [^42]

Each stewardship was to be deeded to the individual steward and secured to him, legally, by the law of the land. A revelation said: "Let my servant Edward Partridge, when he shall appoint a man his portion, give unto him a writing that shall secure unto him his portion, that he shall hold it, even this right and this inheritance in the church." [^43] Even if the individual left the Church, he was to have claim upon his personal stewardship. The revelation further explained: "And if he [a steward] shall trangress and is not accounted worthy to belong to the church, he shall . . . have claim on that portion that is deeded unto him." [^44]

This did not mean that the steward had claim upon the original property which he had consecrated in the first instance, for this was considered to be a gift which he gave. In the event he left the Church, the above revelation stipulated that he was not to "have power to claim that portion which he had consecrated unto the bishop for the poor and needy of my church." "Therefore," it stressed, "he shall not retain the gift." [^45] In a letter to Bishop Partridge, Joseph Smith explained both of these features of the law:

Concerning inheritances, you are bound by the law of the land, to give a deed, securing to him who receives inheritances, his inheritance, for an everlasting inheritance, or in other words, to be his individual property, his private stewardship. And if he is found a transgressor and should be cut off, out of the church, his inheritance is his still, and he is delivered over to the buffetings of Satan, till the day of redemption. But the property which he consecrated to the poor, for their benefit, and inheritance, and stewardship, he cannot obtain again by the law of the Lord. Thus you see the propriety of this law, that rich men cannot have power to disinherit the poor by obtaining again that which they have consecrated, which is the residue, signified in the law. [^46]

The Prophet's statement that transgressors were to be "delivered over to the buffetings of Satan, till the day of redemption," suggests that those who were stewards in the full sense of the word were to live on a spiritual plane where their calling and election to eternal life was made sure. Serious and wilful transgression would then bring upon them this judgment. [^47] But in the event of serious transgression, they were to retain their stewardships and consider them as their private property.

The deed of stewardship which was used by Bishop Partridge did not conform in every way to these instructions. [^48] Some of these early deed-forms have been preserved. The deed issued to Titus Billings, preceded by his deed of consecration, states:

BE IT KNOWN, THAT I, Edward Partridge, of Jackson county, state of Missouri, Bishop of the Church of Christ, organized according to law, and established by the revelations of the Lord, on the 6th day of April, 1830, have leased and by these presents do lease unto Titus Billings, of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, a member of said Church, the following described piece or parcel of land . . . containing twenty-seven and one-half acres, be the same more or less, subject to roads and highways. And also have loaned the following described property, viz.: Sundry articles of furniture, valued fifty-five dollars twenty-five cents; also two beds, bedding and clothing, valued seventy-three dollars twenty-seven cents; also sundry farming utensils, valued forty-one dollars; also one horse, two cows, two calves, and two wagons, valued one hundred forty-seven dollars, to have and to hold the above described property, by him, the said Titus Billings, to be used and occupied as to him shall seem meet and proper.

And as a consideration for the use of the above described property, I, the said Titus Billings, do bind myself to pay the taxes, and also to pay yearly unto the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, or his successor in office, for the benefit of said Church, all that I shall make or accumulate more than is needful for the support and comfort of myself and family. And it is agreed by the parties that this lease and loan shall be binding during the life of the said Titus Billings, unless he transgresses and is not deemed worthy by the authority of the Church, according to its laws, to belong to the Church. And in that case I, the said Titus Billings, do acknowledge that I forfeit all claim to the above described leased and loaned property, and hereby bind myself to give back the lease, and also pay an equivalent, for the loaned [articles] for the benefit of said Church, unto the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, or his successor in office. And further, in case of said Titus Billings' or family's inability in consequence of infirmity or old age to provide for themselves while members of this Church, I, the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, do bind myself to administer to their necessities out of any fund in my hands appropriated for that purpose, not otherwise disposed of, to the satisfaction of the Church. And further, in case of the death of the said Titus Billings, his wife or widow, being at the time a member of said Church, has claim upon the above described leased and loaned property, upon precisely the same conditions that her said husband had them, as above described; and the children of the said Titus Billings, in case of the death of both their parents, also have claim upon the above described property, for their support, until they shall become of age, and no longer; subject to the same conditions yearly that their parents were: provided, however, should the parents not be members of said Church, and in possession of the above described property at the time of their deaths, the claim of the children as above described, is null and void.

IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF we have hereunto set our hands and seals this .................. day of ..................., in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty ...............

In presence of..........................................

........................................................

Edward Partridge

Signed

Titus Billings. [^49]

This document departs from the principles laid down in the revelations to Joseph Smith in that it is not a deed of stewardship, but a document which leases and loans some described property and items to Titus Billings. Elder Billings received back all the household items which he consecrated [^50] and, in addition, he was leased twenty-seven and one-half acres of land. Such provisions were also made in the case of Joseph Knight, Jr. [^51] These confirm that Bishop Partridge began to institute an order of things contrary to the revelations. It may be for this reason that a revelation stated pointedly as a threat to him that "that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning." [^52] In the face of this threat Bishop Partridge apparently repented, and the judgment did not fall, but for a time at least he sought to administer his own version of the ideal economic order. [^53]

The issue of who owned a given stewardship had to be seen in light of the operation of two governing principles, the legal and the spiritual. According to the civil deed which secured a man's stewardship to him legally under the law of the land, that stewardship was his private property. Bishop Partridge and others therefore wrote in a memorial to the Missouri State Legislature, in 1833: "We have no common stock; our property is individual property." [^54] But according to the covenant which a man made when he consecrated, and by which he was bound thereafter, his stewardship belonged to the Lord. It was consecrated property, and he was a consecrated person. As long as he freely and voluntarily sustained that position, he was to act as though the property he managed belonged to the Lord and, as a joint heir through Christ, be a steward over part of their common possessions. To some brethren who were under the covenant of consecration, the Lord said by revelation:

A commandment I give unto you concerning your stewardship which I have appointed unto you.

Behold, all these properties are mine, or else your faith is vain, and ye are found hypocrites, and the covenants which ye have made unto me are broken;

And if the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no stewards.

But, verily I say unto you, I have appointed unto you to be stewards over mine house, even stewards indeed. [^55]

Unless consecrated property belonged to Christ, the faith of those who embraced the law of Zion was vain, for they were consecrated persons and, as such, they were heirs through Christ of all that the Father possessed. In that sacred union they were not private property owners, in the sense that men were in the world. To contend otherwise would make them hypocrites, and their covenants (particularly that of consecration) would be broken. But if the property belonged to God, they were stewards. A steward was not one who owned private property, rather, as Orson Pratt observed, "A steward is one who is accountable to somebody for the property that he manages, and that is his stewardship." [^56] Under Zion's law, men were to be stewards, "even stewards indeed." [^57]

These were vital features, designed to preserve the principle of human agency within the system. Though the earth belonged to God, man was a creature of freedom and dignity whose life could be sustained and elevated only as he became independent by responding to the power of the Holy Spirit. [^58] He had to be free, uncoerced by social or economic influences. The law of consecration and stewardship would therefore find support only as man freely exercised his will to fulfil his covenant obligations. Here again could be seen the need for a foundation of enlivening and enlightening spiritual and ideological forces, to assure successful outward operations of the system.

The Management of Stewardship

Man as a steward was a free and responsible agent under God. "Thou shalt stand in the place of thy stewardship," a revelation admonished. [^59] But being in a covenant relationship with Christ and his fellow saints, a steward was to manage his stewardship "according to the laws and covenants of the Church." [^60] Lorenzo Snow explained: "Men were to have their stewardships—to have possession of property—but they were to hold it as servants of God, not as their own property, particularly, but they were to be made stewards over that property, after they had consecrated to the Lord, and to receive according to their abilities, and manage according to the gifts of God that were within them in regard to temporal affairs." [^61] Among other things, the responsibility of stewardship required man to act with the same regard for the just interests of others as he had for his own.

Here was expressed the underlying philosophy of the new economic system. It was not a socialistic order where man was a pawn of society and had claim upon the system for a livelihood, but a covenant society where free man consecrated his property to God on the assumption that each man would then receive a stewardship by which to care for himself and his family. The poor were to be uplifted and made selfsustaining, but not through a dole, for individual initiative and responsibility lay at the heart of the divine system. The more the student of Joseph Smith's thought associates the law of consecration and stewardship with a Christian system of free enterprise, the closer he comes to grasping a true understanding of it.

As a free enterprise economy based upon the Christian principles of brotherhood and regard for the just interests of others, the law of consecration and stewardship fostered the free exchange of goods and commodities on the open market, with prices determined by the principles and actions of the free market. Stewards did not produce for a storehouse, but for the open market. "Thou shalt pay for that which thou shalt receive of thy brother," a revelation instructed. [^62] Stewards were also directed to do business "in their own names." [^63] Here, too, individuality and personal accountability were stressed. Orson Pratt explained: "There would still be buying and selling, trading and exchanging property with one another as well as with the world." [^64]

The Storehouse

There would be within each city of Zion of from fifteen to twenty thousand saints a storehouse and a treasury [^65] where surplus wealth and property were kept. For the storehouse to function properly as the center of the economic activities of all stewards in the city, it had to contain a surplus [^66] of wealth and property after the initial delegation of stewardships to the Saints had been made. Surplus was accumulated in two ways: first, by that which was left over after those who consecrated had been delegated stewardships, and second, by the surplus profits produced by the several stewards in the community. In delegating stewardships, a bishop was not expected to turn back all that was consecrated. Otherwise there would be no initial surplus in the storehouse as an essential financial basis of the system. Of the first means of accumulating wealth in the storehouse, a revelation said:

If there shall be properties in the hands of the church, or any individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support after this first consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the bishop, it shall be kept to administer to those who have not, from time to time, that every man who has need may be amply supplied and receive according to his wants.

Therefore, the residue shall be kept in my storehouse. [^67]

A steward's action in turning surplus profits over to the storehouse was a new consecration of himself to God. The Lord expressed this view when He said of surplus, "And the benefits shall be consecrated unto the inhabitants of Zion, and unto their generations." [^68] Again, "And if thou obtainest more than that which would be for thy support, thou shalt give it into my storehouse, that all things may be done according to that which I have spoken." [^69]

"Behold, this is what the Lord requires of every man in his stewardship," a revelation stressed, "even as I, the Lord, have appointed or shall hereafter appoint unto any man. And behold, none are exempt from this law who belong to the church of the living God; yea, neither the bishop, neither the agent who keepeth the Lord's storehouse, neither he who is appointed in a stewardship over temporal things." [^70]

Surplus was also created because stewards agreed to retain from their profits only what was necessary to sustain their families on an equal standard of living that had been mutually agreed upon. Such equality was required by the law of God. The Saints had to be "equal in the bonds of . . . earthly things," as well as "heavenly things," a revelation declared, if they were to have "a place in the celestial world." [^71] Another revelation explained:

In your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld.

Now, this commandment I give unto my servants for their benefit while they remain, for a manifestation of my blessings upon their heads, and for a reward of their diligence and for their security;

For food and for raiment; for an inheritance; for houses and for lands, in whatsoever circumstances I, the Lord, shall place them, and whithersoever I, the Lord, shall send them. [^72]

To insure that all families maintained an equal standard and to assist them to work out the details of this provision, each man was required to give to the bishop a periodic accounting of his stewardship. A revelation said:

It is required of the Lord, at the hand of every steward, to render an account of his stewardship, both in time and in eternity.

For he who is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the mansions prepared for him of my Father.

Verily I say unto you, the elders of the church in this part of my vineyard shall render an account of their stewardship unto the bishop, who shall be appointed of me in this part of my vineyard.

These things shall be had on record, to be handed over unto the bishop in Zion. [^73]

The account a steward would render in eternity would be given at the day of judgment, [^74] when he who was a faithful steward in time would be "accounted worthy to inherit the mansions prepared for him" by the Father. [^75] To one who truly accepted the divine origin of the new society, this was a powerful incentive to comply with the requirements of Zion's economic law, including the requirement to be equal according to the Lord's law, for another revelation promised: "Whoso is found a faithful, a just, and a wise steward shall enter into the joy of his Lord, and shall inherit eternal life." [^76]

The periodic account stewards were to give was a practical and immediate tool for determining surplus from the profits of their stewardships. The fact that they were to have an equal standard of living required them to agree upon set criteria by which they could determine what they were to keep from their profits in order that their families enjoy an equal standard. For example, a man with six children would keep back more for his family than one with two or three children. Other appropriate criteria would also be necessary. The criteria having been agreed upon, each steward could keep the proper amount from his income to sustain his family, then give an account of the amount withheld when the bishop and his agents audited his records. His profits above that amount constituted the surplus he turned in to the storehouse as a new consecration.

Though it was not specifically stated in the revelations, the account which a steward rendered to the bishop was probably to be made annually. [^77] Orson Pratt explained that a steward would then "show to his Bishop a full account of everything in his stewardship—that he had gained so much here, and made so much there, upon the Lord's property." [^78]

No account was to be given of the use which a man's family made of the funds he kept from his profits for family purposes. The bishop was to determine only if the steward had kept out the proper amount for his family. Orson Pratt observed:

When you come to render up an account of that stewardship to the Bishop at the end of the year, there may be some prominent leading questions asked, but not about these little [family] matters. It will be asked if you have squandered your stewardship unnecessarily; have you been very extravagant in things unnecessary, and neglected other things of importance? If you have done these things, you will be counted an unwise steward, and you will be reproved; and perhaps, if you have gone too far, you may be removed out of your stewardship, and another person more worthy may step into it, and you be dropped because of doing wrong. But there never will be any Bishop, who has the Spirit of the living God upon him, who will inquire whether you have the same size stoves in your houses, and the same kind of plates, knives, forks, and spoons as your neighbors; but you will have to give an account of those prominent items. [^79]

The account which each man gave to the bishop concerned the operation of his stewardship—his business enterprise—not his use of family funds. The storehouse over which the bishop had some jurisdiction was the center of the business operations of the several stewards in a community, but bishops had no right to supervise the economic operations of a man's home. Families were encouraged to develop refined individual tastes as they made use of family funds. "God delights in variety," Orson Pratt emphasized. "It is not expected that every man's and every woman's tastes would be . . . like their neighbors, but [that they] have variety." [^80]

The Purpose of Storehouse Funds

The action of the Saints in consecrating their possessions to God and turning their surplus profits over to the storehouse created a common fund that played an important role in the operation of the economic order of Zion. Money in the treasury did not belong to any one person, but was a common fund owned jointly by all the heirs in Zion. Of the money in the treasury of a literary firm, for example, the Lord said: "No man among you shall call it his own, or any part of it, for it shall belong to you all with one accord." [^81] Speaking in a general way of the use to be made of common funds in the system at large, Orson Pratt said:

How was this common property to be used? First, the Saints needed land, they needed means to build habitations; they needed farming utensils; they needed flocks and herds; they needed manufacturing establishments; they needed mercantile and all kinds of mechanical businesses to be introduced into their midst, just as fast as they procured means sufficient. . . .

Those who were mechanics received the tools necessary to work with; those who were called upon to engage in some business wherein a greater amount of capital was needed had a capital accordingly. That is, that was the intention as the common property of the Church should increase. [^82]

A revelation mentioned four general purposes for which common funds were used. "The residue shall be kept in my storehouse," it stated, "[1] to administer to the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the church, and the bishop and his council; and for [2] the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the church, [3] and building houses of worship, and [4] building up of the New Jerusalem." [^83] To these another use of common funds was added which was of great importance to each steward. As an heir, each steward had an equal right to draw funds from the common treasury to use to operate and expand his stewardship. In a revelation, the Lord explained:

You are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the properties [in the storehouse], for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships, every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just—

And all this for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man may gain other talents [i. e., wealth or property], yea, even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse, to become the common property of the whole church—

Every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God. [^84]

As the words in italics strongly suggest, the common fund was a joint account to be used by all the stewards of the community to pay the operating expenses of their several stewardships. It was not, normally, a fund upon which a steward drew to care for the needs of his family. Each steward had an equal right to draw upon the common operating fund according to the just needs of his stewardship. This was a vital element in the system and should be clearly understood. Of the role of the storehouse, another revelation said in greater detail:

All moneys that you receive in your stewardships, by improving upon the properties which I have appointed unto you, in houses, or in lands, or in cattle, . . . shall be cast into the treasury as fast as you receive moneys, by hundreds, or by fifties, or by twenties, or by tens, or by fives.

Or in other words, if any man among you obtain five talents [dollars] let him cast them into the treasury; or if he obtain ten, or twenty, or fifty, or an hundred, let him do likewise;

And let not any among you say that it is his own; for it shall not be called his, nor any part of it.

And there shall not any part of it be used, or taken out of the treasury, only by the voice and common consent of the order.

And this shall be the voice and common consent of the order—that any man among you say to the treasurer: I have need of this to help me in my stewardship—

If it be five talents [dollars], or if it be ten talents [dollars], or twenty, or fifty, or a hundred, the treasurer shall give unto him the sum which he requires to help him in his stewardship—

Until he be found a transgressor, and it is manifest before the council of the order plainly that he is an unfaithful and an unwise steward.

But so long as he is in full fellowship, and is faithful and wise in his stewardship, this shall be his token unto the treasurer that the treasurer shall not withhold.

But in case of transgression, the treasurer shall be subject unto the council and voice of the order.

And in case the treasurer is found an unfaithful and an unwise steward, he shall be subject to the council and voice of the order, and shall be removed out of his place, and another shall be appointed in his stead. [^85]

Several important points stand out in the above statements: First, income from a stewardship was to be given to the storehouse as one received it. This provision strengthened the role of the storehouse as an economic center. Presumably, a steward could turn all his income over to the storehouse and draw out monthly, or periodically, the amount needed to sustain his family according to the prescribed standard of living. The surplus would then be retained in the storehouse.

Second, though a record was kept of the surplus a steward gave to the storehouse (that he might give an account to the bishop, etc.), such funds were not thereafter to be his. As stated earlier, they were consecrated funds, given to the Lord's storehouse to be the "common property" of all those in the system. [^86] Under Zion's law, the Saints were to have all things in common. [^87] This did not mean that they were to live under some form of Christian communism, but that, as heirs, they owned jointly through Christ all that the Father possessed, and that in the storehouse there was a common fund upon which each man had an equal claim to obtain capital to operate and expand his stewardship. In addition, all things were to be done according to the principle of common consent.

Third, no funds were to be taken from the treasury except by "the voice and common consent of the order." [^88] To withdraw funds by the "voice" of the order meant that each steward had a right to express himself on the withdrawals which were made from the common fund. To withdraw funds by the "consent" of the order meant that the stewards within the system had mutually to consent to the requests each man made upon the storehouse. This was an important expression of the doctrine that the Saints were to have all things in common. Common consent was to govern withdrawals from the common treasury.

Fourth, as long as a man was a "faithful and wise" steward he had an equal right, with other stewards, to draw upon the common treasury "to help him in his stewardship." [^89] This meant that all business interests were centered in the storehouse; and though each man was given an individual stewardship to operate and manage, he had a common economic interest in the whole system. This was a law of brotherhood and union. In exercising the right to draw funds from the storehouse, a steward was expected to seek "the interest of his neighbor" and do "all things with an eye single to the glory of God." [^90] Freedom and responsibility were twin principles governing the withdrawal of funds from the storehouse.

Finally, the treasurer was responsible for the withdrawals stewards made from the common fund. The treasurer who administered withdrawals from the storehouse was to check the proposed use of common funds and report to the Council of the Order and to the several stewards. Making him responsible was a check against the misuse of common funds. "Everybody is not so honest, pure and upright as this state of things demands," John Taylor noted. [^91] But when a man showed himself to be a just and wise steward, he received the support he needed to operate and expand his stewardship.

The right of each steward to draw funds from the storehouse to operate and expand his stewardship was in accord with biblical principles governing the use of surplus wealth, for an heir under Zion's law was not to pay interest, or usury, on the money which he received. Instead, he had an equal right with other heirs to draw funds from the common treasury for proper purposes. This basic principle was in harmony with the word of God anciently.

In the Bible, the term usury is understood to be any interest on a loan, whether in money or in commodities. (In modern usage the term has come to mean "excessive interest.") In biblical times, the law of God prohibited the imposing of interest or the exacting of interest on money which was loaned to a brother. Moses declared: "If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury." [^92] Again: "Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of anything that is lent upon usury." [^93]

This principle was expressed to perfection in the law of Zion. Though stewards had to account for funds withdrawn from the common treasury, they did not have to pay interest. Nor were they obliged, as in a loan, to repay the money. Brotherhood and the production of goods were emphasized, not the extraction of interest from heirs for their use of accumulated wealth. This philosophy prompted Joseph Smith to admonish the Saints at Nauvoo, "The temporal economy of this people should be to establish and encourage manufactures, and not to take usury for their money." [^94]

Corporations

Besides individual and joint stewardships, Joseph Smith organized corporations where several men united as stewards in an enterprise. Except for the corporate features, a revelation stated that the guiding principles governing stewards in such organizations were the same as those which regulated "every man in his stewardship." [^95] Having consecrated themselves and their possessions to God, men received stewardships within the corporation. As heirs, they had access to a storehouse for funds to operate and expand their stewardships, and they turned their surplus profits into the storehouse.

Because the law of consecration and stewardship could be applied to a corporate structure, Orson Pratt reasoned that it would fit the needs and circumstances of an industrial society as well as an agrarian society. A man's stewardship could be to manage or work in a large manufacturing concern as well as to operate a given acreage of farmland. The basic principles and practices of the system could apply to either program. The manager of a corporation of stewards would "not own the building, the machinery, the cotton or the flax, as the case may be," Elder Pratt reasoned, but he and others within the corporation would be stewards over the Lord's property and would enjoy the same rights as other stewards. [^96]

By the organization of corporate stewardships, Joseph Smith sought to achieve what some social thinkers have advocated as the most desirable relationship between capital and labor, namely, to have businesses and industries owned and controlled by the artisans who build and operate them. Under the law of consecration and stewardship, each man in a corporation was a steward over his assigned job or responsibility, enjoying the dignity and security that his position gave him. He was a joint-owner of the corporation, with the right of voice and vote in its operations. Meanwhile he was responsible to the administration for the handling of his stewardship. By failure to function faithfully, he could either be disciplined or be removed from office.

George Q. Cannon argued that the organization of corporate stewardships was the only final solution to "the riddle of social justice." "All these problems of capital and labor can be solved by this principle and in no other way," he declared, "and there will be an incessant and never-ending conflict between capital and labor until they are solved in this manner." [^97]

The first corporation which Joseph Smith organized, in November, 1831, was the Literary Firm, a printing and publishing house for the Church. Its officers were made stewards over the revelations to the Church, with the responsibility to publish them for the Church and the world. [^98] The Literary Firm also published a hymnal, and it gave consent for William W. Phelps, one of its members, to print an almanac. [^99]

Joseph Smith stated, "The order of the Literary Firm is a matter of stewardship, which is of the greatest importance." [^100] It was to function as a distinct corporate entity [^101] with its own treasury from which money could be drawn "only by the voice of the order, or by commandment." [^102] "Nevertheless," a revelation said of its members, "inasmuch as they receive more than is needful for their necessities and their wants, it shall be given into my storehouse; and the benefits shall be consecrated unto the inhabitants of Zion, and unto their generations, inasmuch as they become heirs according to the laws of the kingdom." [^103]

As a further application of corporate principles under the law of consecration and stewardship, in the spring of 1832 Joseph Smith organized a mercantile corporation called the United Firm, with one branch at Kirtland, Ohio, under the name of "Newel K. Whitney & Company," and another branch at Independence, Missouri, called "Gilbert, Whitney & Company." [^104] The initial mercantile establishment had existed at Kirtland under the name of "Gilbert and Whitney Company," before its owners joined the Church. But when Algernon Sidney Gilbert and Newel K. Whitney embraced the restored gospel and obeyed the law of consecration, their company was superseded by the United Firm, which utilized consecrated funds from other sources to expand its program. Though the two branches were part of the over-all firm, each functioned for the benefit of the Saints in its area. [^105]

Though the program of the United Firm was not fully developed and had to be terminated because of the persecutions which the Saints suffered, [^106] the Prophet organized other corporations, to the extent conditions would permit, based upon the economic law of Zion. At Far West, Missouri, agricultural corporations were established in 1838. The first of these "big field united firms" was called the Western Agricultural Company; it embraced 7,680 acres of land. The Eastern Agricultural Company was organized the same day, but the extent of its field was not then decided. The following day the Southern Agricultural Company was formed, with the same acreage as the first. [^107] Again it was unfortunate that these programs were not permitted to develop after the pattern which the Prophet envisioned. [^108]

The Law of Tithing

The Nature and Place of Tithing

Through Joseph Smith the Saints were given the law of tithing to "be a standing law unto them forever." [^109] As a permanent part of the total economic program of Zion, the law of tithing was designed to be a companion to the law of consecration and stewardship. [^110] Stewards in Zion were to contribute to the Lord "one-tenth of all their interest annually" in compliance with the law of tithing. [^111] This money was given to the First Presidency of the Church and administered by them and other general officers of the Church. [^112] Of the use of tithing, Brigham Young said: "The law is for a man to pay one-tenth of all he possesses for the erecting of the House of God, the spread of the gospel, and the support of the priesthood." [^113]

There was a difference between tithing funds and surplus in a community storehouse. Tithing consisted of one-tenth of a steward's personal annual income. Surplus was that which he had left from his annual profits after he sustained his family on a standard equal to that of other stewards. Tithing was sent to the First Presidency of the Church. Surplus was given to the community storehouse. Tithing belonged to the Church and was used primarily to pay the expenses of the ecclesiastical system. The surplus in each community storehouse belonged to the heirs in that community and was used as a joint expense account and for community expenses. Tithing was spent by the General Authorities of the Church. Surplus was administered by the officers of the community storehouse, by the consent of the stewards who consecrated at the storehouse.

Since the law of tithing and the law of consecration and stewardship were designed to fulfil different purposes, they could function simultaneously together, neither interfering with or taking the place of the other. [^114] The Saints were to obey both laws. When Jesus instituted the full law of Zion among the Nephites after His resurrection, including the divine economic order by which "they had all things common among them," [^115] he quoted the law of tithing which Malachi delivered to ancient Israel and commanded the Nephites to obey it. [^116] "These scriptures, which ye had not with you," the Master said of Malachi's writings, "the Father commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom in him that they should be given unto future generations." [^117] The future generations among the Nephites of whom Jesus spoke were those who had the full economic law of Zion. Being under the law of consecration and stewardship, they were also to obey the law of tithing. [^118]

The Introduction of the Law of Tithing

The revelation showing how the Saints were to be tithed under the law of consecration and stewardship was given July 8, 1838. On that date, a public meeting was held and three revelations given to the Prophet earlier that year were read; [^119] they stressed the need for the Saints to obey the law of consecration and stewardship. These revelations have since been lost, but a member of the Church who was present wrote of at least one of them:

Joseph Smith made known to the people the substance of a revelation he had before received from God. It was to the effect that all the Saints throughout the land were required to sell their possessions, gather all their money together, and send an agent to buy up all the land in the region round about Far West, [Missouri,] and get a patent for the land from the Government, then deed it over to the Church; then every man should come up there to the land of their promised inheritance and consecrate what they had to the Lord. In return the Prophet would set apart a tract of land for each Saint—the amount to correspond with the number of the Saint's family—and this land should be for each Saint an everlasting inheritance. In this way the people could, in time, redeem Zion (Jackson County) without the shedding of blood. [^120]

The revelation having been read, Sidney Rigdon stressed that the Saints could "never be accepted as the children of God unless they were united as one man, in temporal as well as spiritual affairs, for Jesus had said unless ye are one, ye are not mine; that oneness must exist to make the Saints the accepted children of God." A vote was then taken to determine if they would accept the full economic law of Zion, and it "was unanimous for the consecration." [^121]

The revelation on tithing was given the same day the above meeting was held, [^122] not to take the place of the law of consecration and stewardship which the Saints then covenanted to obey, but to make clear their obligations concerning the payment of tithing under that law. Having pledged to obey the law of consecration and stewardship, the Saints desired "to know what the Lord required as a Tithing." [^123] Joseph Smith therefore inquired: "O Lord! Show unto thy servant how much thou requirest of the properties of thy people for a tithing." [^124] The revelation he received said:

Verily, thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop of my church in Zion [in accordance with the law of consecration],

For the building of mine house, and for the laying of the foundation of Zion and for the priesthood, and for the debts of the Presidency of my Church.

And this [consecration] shall be the beginning of the tithing of my people.

And after that, those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord. [^125]

This statement, in the historical setting in which it was given, makes it clear that the law of tithing was to function within the framework of the law of consecration and stewardship. The Saints were first expected to consecrate their surplus property as required by the law of consecration, and then pay a tithe of their increase or income thereafter. The Prophet's actions thereafter also indicate that the law of tithing in no way rescinded the obligation of the Saints to apply the principles of consecration in their economic practices. Later that month Joseph Smith reported: "The First Presidency, High Council, and Bishop's court assembled at Far West to dispose of the public properties of the Church in the hands of the Bishop, many of the brethren having consecrated their surplus property according to the revelations." [^126] At this meeting several resolutions were passed, two of which concerned the law of consecration and stewardship which they were then applying. One resolution proposed "that the Bishop be authorized to pay orders coming from the east, inasmuch as they [the Saints] will consecrate liberally, but this is to be done under the inspection of the First Presidency." The other stated "that the Bishop of Zion receive all consecrations from those living east, west, and south, who are not in the jurisdiction of a Bishop of any other stake." [^127]

The Suspension Of The Law Of Consecration And Stewardship

Not until the Saints evidenced an unwillingness to comply freely with the full economic law of Zion, and circumstances made it difficult for them to do so, was the program of consecration set aside for a time. [^128] Before such action was taken, John Smith wrote from Lee County, Iowa Territory, to his son, George A. Smith, in January, 1840, as the Saints began to settle at Nauvoo, Illinois, after being driven from the state of Missouri:

We [the Saints in Iowa Territory] have voted to organize after the order of the Law of Consecration as given in the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church, but there are some objections to that order at Nauvoo. I have debated in public with some of their champions and they acknowledge the justice of our proceedings yet we learn they are not all satisfied. What will be the event I know not, but one thing is evident: his satanic majesty has been trotting across the river back and forth all winter to prevent the Saints from keeping the Law of the Lord, and many are led by that spirit and seem to love to have it so. I know not what the event will be. [^129]

During this period, Joseph Smith was in Washington, D. C. When he returned to Nauvoo early in March, 1840, he studied the situation in relation to the law of consecration and other pressing matters that then confronted the Saints. At a meeting of the High Council at Montrose, Iowa, March 6, 1840, he declared that "the law of consecration could not be kept" there, stating that it was the will of God that they "desist from trying to keep it; and if persisted in, it would produce a perfect defeat of its object." [^130] The full economic law was therefore suspended for the time, and the law of tithing continued to operate among the Saints.

Summary

Zion's law of consecration and stewardship was to be the economic law of the gospel, or, more specifically, the economic law of the Melchizedek Priesthood organized in the house of the Lord according to its highest order. Based upon the sacred covenant of consecration, the divine economic system was to be a vital part of the program by which man could become an heir through Christ in the Father's kingdom. Having embraced the gospel and made sacred covenants in the temple by which he established his life on the program of the divine patriarchal order, a man consecrated his possessions to God through the bishop and was delegated a stewardship which was secured to him by a deed. He was then to operate his stewardship as a free and responsible person, and sell his produce on the open market. From his profits, he provided for his family, paid his tithing, and turned the surplus over to the storehouse as a new consecration to the Lord to be used for community expenses, operating costs of the several stewardships, new stewardships, etc. One who became an heir in Zion had a right to participate in all the functions and blessings of the system equally with other heirs in the system.

In addition to individual and joint stewardships, Joseph Smith organized corporate stewardships where several stewards were combined in an economic enterprise under a corporate structure. The new system could therefore be adapted to a complex society. But after the economic law of Zion was given and the place of tithing in the system was defined, the Saints failed to understand and appreciate that which they had received. Circumstances also made it difficult to apply the divine law in its fulness. Consequently, the law of consecration and stewardship was suspended. The law of tithing continued in the Church.

Footnotes

And all they who are not found written in the book of remembrance shall find none inheritance in that day, but they shall be cut asunder, and their portion shall be appointed them among unbelievers, where are wailing and gnashing of teeth.

These things I say not of myself; therefore, as the Lord speaketh, he will also fulfil.

And they who are of the High Priesthood, whose names are not found written in the book of law, or that are found to have apostatized, or to have been cut off from the church, as well as the lesser priesthood, or the members, in that day shall not find an inheritance among the saints of the Most High.

Therefore, it shall be done unto them as unto the children of the priest, as will be found recorded in the second chapter and sixty-first and second verses of Ezra.—D&C 85:9-12.

Though the law of consecration was suspended in March, 1840, Joseph Smith still applied some of its economic principles in settling the Saints at Nauvoo. On February 13, 1843, Joseph Smith reported: "I spent the evening at Elder Orson Hyde's. In the course of conversation I remarked that those brethren who came here having money, and purchased without the Church and without counsel, must be cut off."—HC, V, pp. 272-273.

It is wisdom in me; therefore, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall organize yourselves and appoint every man his stewardship;

That every man may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is appointed unto him.

For it is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my creatures.—D&C 104:11-13.

Every man was to put in all his property by leasing it to the firm for a term of years; overseers or managers were to be chosen from time to time, by the members of the firm, to manage the concerns of the same, and the rest were to labor under their direction. In the division of the profits, more regard was to be paid towards the needs and wants of the members, than to the amount of stock put in. Many joined these firms, while many others were much dissatisfied with them, which caused considerable feeling and excitement in the Church. [Joseph] Smith said every man must act his own feelings, whether to join or not, yet great exertions were used . . . to persuade all to join.—Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, p. 46.

Similar companies were organized at Adam-ondi-Ahman. William Swartzell, another member who became disaffected about this time, said of these: "These thousand acre lots were designed as the general farming lands of the whole brotherhood, who were all to be under the direction of the dignitaries or overseers of the congregation; and from the proceeds of these thousand acre lots, the laboring part, or those who tilled them, were to receive their bread-stuffs, and their seed-grain, while the residue of the crops was to go to the support of the Church."—William Swartzell, Mormonism Exposed, Being a Journal of a Residence in Missouri from 28th of May to the 20th of August, 1838 (Pekin, Ohio, 1840), pp. 23-24.

Cooperative organizations were also set up to unite mechanics, shopkeepers, and laborers. Of these programs, a Brother Winchester wrote:

All kinds of necessary articles will soon be manufactured by these firms that we may be under no necessity of purchasing of our enemies. The firms furnish constant employ for all who join them and pay $1.00 per day for a man's work. Any surplus that may remain after paying the demands of the firm is to be divided according to the needs and wants (not according to the property invested) to each family, annually or oftener if needed. . . .

The operation of these firms enables a man to get a comfortable house in a very few days, when he gets about it, first by working for the firm 70 or 80 days, then the firm turns out stone cutters, teams, carpenters, masons, &c., to complete the house and nearly everything (save the land) is paid for by a man's own labor. . . .

Arrangements will soon be made that a person can get every necessity to eat, drink, live in, and to wear, at the store house of the firms, and the best part of it all is that they want no better pay than labor. Arrangements are making that no person shall have the excuse for not laboring, nothing to do, nor shall the idle eat the bread of industry.—Journal History, November 19, 1838.

Because the law of tithing was designed to function along with the law of consecration and stewardship, Brigham Young required that one-tenth of the annual income of the communities within his united order in the West be paid as tithing into the central storehouse of the Church.—See B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, V, pp. 485-486.

It is the fixed purpose of our God, and has been so from the testimony of the ancient prophets, that the great work of the last days was to be accomplished by the tithing of his saints. The saints were required to bring their tithes into the storehouse, and after that, not before, they were to look for a blessing that there should not be room enough to receive it. See Malachi 3rd chapter 10th verse.

Our appeal then to the saints is founded on the best of testimony, that which no saint will feel to gainsay, but rejoice to obey. The saint of God will rejoice in all that the Lord does, and in doing all that the Lord requires.—MA, III (September, 1837), p. 562.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 92:1; 104:1, 7, 8, 53. The revelations which deal with the united order are D&C 78, 82, 92, 96, and 104.
[^2] D&C 78:4.
[^3] Unpublished revelation to Joseph Smith, January 7, 1832.
[^4] See also D&C 81:1-2; 90:6.
[^5] See D&C 78.
[^6] D&C 78:3.
[^7] D&C 82:11-12.
[^8] See D&C 92:1; 104:1, 7, 8, 53.
[^9] D&C 78:4.
[^10] D&C 82:20.
[^11] They were Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Newel K. Whitney, and Martin Harris. See D&C 78:9; 82:11. Later Frederick G. Williams and John Johnson were added to the board.—D&C 92:1-2; 96:6-9.
[^12] D&C 78:5-7. See also D&C 78:11-12; 82:11. For a further discussion of this subject, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "Conditions Governing Those Who Make Their Calling and Election Sure."
[^13] D&C 72:20-22.
[^14] D&C 70:7-8.
[^15] D&C 82:18. These programs were to be organized "according to the laws of the Lord" (D&C 82:15) and were to operate according to the requirements of all stewardships (D&C 70:9; 72:23). Since they functioned on the general level of the system, their surplus profits were to be used for the benefit of the whole Church, not merely of a given community.
[^16] D&C 51:6-7, 10-12.
[^17] D&C 104:49.
[^18] D&C 104:50. Though these instructions were given as a result of conditions which then existed, they were in harmony with the general principles upon which the system was established.
[^19] D&C 82:18.
[^20] D&C 82:18.
[^21] These suggestions should be evaluated in light of D&C 78:3ff., where, as will be discussed hereafter in this chapter, it is stated that a major purpose of the united order was to bring about equality among the Saints.
[^22] D&C 98:8.
[^23] D&C 38:22.
[^24] D&C 101:79.
[^25] JD, XVIII, p. 104.
[^26] D&C 42:33.
[^27] HC, I, pp. 364-365.
[^28] This rule would apply if the case was heard by the high council. See D&C 102:15-18. But there was no reason why it would not apply if the twelve men constituted a special body called for that purpose.
[^29] D&C 51:4-5.
[^30] D&C 51:5. It is possible that there could be some legitimate modification of this right in cases where a man did not initially consecrate as much as he received as a stewardship, until he had contributed sufficient surplus to the storehouse to compensate for that initial deficiency.
[^31] D&C 51:4.
[^32] For statements on the principle of consent as it related to the economic order of Zion, see D&C 104:21, 71-72, 85.
[^33] See D&C 82:17-19; 104:68-77.
[^34] D&C 83.
[^35] The present program of the Deseret Industries in the Church is an excellent expression of this principle.
[^36] See D&C 82:17; 83:4-5.
[^37] D&C 78:4. See also verses 5-16, for mention of other objectives to be discussed later in this chapter.
[^38] Pratt, "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," p. 291. With this view in mind the Prophet wrote: "All members of the United Firm are considered one."—HC, I, p. 365.
[^39] D&C 38:24-27.
[^40] Jesus prayed: "Father, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me out of the world, because of their faith, that they may be purified in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one, that I may be glorified in them."—3 Nephi 19:29.
[^41] D&C 78:5-7. On the strength of this statement, Orson Pratt said: "The Saints are not only one in doctrine, but they are to be made one in temporal things, without which they cannot be made equal in spiritual things."—Pratt, "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," p. 290.
[^42] D&C 70:14. See also Alma 16:16.
[^43] D&C 19:20.
[^44] See for example, Mosiah 29:32: Alma 4:12, 15: 16:16: 28:13: 3 Nephi
[^45] See 4 Nephi. For a commentary on this source by Erastus Snow, see JD, XIX p. 179. See also ibid., XVI, p. 118.
[^46] Pratt, "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," pp. 293-294.
[^47] The Federalist, No. 10.
[^48] JD, XVIII, p. 354.
[^49] See Pratt, "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," p. 290. For a similar statement by Parley P. Pratt, see JD, I, p. 303.
[^50] JD, VIII, p. 331.
[^51] Ibid., II, p. 100. (Italics in the original.)
[^52] Pratt, "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," p. 294.
[^53] Ibid., p. 292.
[^54] D&C 38:38; 42:9, 36.
[^55] See D&C 42:9. See also D&C 38:27.
[^56] See, for example, 3 Nephi 19:28-29. See also Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "The Nature of Eternal Life."
[^57] JD, II, pp. 98-100.
[^58] That is, the act of consecration and the related covenants administered in the temple of God. See HC, V, p. 424.
[^59] JD, II, pp. 98-100. Having asserted "that no circumstances which can transpire can make them unequal," Elder Pratt challenged: "Now I defy you to bring about an equality upon any other principle."—Ibid.
[^60] D&C 51:3.
[^61] JD, II, pp. 98-100.
[^62] Reason would imply that a man with little or nothing to consecrate could not immediately exercise the right to take his stewardship out of the system and make it private property according to the world's definition of the term. If so, some might feign conversion for the purpose of getting a stewardship which they could then withdraw from the system.
[^63] See D&C 42:30-31, 34, 37, 39, 71; 56:16; 58:8, 11; 72:12; 78:3; 82:12; 83:6; 104:16, 18; 105:3.
[^64] Unpublished revelation to Joseph Smith, January 7, 1832.
[^65] Ibid., XVI, p. 4. For other statements on this point, see ibid., II, p. 100; XVII, pp. 107-108; XVIII, pp. 353-355.
[^66] Ibid., II, p. 101. For other statements by Elder Pratt, see ibid. XVII, p. 107; "The Equality and Oneness of the Saints," p. 297.
[^67] JD, XVI, p. 4.
[^68] Ibid.
[^69] Ibid., XVI, pp. 4-5. See also ibid., XVII, pp. 107-108.
[^70] D&C 51:3.
[^71] JD, XX, pp. 369-370.
[^72] Ibid., II, p. 100. See also ibid., XVI, p. 154; XVII, pp. 107-108.
[^73] JD, XVI, pp. 4-5.
[^74] D&C 82:17.
[^75] JD, XIII, p. 99.
[^76] See D&C 104:70-76.
[^77] D&C 78:13-14.
[^78] D&C 93:30. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "All Truth and Intelligence Independent."
[^79] D&C 78:14-15.
[^80] D&C 78:15-16.
[^81] Daniel 7:14. The government of God is discussed in chapter eleven of this volume. The council at Adam-ondi-Ahman will be discussed more fully in Volume IV of this study.
[^82] Statement by George Q. Cannon, in JD, XVI, pp. 118-119. For a similar statement by John Taylor, see ibid., XVII, p. 49.
[^83] Ibid., V, p. 52.
[^84] Ibid., XV, p. 209.
[^85] Ibid., XVI, pp. 118-119. John Taylor also called for a change in the basic economic principles of society. See ibid., XVII, p. 49.
[^86] Ibid., XVII, p. 74.
[^87] Ibid., XVI, p. 267.
[^88] Mosiah 18:8-10.
[^89] Mosiah 18:27-29.
[^90] D&C 38:24-25.
[^91] HC, III, p. 231. An expression of the principle of consecration among the Saints is found in the covenant which they made with each other when Governor Boggs of Missouri issued his infamous exterminating order which drove them from the state:
[^92] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "Retaining a Remission of Sins."
[^93] Alma 13:16.
[^94] Mosiah 4:12-16.
[^95] Mosiah 4:17-25.
[^96] Mosiah 4:26.
[^97] D&C 104:18.
[^98] D&C 56:16.
[^99] See 1 Nephi 2:20; 4:14; 2 Nephi 5:11-13; Omni 6; Mosiah 1:7; 2:22, 31; 23:19-20; 25:24; 27:7; Alma 9:22; 45:8; 48:15, 25; 50:18, 20; Helaman 3:20; 3 Nephi 5:22; 4 Nephi 7, 18; Ether 7:19; 10:28.
[^100] 1 Nephi 13:15-16, 20.
[^101] Alma 1:29, 31.
[^102] 1 Nephi 12:23; 2 Nephi 5:24.
[^103] Alma 23:18.
[^104] 4 Nephi 1:2, 7, 10, 17.
[^105] D&C 59:16-22.
[^106] "The Reed Peck Manuscript," handwritten account of Peck's experiences within the Latter-day Saint Church, written by himself September 18, 1839, pp. 11-12, Brigham Young University Library.
[^107] Quincy Whig, published at Quincy, Illinois, October 17, 1840.
[^108] Elders Journal Of The Church Of Latter Day Saints, Far West, Mo., I (July, 1838), p. 33; hereafter abbreviated Elders' Journal.
[^109] D&C 104:16.
[^110] See, for example, D&C 42:53-54; 51:8, 11-12; 58:49.
[^111] 1 Timothy 5:8.
[^112] D&C 42:42.
[^113] D&C 75:29.
[^114] D&C 82:15-18.
[^115] Unpublished revelation to Joseph Smith. January 7, 1832.
[^116] See 3 Nephi 24.
[^117] 3 Nephi 26:2.
[^118] See 4 Nephi. Early information on the law of tithing in this dispensation indicates that it had a companion relationship to the law of consecration and stewardship. A revelation in 1831 mentioned both laws as essential parts of the economic program of Zion. Having referred to the law of consecration and stewardship, the Lord declared: "Verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people."—D&C 64:23. The next year another revelation declared that under the law of consecration the Lord would "tithe his people."—D&C 85:3. The Saints in Missouri therefore discussed the law of tithing, recognizing that it was a divine commandment even though they were then practicing the law of consecration and stewardship. See Journal History, September 11, 1833. In 1834, when the Church was still under the program of consecration, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery entered into a covenant with God to pay tithing. When some faithful brethren in the East complied with the requirement to consecrate their wealth to further the work of the Lord and purchase inheritances in Missouri (See HC, II, pp. 172-174), making it possible for the leaders to obtain a loan to pay some pressing debts of the Church, the Prophet said: "We agreed to enter into the following covenant with the Lord, viz.: That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts; that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor His people; after that, of all that He shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church, or as He shall command."—Ibid., p. 175. This law was known and applied to a degree among the Saints before 1838, when it was finally made clear by a revelation to the Prophet. In appealing to the Saints to live the law of God by which they were to contribute funds to pay the expenses of the Church, the Bishop and his counselors at Kirtland wrote in a general epistle to the Church in 1837:
[^119] HC, III, p. 44.
[^120] John D. Lee, Mormonism Unveiled (St. Louis, 1891), pp. 60-61. This account is corroborated by William Swartzell, who reported, July 22, 1838, that Lyman Wight preached that after the "brethren had bought lots to suit themselves they should consecrate all money and property to the church so that [the] church can purchase lands within twelve miles from the center of the stake in every direction."—William Swartzell, Mormonism Exposed, p. 23. See also Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, p. 46.
[^121] Lee, op. cit., pp. 61, 62. Lee observed that events later showed that they voted "to please the priesthood," then acted "to suit themselves."—Ibid., p. 62. The failure of the Saints to fulfil their obligations to the law of Zion will be discussed in Volume IV of this study.
[^122] See HC, III, p. 44.
[^123] Statement by John Taylor, in JD, XXII, p. 11.
[^124] HC, III, p. 44.
[^125] D&C 119:1-4.
[^126] HC, III, p. 47.
[^127] Ibid., p. 48.
[^128] The failure of the Saints to live the full law of Zion will be treated in greater detail in the next volume of this work, also, the anticipated establishment of Zion's law.
[^129] Letter of John Smith, written from Nashville, Lee County, Iowa Territory, January 8, 1840, to George A. Smith at New York; original letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^130] HC, IV, p. 93.
