Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

9

Zion's United Order

I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH.

After giving the law of consecration and stewardship, in 1831, and starting communities and corporations based upon its principles, Joseph Smith was instructed by revelation to unite these units into one great economic program. The consolidated system was called the United Order. [^1] In a revelation, the Lord declared that it was given "to advance the cause, which ye have espoused, to the salvation of man, and to the glory of your Father who is in heaven." [^2] The united order was designed to promote economic union among the Saints and to establish them upon an equal economic standard, while preserving individual, community, and corporate rights. Within the system the great Christian ideals of social justice, union, and equality were to be achieved.

The Administrative System

The Organization of the United Order

Joseph Smith was directed to organize the united order early in 1832. In a revelation "concerning the Bishops of my church," the Lord stated that each bishop was to be a separate entity in his administrative responsibilities, "but not from claim neither from council." Instead, the Lord explained, "I have given unto you commandment that you should be joined together by covenant and bond, wherefore see that ye do even as I have commanded; and unto the office of the Presidency of the High Priesthood I have given authority to preside, with the assistance of his counselors, over all the concerns of the church." [^3]

This revelation—the earliest one to speak of the organization of the First Presidency [^4]—centered the power to direct the economic concerns of Zion in that body. It was followed in March, 1832, by another revelation that instructed the Prophet to organize the united order as a means of regulating all the economic activities of the Saints under the law of consecration and stewardship. [^5] The Lord declared: "Verily I say unto you, the time has come . . . that there [should] be an organization of my people, in regulating and establishing the affairs of the storehouse for the poor of my people, both in this place [Kirtland] and the land of Zion [Missouri]." [^6] A third revelation added that the united order was to "manage . . . all things pertaining to the bishopric" in Ohio and Missouri. [^7] Because it was designed to organize the Saints into one great and united economic system, the new organization was called the United Order. [^8]

This was "a permanent and everlasting establishment and order" under Zion's economic law, [^9] as long as the Saints kept that law. [^10] A central board composed of the Prophet and four other men was appointed to administer the affairs of the order. [^11] These men had made their calling and election sure to eternal life, and as officials in the united order they were to play a powerful role in building Zion. When fully established, Zion would exist on a spiritual plane, with the pure in heart having direct communion with God through the blessings of the Second Comforter. Consequently the members of the Central United Order Board were under great obligation to administer their responsibilities in righteousness so that condemnation and judgment would not overtake them. The Lord said:

I, the Lord, have decreed in my heart, that inasmuch as any man belonging to the order shall be found a transgressor, or, in other words, shall break the convenant with which ye are bound, he shall be cursed in his life, and shall be trodden down by whom I Will;

For I, the Lord, am not to be mocked in these things—and all this that the innocent among you may not be condemned with the unjust: and that the guilty among you may not escape; because I, the Lord, have promised unto you a crown of glory at my right hand. [^12]

The total economic program of Zion was made up of various enterprises under the general supervision of the Central United Order Board. Within each community—under the direction of the local united order council and the bishop, with his agents—were men who managed single, joint, and corporate stewardships. On the general administrative level, central corporations were organized which pertained to the whole order rather than to a particular community. These corporations were placed directly under the supervision of the Central United Order Board.

The Literary Firm was an example of a corporation on the general administrative level of Zion, organized for the benefit of the whole society and, consequently, having claim upon the general surplus funds to carry out its program. In a revelation, the Lord said:

Let my servants who are appointed as stewards over the literary concerns of my church have claim for assistance upon the bishop or bishops in all things—

That the revelations may be published, and go forth unto the ends of the earth; that they may also obtain funds which shall benefit the church in all things;

That they also may render themselves approved in all things, and be accounted as wise stewards. [^13]

As a corporation organized to glean profits by selling its works throughout the Church, the Literary Firm was to turn its surplus over to the central storehouse of the Church, to be "consecrated unto the inhabitants of Zion. [^14] Likewise, profits derived from other stewardships on the general level of the system were "to be cast into the Lord's storehouse, to become the common property of the whole church." [^15]

The Decentralization of the United Order

Under the united order, Zion was decentralized so that the economic operations of the system functioned mainly at the community level. The new society was to be a network of self-sustaining communities or cities established on the law of consecration and stewardship and unified into one great united order.

Each city had a storehouse, and the Saints were to consecrate their possessions to God through their local bishop and receive stewardships from the community storehouse. Though all surplus in the community was consecrated property and as such could be used for the benefit of Zion, it was secured to the community on the same general principles that a stewardship was secured to an individual steward. By covenant it was the Lord's property, but legally it belonged to the community and was not to be taken from it except by the consent of its members. This principle preserved community rights and autonomy. A revelation instructed:

All things shall be made sure, according to the laws of the land.

And let that which belongs to this people be appointed [by law] unto this people. . . .

And let that which belongeth to this people not be taken and given unto that of another church [i.e., community or city].

Wherefore, if another church would receive money of this church, let them pay unto this church again according as they shall agree;

And this shall be done through the bishop or the agent, which shall be appointed by the voice of the church. [^16]

Each community within the united order was to be an individual legal entity and to do business in its own name. A revelation said of the United Order of the City of Zion: "And they shall be organized in their own names, and in their own name; and they shall do their business in their own name, and in their own names." [^17] The United Order of the Stake of Zion at Kirtland was to do the same. [^18]

The Functions of the Central United Order Board

In addition to each community within the united order having its own storehouse, or economic center, there was a central storehouse into which the members of the Central United Order Board turned their surplus, which became "the common property of the whole church." [^19] This meant that the funds of the central storehouse were to be administered for the benefit of the whole system.

Though the program of the central storehouse was not fully developed while the Saints were in Ohio and Missouri, there can be little doubt that the Central United Order Board was expected to play a vital role in the over-all operation of the system.

First, in its administration of the surplus funds of the central storehouse, the central board could bring about a uniform standard of living among the members of the whole system, based upon the existence of sufficient wealth in each community storehouse to sustain its members on that standard. If the surplus of the central storehouse was to be administered for the benefit of "the whole church," [^20] and if all stewards as heirs truly had an equal right to acquire the blessings of the earth, it followed that communities lacking in natural resources, etc., could apply to the central storehouse for funds to develop industries and enterprises which would stimulate their economic growth. Without taking from one community storehouse to give to another, stewards could achieve and maintain an equal standard of living consistent with the principles of the new economic order and not contradictory to the incentive of those with wealth to obtain more. [^21]

Second, the Central United Order Board could foster and direct intelligently the growth and expansion of the system. By instituting reclamation projects funded by the central storehouse, for instance, new areas could be developed in which cities of Zion could be built and new stewardships be made available in an expanding society.

Third, centralization of the economic order made it possible for the movement and transfer of stewardships within the entire system. A steward who wanted to move from one area to another could turn in his stewardship in one city and take out a stewardship in another. The administrative details of the transfer would be coordinated through the central storehouse.

Fourth, in addition to the above benefits, the administration of the Central United Order Board made it possible to achieve all the objectives and blessings of a planned society while retaining the basic essentials of a free economic order—individual freedom, dignity, and incentive to progress. For example, in coordinating the over-all program of allocating stewardships, attention could be given to the needs of the market so that surpluses would not be created in some commodities and deficiencies in others. Again, by conducting studies to determine the changing needs of the market, the central board could keep the several communities advised on current demands and opportunities so that the stewards in the several communities could plan their production accordingly.

Ideals And Rewards Of The United Order

Private Rights

No ideal of human freedom and dignity is greater than that embodied in the society of Zion. The Saints were declared to be free both by the law of God and the law of man. [^22] Particularly would this be the case when the kingdom of God was established upon the earth. [^23] A revelation declared emphatically: "It is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." [^24] These provisions extended to the economic sphere of life. Freedom and its concomitant obligation of true Christian conduct toward others were the distinguishing features of the united order in which each man, as an heir, inherited and owned jointly all that the Father possessed.

The united order was an economic system which perfected the fundamental principles of a free economy and showed how they related to the equally legitimate principles of social union and equality. Since the economic order of Zion was based upon the premise that its members were heirs of the Father through Jesus Christ, it was not strictly a system of private property as the term is generally used. As heirs, the Saints were guaranteed certain private rights which provided for the free expression of initiative and individuality in a system where social union and concerted action were also dominant ideals. George Q. Cannon observed that these features of Zion's economic law appealed "strongly to most men's minds." "They can see that under such a system what are called individual rights might better be preserved, and property not be absorbed in a way to cause loss or waste," he explained, "and yet the great principle be carried out that is aimed at, namely, the uniting of the hearts of the people in one." [^25]

First, each man who consecrated his property to the Lord and thereby became an heir in the kingdom of God had the right to be a steward over a portion of the Lord's property. This right applied also to those who had but little to consecrate. Property in the storehouse was to be used, a revelation stated, to "administer to him who has not, that every man may receive according as he stands in need." [^26] For those who had little to consecrate, the delegation of a stewardship was not a dole but the application of the Christian principle of loving one's neighbor as one's self, by granting every man the means by which he could provide for himself and his family, with the character of the recipient rather than his economic holdings being the basis of such action. The individual's creative powers could thus be released and stimulated; and in due time worthy recipients of stewardships could be counted upon to contribute to the storehouse.

Second, each man had a right to negotiate with the bishop to determine the kind and size of his stewardship; and in the event they could not come to a mutual decision, the prospective steward did not have to accept the bishop's judgment. Instead, the case was to be heard by an independent body of twelve high priests, [^27] with six men of the council charged to see that his interests were properly represented. [^28]

Third, each heir had the right to be secure in his stewardship, by receiving a formal deed which defined the delegated property and made him its legal owner. [^29] This feature assured that the law of consecration and stewardship would not be an economic order centered primarily in the community, rather in the individuality and dignity of man. Even if a steward was severed from the system, he could retain his stewardship as though it was private property. [^30]

Fourth, each steward was a free, but responsible, person in managing his stewardship. Being a free agent, he conducted his business "according to the laws and covenants of the Church." [^31] This meant that he was bound by covenant to apply the principles of the gospel in his business transactions and to cooperate in the spirit of brotherhood with other stewards over the Lord's property. Together they were managing Christ's property, not their own, in the way Christ would direct it. To the extent they sustained their covenant obligations, the divine order would inject true Christian principles into an otherwise free enterprise economy. In freely managing his stewardship according to these principles, each steward sold his produce on the open market and received a return based on the actions of the free market.

Fifth, each steward had the right of voice and vote in the affairs of the society as guaranteed by the requirement that all things were to be done by the "united consent and voice" of those within the system. [^32] This included the right of voice and vote in relation to community expenditures from the storehouse and in the withdrawal of funds by other stewards from the common treasury.

Sixth, subject to the checks and regulations which were built into the system, each steward had the right to draw upon the Lord's storehouse to operate and expand his stewardship. [^33] Moral, spiritual, and political freedom were not complete without economic freedom and equality. The guarantee of this private right, therefore, was a vital part of Zion's program for enhancing the life and dignity of man. By means of this right, a man of integrity and ability was supported in his efforts to increase his capabilities and expand his financial holdings and his economic influence.

Seventh, a steward could draw from the storehouse means to supply legitimate family needs should his stewardship fail to produce sufficient profit to sustain his family on a standard equal with that of others in the community. This right was based upon the assumption that each steward was a responsible heir in the system and, as such, had helped develop surplus in the storehouse. It was also founded on the Christian principle that those who possessed wealth should, in the expression of true love and concern, lift up the less fortunate. It was not based upon the assumption that the community as a system had an obligation to care for the needs of the individual. Repeated failures by a steward required that some adjustment be made in the kind or size of his stewardship.

Eighth, worthy members unable to sustain themselves—widows, orphans, the aged, the disabled, etc.—were to "have claim upon . . . the Lord's storehouse" to supply their temporal needs. [^34] However, they were to work to sustain themselves to the extent that their conditions permitted. [^35]

Ninth, children of worthy stewards in arriving at adulthood had the right to receive stewardships of their own from the storehouse, for they were lawful heirs by birth, having been born under the covenants and promises of Zion. [^36]

Union and Equality

The revelation which instructed Joseph Smith to organize the united order spoke of the objectives of union and equality that the system would achieve. [^37] These ideals are in some respects inseparable. Though some measure of equality can exist without union, there can be no free and open union among men without equality, for the distinctions created by inequalities, to the degree they exist, militate against brotherly union. Economic equality was necessary, Orson Pratt stressed, or the inhabitants of Zion never would "be one." [^38]

Another revelation which related these two great ideals declared that unless the Saints were one on the basis of temporal equality they were not truly the Lord's people. It said:

Let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me.

And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself.

For what man among you having twelve sons, and is no respecter of them, and they serve him obediently, and he saith unto the one: Be thou clothed in robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou there—and looketh upon his sons and saith I am just?

Behold, this I have given unto you as a parable, and it is even as I am. I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine. [^39]

To be one required temporal and spiritual union. But the standard of union and equality was not to be a smothering one, but an enlightened and uplifting one. And in the united order, temporal union was a means of achieving the greater and more exalting spiritual union that the Saints could acquire by receiving the truth and light of God's glory. This union had as its final purpose the glorification of man in Christ, as He is glorified in the Father. [^40] A revelation therefore explained that the united order was given that the Saints might "be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things." It then added: "For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things; for if you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and required of you." [^41]

Of the two kinds of equality, temporal and spiritual, the greatest benefits were to be derived from the spiritual. These benefits pertained to man's acquisition of the gifts and endowments of the Holy Ghost and, ultimately, of the fulness of God's glory and power. The Saints, therefore, were to center primary attention upon achieving this union. "In your temporal things you shall be equal," a revelation admonished, "and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld." [^42] On the basis that the Saints would comply with this prerequisite, among others, Zion would be endowed with glory in the last days.

In recognizing the values of equality, Joseph Smith was aware that numerous social disorders have their basis in economic inequality. "It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another," a revelation declared, "wherefore the world lieth in sin." [^43] Book of Mormon prophets evidenced a similar awareness and sought diligently to eliminate inequalities among their people. [^44] The Nephite scripture warns that class distinctions resulting from economic inequality breed conflict and militate against true peace and union among men. [^45]

Orson Pratt reflected that Latter-day Saint leaders were conscious of the evils of inequality:

An inequality in riches lays a foundation for pride, and many other evils. A family who are rich can build comfortable houses, purchase inheritances and fine carriages, clothe themselves in splendid attire, and educate their children in every branch of useful learning; while those who are poor labour and toil from morning until evening to procure a scanty subsistence; their families are coarsely clad, their children are not so highly educated. These opposite circumstances produce distinctions; the rich family do not feel to associate with the same degree of familiarity with the poor as they do with the rich: the sons and daughters of the rich seek for companions among those that are wealthy; the poor feel themselves slighted, and feel envious, because they are not rich. Besides the great inequalities in regard to the actual comforts of life, it produces great inequalities in education, in the social circle, in marriage associations, and in almost every other respect. Hence, an inequality in property is the root and foundation of innumerable evils; it tends to division, and to keep asunder the social feelings that should exist among the people of God. It is the great barrier erected by the devil to prevent that unity and oneness which the Gospel requires; it is a principle originated in hell; it is the root of all evil.

Riches are not a curse, but they are a great blessing: it is inequality in riches that is a great curse. God has made all the riches of the earth, and the riches of all worlds. He made the gold, and the silver, and the other precious metals: He formed the flocks and herds, and all useful animals: He has made the earth exceedingly rich; and He has given man dominion over all these things: the more His people enjoy of these things the better he is pleased; it is impossible for His people to become to rich: if the whole world, with all the treasures thereof, were in the hands of the Saints, the Lord would still be delighted for them to have more. But these blessings have become a great curse to man, because they have been unequally possessed. We again repeat the word of the Lord to this Church: "IT IS NOT GIVEN THAT ONE MAN SHOULD POSSESS THAT WHICH IS ABOVE ANOTHER: WHEREFORE THE WORLD LIETH IN SIN." Unequal possession of that which God has made for the benefit of all His children, in sin. All nations, kindreds, and people, are in sin because of this inequality. The Saints are still in sin so far as they approve of this unequal possession; and we shall remain in sin until we make exertions to put this inequality away from us. We must be one, not only one in heavenly riches, but one in earthly riches. [^46]

Other prominent men in America were concerned about the serious problems inherent in economic inequality. James Madison wrote that "the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property." [^47]

To meet the problem and institute a system of true social union, Joseph Smith went to the root of the matter. In Zion, property was not "to be divided equally among the people, to let them do what they please with it," Brigham Young explained. "But the idea is to get the people into the same state of unity in all things temporal, that we find ourselves in with regard to things spiritual." [^48] Social union was to be achieved to a degree by the influence of the Holy Spirit. But to realize the ideal of union in its fulness, there had to be a union of property, and the machinery of society had to be organized so that it would foster sympathetic feelings and concerted action, rather than discord, and enhance the dignity and individuality of man.

Here Zion's economic order was related to the gospel program upon which it was based. Orson Pratt has been quoted as stating that the "first approximation towards a oneness" could be attained by the Saints as they utilized the enlightening power of the Holy Spirit which they received in the gospel. [^49] But speaking of the more complete program of union, Brigham Young said: "We are not of one heart and mind until we are one in all temporal things as well as in spiritual things." [^50]

Complete unity required a union of property, rather than an equal division of property, among the Saints. "No equality can be brought about by dividing property; the Lord never intended such an order of things," Orson Pratt observed. "It is not a division of property that is going to bring about a oneness among the Latter-day Saints in temporal things, but it is a union of property, that all the property may be united [by the act of consecration] and considered belonging to the Lord, and to every individual in the whole Church, as joint heirs with Him, or as His stewards." [^51] In this regard he also said:

How are we to be made one and equal in the inheritance of temporal things? If the riches of the earth were equally divided among all the children of God, circumstances would soon render them unequal; accidents, misfortunes, unwise calculations, sickness, and many other calamities would reduce some to poverty; while through experience and favorable circumstances, others would greatly add to their property. . . . Hence it is supposed by some, that under such changing and fluctuating circumstances, equality could not be maintained, even though it should be established. They argue that if they were all made equal today, circumstances would render them unequal tomorrow. . . . God's plan of making His Saints equal in property is not subject to any fluctuating circumstances; it is a perfect plan; it is not brought about by an equal division of property, nor by any division at all. Division of property, like division of doctrine, is a plan of the devil. . . . Equality among the Saints is not to be introduced by an equal division of property, but by a union of property. [^52]

With all property centered in Christ, and each man a steward over a portion of the Lord's possessions and a joint heir of the whole, Orson Pratt explained that there would be "one common interest among the Saints." [^53] Revelations from the Lord to Joseph Smith therefore declared that by establishing the order of Zion the Saints would be gathered together "in one." [^54] To the unifying influences which the Holy Spirit produced in their lives would be added the power of common economic interests and motives, and the consolidating effects which the mechanical operations of the system would produce. Only then would the Saints truly be the Lord's people. [^55] As such, they would be entitled to the manifestations of His glory which would further unite them in the Master, in accordance with the divine plan of life and salvation which has as its objective the glorification of man in Christ, as Christ is glorified in the Father. [^56]

Methods to Achieve Equality and Union

Having given the Saints the gift of the Holy Ghost through which spiritual union could be achieved among men, and having placed them under the higher covenants of the gospel plan, Joseph Smith expected to establish and maintain economic equality and union at each step in the process of implementing the law of consecration and stewardship. The Saints were required first to consecrate their possessions to God. By this action, Orson Pratt pointed out, they were placed initially in "a state of equality, owning nothing," [^57] for all consecrated property then belonged to the Lord.

By the act of consecration the Saints were to become heirs through Christ in the Father's kingdom. [^58] As an heir of God, each person was to share equally in the natural wealth of the earth and in the benefits derived from the concerted efforts of the group. Thus was destroyed among the Saints the false idea that one man should own exclusively what others helped to build, or control exclusively that which others helped to operate. Orson Pratt explained:

If each one in the Church, then, possesses the whole of it [i.e., the total united property, etc.], as joint heirs with the Lord, is there not an equality? You may diminish the common property or joint fund just as much as you please. Suppose it were diminished to one half by mobs, &c., it does not make the Church unequal, not in the least; for each one may be considered as the possessor of the whole; he inherits all things; he is a joint heir with Jesus Christ in the inheritance of the earth, and all the fulness thereof. Can you make any inequality here? If each man in the Church is a joint inheritor of all the property, and is a steward over a part of it, it makes each one perfectly equal with the rest. [^59]

As heirs in Zion, the Saints were made stewards over the Lord's property; and in receiving their stewardships each man was to be "equal according to his family, . . . his circumstances and his wants and needs." [^60] Here, as indicated, the ideal of equality was applied according to these general criteria. Since all stewardships belonged to God, Orson Pratt observed that in this respect also each man in the system would be on "a perfect equality with his brother." [^61]

Those who had but little to consecrate were also to be made stewards according to the above principles. [^62] Several revelations made reference to the fact that the Saints were to consecrate their wealth to God for the benefit of the poor. [^63] Properly understood, these statements designated how the great ideals of economic justice and equality were to be achieved. Having observed that bishops were to administer the surplus of the several stewardships, a revelation said of that surplus: "Wherefore, it is the property of the Lord, and it is for the poor of the church to be administered according to the law, for it is the will of the Lord that the church should be made equal in all things." [^64] By each man consecrating his wealth to God and receiving a stewardship according to the laws of the system, all men were to be made equal in economic matters.

Though men were heirs, each man's stewardship was not equal in size or kind, nor did the Saints follow such a policy of delegating stewardships when they sought to practice the new economic law in Missouri. "Those who were called upon to engage in some business wherein a greater amount of capital was needed had a capital accordingly," Elder Pratt noted. [^65] Because the various skills, businesses, and professions do not require the same outlay of capital, he reasoned on another occasion that stewardships would be different, not only in kind, but in the amount or value of the stewardship. He said:

It is well known that for farming purposes, it does not require the same skill as for manufacturing many articles, nor the same capital. And the ingenious mechanic, who understands the nature or construction of machinery, might have to be intrusted with a stewardship of one hundred thousand dollars worth of property to establish his manufactory, and work it so as to have it prove a benefit to the whole Church; and without this amount being put into his hands, as a steward, he might not be able to accomplish anything needed in the particular branch of manufacturing with which he was familiar. The stewardships, in such cases, would be different, not only in kind, but in the amount or value of the stewardship. [^66]

Differences in the size and kind of stewardships the Saints were to receive would not make them unequal in the enjoyment of temporal things; nor would inequality exist if one man, by receiving a greater stewardship than another, had several thousand dollars more surplus profits at the end of the year. Elder Pratt explained that as they rendered an account of their stewardships to the bishop, the various stewards were to turn over to the storehouse all that they had gained, "excepting what it had cost to feed and clothe them." [^67] And here the living standard which was mutually agreed upon by the members of the system would dictate the amount each family would keep out of the profits of their stewardship for personal and family needs. In this way, a permanent equality could be maintained. [^68] Elder Pratt further explained:

Let me show you how they would be equal. The manufacturer does not own the building, the machinery, the cotton or the flax, as the case may be. He is only a steward, like the farmer. And if, at the end of the year, he has five, ten, or fifty thousand dollars surplus, does that make him a rich man? By no means, it goes into the Lord's storehouse at the end of the year, or as often as may be required, thus leaving him on the same platform of equality with the farmer and his small stewardship. Do you not see the equality of the thing? [^69]

By the same reasoning, stewards in a similar line of business could be delegated different amounts of property without disrupting the standard of equality. The general rule was to delegate property to an individual according to the size of his family, the nature or circumstances of his business, and his legitimate wants and needs. [^70] But these were the minimal criteria to be used for judging the size of one's stewardship. If a man possessed special gifts and abilities, these factors were also to be considered. "If a man was capable of managing merchandise to the amount of one hundred thousand dollars, it would be proper that he should be made a steward over that amount," Lorenzo Snow explained, for every man was to receive a stewardship "in proportion to his capacity to oversee it for the general good." [^71] Orson Pratt elaborated on this point:

The Lord never intended that every man should possess an equal amount of stewardship with his brother. Why? Because God has given to some men greater ability to manage and control property than others. He may give to one, one talent; to another, two; to another, three; to another, five; and to another, ten; and then command them to make use of these talents according to the instructions and revelations given, and be accountable to Him who gave them. [^72]

Each steward's obligation to turn the surplus profits from his stewardship over to the storehouse as a new consecration was another important factor in Zion's program for maintaining a permanent equality within the united order. Orson Pratt said:

What provisions did the Lord make in order to maintain this equality among his Saints permanently? He made this arrangement by law—that every man should be considered a steward. . . . These stewards were to render an account to the judge in Zion of their stewardships. . . .

To the Lord's bishop or bishops, as the case may be, he reports what he has done with the means entrusted to his care. If a man has been entrusted with fifty or with a thousand dollars, or with a million, to carry on some branch of business he must, at the end of the year, render an account of that stewardship. If a man is only entrusted with a small farm, he renders an account of his stewardship at the end of the year, and thus all those who are occupied in these different branches of trade, render accounts of their stewardships, consecrating, at the end of the year, all that they have gained, excepting what it has cost to feed and clothe them. Are they not equal? Yes, and this maintains a permanent equality; for the man who has gained a hundred thousand in his stewardship consecrates all that he has not used; and the man with a smaller stewardship who in the whole year, has only gained fifty dollars over and above what he has used, consecrates that fifty. The man who has gained most consecrates most, the man who has gained least consecrates the least. This reduces them yearly to the same position and condition as they were in when they commenced this heavenly order. [^73]

Finally, a steward's continued right to draw upon the storehouse for funds to operate and expand his stewardship concluded the provisions by which a permanent equality could be maintained within the united order. "You are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the properties [of the storehouse], for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships," a revelation declared, "every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just." [^74] This meant, George Q. Cannon explained, that all stewards would have "an equal claim on the properties of the Lord's treasury." [^75] The funds in that treasury were to be held in common by all stewards within the system, and each man had a right to share equally in the profits which were derived from the economic ventures of all other stewards. No funds were to be taken from the treasury, however, except by the common consent of the several stewards. [^76] But governed by this principle, all stewards were to have equal access to the treasury as a common fund from which they could draw to operate and expand their stewardships.

The fact that each steward had an equal right to draw upon the common treasury to supply the needs of his stewardship did not mean that each man could withdraw the same amount. Instead, his right to withdraw funds depended upon the size and kind of his stewardship, its legitimate needs, his demonstrated integrity and ability in managing his stewardship, and the principle of common consent.

Independence

To the ideal of equality, the revelation which instructed Joseph Smith to organize the united order added the great objective of making the Saints independent economically, as individuals and as a people. Referring to the divine program to be established, the Lord said: "Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, . . . that through my providence . . . the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." [^77]

Joseph Smith held that all life must be independent in the sphere in which God has placed it. "Otherwise," a revelation reasoned, "there is no existence." [^78] This means that a true order of life must give man the means of becoming independent as an individual and in a social and economic capacity; and within such a system, independence in these outward aspects must be an extension of independence in the spiritual sphere of human life. If the principles and designs of human association do not aid man to become an independent being as an individual and in his collective associations with others, they are to that extent either deficient or perverse and therefore destructive of life within man. The Prophet taught that only in a system founded upon the principle of mutual covenant, where free and mature men unite together and give equal consideration to the rights of each other, could the goal of true independence in economic matters be achieved.

There was therefore a direct relationship between the ideals of equality, union, and independence, and the way they were to be attained. True independence could be achieved only in a system of equality and union, and on the basis that every man esteemed his brother as himself. When a man was denied the opportunity or the means of becoming economically independent, or the opportunity of becoming what others were economically, he was something less than his true self, or what he in truth could be. Equality and union laid the foundation for man to be truly independent in his sphere of existence, temporally and also spiritually.

Political Freedom and Justice

The development of the economic program of the united order was directly related to the successful maintenance of a free political state, and in this sense the united order was expected to play a significant role in the perfected program of the kingdom of God. It is clear in the study of Joseph Smith's thought that the united order was not to be merged in its operations with the government of God; the economic and political systems were separate and distinct units of the kingdom. However, each system had its basis in the spiritual program of the priesthood. Each program, also, was dependent in some ways upon the other. The principles of freedom which the political organ secured to man were essential to the existence of the united order. But within the free political state there had to be a dynamic economic order capable of achieving social justice and developing man to be an independent being, socially and economically, both as an individual and in his collective relationships. Otherwise spiritual darkness and the need to alleviate social and economic injustices would cause man to turn to the state for solutions to his problems, and thereby socialize its program with a commensurate loss of freedom and human dignity.

In the revelation which instructed Joseph Smith to organize the united order, the Lord stated that by means of that economic system the Saints were to become "independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world," that they might "come up unto the crown prepared" for them and "be made rulers over many kingdoms." [^79] This, He implied, was the order of things which would be established at Adamondi-Ahman, [^80] when the government of God would be perfected and Christ given "dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him." [^81] Zion was to be established upon the law of the united order as a means of bringing about these great purposes.

Christianizing The Social Order

The Need for a Change in Fundamental Principles

Discerning Latter-day Saints detected something unnatural in economic systems where "there is a constant temptation for a man to do the best for himself at the expense of his fellowmen." [^82] This was the way of the world. Brigham Young inquired: "Where is there a people or nation that does not oppress each other?" [^83] Such tendencies militate against Christian ideals of brotherhood and truth, and they prevent the development of true social union. George Q. Cannon observed: "There is a clashing of interests, and there is not that feeling among men which we are told the Gospel should bring—a feeling to love our neighbor as we love ourselves." [^84]

Elder Cannon explained that the new economic order sought to eliminate these inherent weaknesses by effecting a fundamental change in the "temporal affairs" of the Saints, thus laying a foundation that would knit them together and make them one. [^85] In the same vein, Erastus Snow said: "The United Order of Zion . . . will . . . help us, by a combined effort, to cultivate every virtue, to put from us every vice, to conduct ourselves and our children sensibly, and to dispense with childish follies." [^86] Only then, Lorenzo Snow concluded, could the Saints "become sanctified through the practice of the truth." [^87]

To bring about the required change in society, Joseph Smith proposed to extend the covenant obligations which the Saints took upon themselves in baptism directly into the economic sphere of life and thereby Christianize the social order of Zion. First, in the covenant of baptism the Saints gave themselves to Christ. But in the covenant of consecration they gave to Him, in addition, all their possessions. This made effective, as an economic principle, the doctrine that the earth and all within it belonged to the Master.

Second, in baptism the Saints pledged to follow Christ in their conduct, and in their compliance with the divine plan of regeneration. In the covenant of consecration, they extended these obligations directly to the economic sphere of life by pledging to act as Christ would have them act in the responsibilities of property and wealth and in this way sanctify the operations of society to the end that Zion and all her municipals could be endowed with the glory and power of God.

Third, in baptism the Saints accepted the law of Christ to love their neighbor as themselves and to respect the interests of others as their own. In the covenant of consecration, this obligation applied directly to the economic sphere in that the Saints consecrated their wealth to God so that all became heirs of God, and an economic order established in which every man continually had an equal opportunity to acquire and enjoy the material blessings of the earth. In this way they loved their neighbor, economically, as themselves.

The Book of Mormon shows the relationship that exists between the obligations which man accepts in baptism and the requirement to consecrate his material wealth to alleviate economic distress and give others an equal opportunity to acquire the blessings of the earth. When Alma baptized some people, he explained:

Behold, here are the waters of Mormon. . . and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light;

Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even unto death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—

Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you? [^88]

Having baptized the people as a witness of their acceptance of these obligations, Alma then applied the above principles directly to the economic sphere of life. The record continues:

And . . . Alma commanded that the people of the church should impart of their substance, every one according to that which he had; if he have more abundantly he should impart more abundantly; and of him that had but little, but little should be required; and to him that had not should be given.

And thus they should impart of their substance of their own free will and good desires towards God, and to those priests that stood in need, and to every needy, naked soul.

And this he said unto them, having been commanded of God; and they did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants. [^89]

Joseph Smith endeavored to apply the same principles and obligations to the economic activities of the Saints, in giving the poor an equal opportunity to acquire the blessings of the earth. A revelation which sought to prepare the Saints for the more comprehensive law of Christ disclosed the underlying principle of that law. The Lord admonished: "Let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me." He then stressed: "And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself." [^90] Of the central idea of consecration, Joseph Smith said: "Now for a man to consecrate his property, wife and children, to the Lord, is nothing more nor less than to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the widow and fatherless, the sick and afflicted, and do all he can to administer to their relief and their afflictions, and for him and his house to serve the Lord." [^91] On these principles social justice was to be established among the Saints.

The direct relationship between the obligations which a person assumed in baptism and his responsibility to help Christianize the economic order was such that those who failed to do the latter negated the blessings which came to them through baptism. By baptism man could initially obtain a remission of personal sins. But only by actually following Christ thereafter could he retain a remission of sins from day to day and grow in the knowledge of that which was just and true. [^92] Compliance with the law of consecration and stewardship was a full demonstration, socially and economically, of a life consecrated to Christ.

The Book of Mormon teaches that to retain a remission of sins through Christ after baptism, man has to help build up the kingdom of God and extend its blessing of peace, justice, and well-being to others. By complying with the law of tithing, men look forward to Christ for "a remission of their sins." [^93] To that end, they must also "live peaceably" with each other and "render to every man" that which is due to him, teaching their children "to walk in the ways of truth and soberness" and to love and serve each other. But this is not all. King Benjamin explained: "And also, ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish." [^94] Of man's obligation to assist the poor that he might retain a remission of sins and obtain salvation, the Nephite king said:

Perhaps thou shalt say: The man has brought upon himself his misery; therefore I will stay my hand, and will not give unto him of my food, nor impart unto him of my substance that he may not suffer, for his punishments are just—

But I say unto you, O man, whosoever doeth this the same hath great cause to repent; and except he repenteth of that which he hath done he perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the kingdom of God.

For behold, are we not all beggars? Do we not all depend upon the same Being, even God, for all the substance which we have, for both food and raiment, and for gold, and for silver, and for all the riches which we have of every kind?

And . . . ye have been calling on his name, and begging for a remission of your sins. And has he suffered that ye have begged in vain? Nay; he has poured out his Spirit upon you, and has caused that your hearts should be filled with joy, and has caused that your mouths should be stopped that ye could not find utterance, so great was your joy.

And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another.

And if ye judge the man who putteth up his petition to you for your substance that he perish not, and condemn him, how much more just will be your condemnation for withholding your substance, which doth not belong to you but to God, to whom also your life belongeth; and yet ye put up no petition, nor repent of the thing which thou hast done.

I say unto you, wo be unto that man, for his substance shall perish with him; and now, I say these things unto those who are rich as pertaining to the things of this world.

And again, I say unto the poor, ye who have not and yet have sufficient, that ye remain from day to day; I mean all you who deny the beggar, because ye have not; I would that ye say in your hearts that: I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give.

And now, if ye say this in your hearts ye remain guiltless, otherwise ye are condemned; and your condemnation is just for ye covet that which ye have not received. [^95]

King Benjamin's summary statement is a classic, directly to the point. "And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you," he declared, "that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants." [^96]

Revelations to Joseph Smith also stressed that Christ's atonement could not consistently pay the debt of sin for man and thereby free him from the demands of divine justice unless man served God by assisting those who stood in need and by acting justly toward all men. It was inconsistent with man's covenant to follow Christ, a flagrant denial of the principle of gospel brotherhood, for a rich man to use his wealth for his own personal interests without regard for the needs and welfare of others. Those who did so would not have full access to the blessings of the atonement in the remission of their personal sins. "If any man shall take of the abundance which I have made," the Lord therefore announced, "and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment." [^97] Again: "Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved." [^98]

Economic Benefits

Joseph Smith held that great temporal benefits would result from Christianizing the social order, because the development of regenerating truths and powers in man would have the effect of awakening him to social and economic values, and would stimulate his desire to achieve in these areas. The Book of Mormon repeatedly affirms that when the Nephites lived in spiritual union with God they prospered in their temporal affairs. [^99] Nephi's vision of the early European colonists in America also illustrated this point. "I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles," he reported, "and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance." [^100]

From the Book of Mormon three cases serve to illustrate the influence of spiritual truths and powers upon the temporal prosperity of man. Having obeyed the gospel, the Nephites who were converted by Alma imparted of their substance to the poor and in other ways complied with the economic principles of the gospel of Christ. The record reports:

And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began to be exceeding rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need—and abundance of flocks and herds, and fatlings of every kind, and also abundance of grain, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious things, and abundance of silk and fine-twined linen, and all manner of good homely cloth. . . .

And thus they did prosper and become far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their church. [^101]

The second illustration comes from the record of the Lamanites. When they departed from the ways of the Lord and "dwindled in unbelief," they became "an idle people, full of mischief and subtlety." [^102] But when a group of Lamanites became converted to the gospel, "they began to be a very industrious people." [^103]

Finally, when Christ established the full program of His kingdom among the Nephites after His resurrection, they enjoyed a period of peace similar to the millennium in which "every man did deal justly one with another." The record states that "the Lord did prosper them exceedingly in the land" so that they "did wax strong . . . and became an exceedingly fair and delightsome people." Under the full law of God "they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God." [^104]

The influence of the spiritual upon the temporal is also reflected in latter-day revelations to Joseph Smith. In enumerating the blessings which would follow the proper observance of the sabbath day, the Lord said:

Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth;

Yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards;

Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart;

Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul.

And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion.

And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments.

Behold, this is according to the law and the prophets. [^105]

The transforming power of the gospel within the lives of the Latter-day Saints was evident in their outward economic achievements. When the wild prairies of Caldwell County, Missouri, were converted by the Saints into cultivated fields, individuals visiting that area remarked "that no other people of the same number could build a town like Far West and accomplish as much in the agricultural line in five years as the Mormons had in one." [^106] The Quincy Whig remarked: "No sect, with equal means, has probably ever suffered and achieved more in so short a time." [^107] Though they embraced a transcendental faith and philosophy, the Saints were practical and down to earth in their realism. Of their settlement of Caldwell County, the Elders' Journal said:

Large bodies of land have been, and are now being put under cultivation.

We might venture an assertion on this point, and that, without the fear of contradiction by those who are acquainted with the settlements in this vicinity, and that is [that] no part of the world can produce a superior to Caldwell County, if an equal. Eighteen months since without scarcely an inhabitant: at this time the City of "Far West," the county seat, has one hundred and fifty houses, and almost the whole country is taken up or all that part of it, which can be conveniently settled for want of timber: and large bodies of it are now under cultivation. [^108]

Social And Economic Incentives

The united order was not designed to level men down economically, but to raise them up to an equal standard. The Lord said: "This is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low." [^109] This statement should be understood. Within the united order the productive power and capacity of the rich were left unchecked. It was in the use they made of their surplus and the amount they kept from their profits for their families that the Lord's law regulated what they did with their wealth. The leveling of the rich by extending their surplus to the poor, and by granting equal opportunity to the poor to produce and expand, was not designed to check the productive capacity of any man, but to broaden the base of enterprise and, consequently, the power of all men to be consumers, which would stimulate production. This in no way checked man's incentive to produce, if the Spirit of Christ filled his soul and if his heart was set on building Zion. Instead, true social and economic justice would produce great rewards, both tangible and intangible in nature.

The underlying philosophy of the united order held that man's desire to produce wealth so that he could have a more affluent life than his neighbor, being based upon improper principles of pride and self-aggrandizement, was unchristian. Such an incentive turned man's attention inward, rather than outward, and caused him to shrivel rather than to grow in his human and divine attributes. Acting with true incentives, man was to produce wealth so that he could develop in his capacity to express and enjoy himself, and to extend his influence and power on the basis of righteous principles. For example, a young man should not develop physical prowess in order to be a bully among his associates. This is an improper incentive, and it has baneful effects upon him and others. There exist more noble goals. He should develop himself in order to better fulfill his role as a human being, that he might acquire recognition and influence properly on the basis of skill and merit. The same reasoning applies in the realm of economic incentives. As an eternal creature of dignity and value, man has an inborn desire and capacity to develop and to expand his influence. He should do so in the right way, not by giving himself over to pride and vanity. The fact that all stewards had equal access to the storehouse as a fund upon which they could draw to operate and expand their stewardships gave them the means to fulfill in proper ways this inborn desire and capacity.

Nor did the fact that the united order extended Christian principles into the practical realm of society mean that economic incentives and the principle of competition were eliminated from the system. It meant, instead, that injustices, inequalities, and hostilities were minimized or removed. With these improvements and the benefits of greater social union, the new system operated according to the principles and incentives of free enterprise and the free market. Stewards bought goods and commodities from each other and from the world; [^110] they sold to each other and the world. Goods and commodities produced by the several stewards therefore competed with each other on the free market, and with those produced by the world. This opened the door of opportunity for new commodities and new ventures. Competition of the "cut-throat" variety was minimized, if not eliminated, but competition that pitted the quality and cost of one product against the quality and cost of another was encouraged. In this way the undesirable features of the free market system were eliminated and the desirable ones of competition and challenge, with their refining and upgrading influences, were retained.

A steward's right to draw upon the storehouse for funds to operate and expand his stewardship was also an important economic incentive. It takes money to make money; ability and integrity do not always succeed, or succeed as well, without financial backing. A steward's right to draw funds from the storehouse was not limited to the amount which others drew out, even if they were stewards in a similiar business. When there was opportunity for legitimate monetary gain, and a steward evidenced integrity, ability, and desire to move ahead in the project, funds could be made available without a stifling interest payment which might discourage him from making the venture.

The incentive for man to provide for his family is a deep and legitimate one which the united order retained. Since the divine system was not a communal program where society assumed the responsibility of providing for its members, each steward was expected to care for his family. The emphasis was upon personal, not community, responsibility. This meant that a steward was required to produce enough to sustain his family on a standard equal with that of other families, and to contribute enough surplus to the storehouse to bear his share of community expenses and provide the funds required to operate his stewardship the next year. If a man failed to contribute what he should to the storehouse, the amount he drew out thereafter could justly be scrutinized and limited to meet the existing situation. In the case of critical and continued failure, he would be removed from his stewardship.

The united order opened wide the door of economic opportunity, and it released human initiative, but it did not encourage or tolerate the principle of the dole. The major differences between the order and a strictly free-enterprise economy were those of Christian concern and social justice. But such concern did not assume responsibility for an idler's welfare. The Saints accepted without reservation the declaration of the Apostle Paul: "If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." [^111] To the Saints, the Lord declared: "Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer." [^112] Again, "The idler shall not have place in the church, except he repent and mend his ways." [^113]

It is in the realm of family associations that the regenerated man finds his greatest happiness and fulfilment. Pleasure acquired from the physical and material world is fleeting and somewhat limited, but there is no end to the joy derived from intimate family relationships which are based upon the blessings of peace and union which come from the Holy Spirit. In recognition of these basic truths, the Prophet made family relationships the center of the perfected order of Zion. He also taught that the desire to secure and expand one's family according to righteous principles was natural and proper. This, in turn, gave added incentive for a regenerated man to apply himself in economic endeavors. He could expand and extend his family as he increased and strengthened his stewardship. And as his family increased, he could keep more from the profits of his stewardship to use for family needs.

The thrill of building a stewardship into a substantial business was another important incentive. A man often pours his whole heart and soul—his very life—into the work of building a business into a stable and respectable establishment, then looks upon his efforts and accomplishments with a deep sense of joy and satisfaction. The pursuit of happiness is for him the happiness of pursuit. The opportunity to create and to possess—to say, "This I have wrought by my efforts with the grace of God"—is a legitimate incentive. Within the united order every steward had the economic backing necessary to "improve upon his talent [i. e., economic holdings]." a revelation explained, "that every man may gain other talents. yea, even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse." [^114] And having achieved a hundred fold, he was in a position to improve and expand again. Thus the storehouse was to be filled continually with surplus wealth, the Lord said in another revelation, "that ye may all grow in temporal as well as spiritual things." [^115]

Though stewards were to live on an equal economic standard, that standard could be raised as they increased the surplus in the storehouse. Here was another important incentive for stewards to produce.

Finally, the desire for security and independence was a meaningful incentive. Joseph Smith recognized that there was no short cut to security; to seek for it without placing primary emphasis upon the principles by which it could be achieved was self-defeating. By reason of its nature, security could not be an objective but a by-product. nevertheless, it could be achieved. There was no greater security than that which was made possible when conscientious men united their property and wealth in Christ, in a program where each individual inherited the whole and could by mutual consent draw upon the combined wealth and talent of the society to sustain himself against the mishaps of life. Within the united order there was security against financial failure and the unforeseen disruptions of the economic world, security for a man and his family in the event of severe illness, security in the task of establishing his children in their economic endeavors, security for himself in his declining years, and security for his wife and children in the event of his death. To achieve these objectives, an intelligent steward would apply himself in productive effort.

Summary

In 1832, Joseph Smith organized the united order as a system to consolidate all the economic enterprises of the Saints into one great and united program under the law of consecration and stewardship. Though the system was centered administatively in the Central United Order Board, it was decentralized functionally so that each city or community was a legal entity and functioned as an independent unit. This gave the order all the benefits of a consolidated system, with the power and means to plan and direct the functions of the order in ways that would sustain the freedom of man, promote union, and achieve social and economic justice. Therein, freedom, union, and equality were properly blended and sustained. On this basis both the individual and the society were to become economically independent. It was a Christian society in every respect: it provided great economic benefits, and it preserved and enhanced all the proper incentives to achieve the material blessings of the earth.

Footnotes

Some of these men were already stewards in corporations organized for the benefit of the whole society. See, for example, D&C 70:1, for the members of the Literary Firm. When the Central United Order Board was organized, these men were given additional responsibilities as members of that board which was organized "according to the laws of the Lord."—D&C 82:15. As a steward over a corporation and as a member of the Central United Order Board (which constituted another stewardship), each man had "equal claims" on the central storehouse for the purpose of "managing the concerns" of his stewardship, "every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants" were just.—D&C 82:17-18. For statements which tie the Literary Firm to the united order after the latter system was organized, see D&C 96:4, 8; 104:26, 28-33, 58-68.

We whose names are hereunder written do each for ourselves individually hereby covenant to stand by and assist each other to the utmost of our abilities in removing from this state in compliance with the authorities of the State; and we do hereby acknowledge ourselves firmly bound to the extent of all our available property to be disposed of by a committee who shall be appointed for that purpose, for providing means for the removing of the poor and destitute who shall be considered worthy from this county till there shall not be one left who desires to remove from this state.—Far West, Missouri, Council Minutes, in "Letters, 1839," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also HC, III, pp. 250ff.

---
Notas:
[^1] See D&C 57:1-3.
[^2] Moses 7:62. The prophetic picture of the building of the City of Zion in the last days will be discussed in the next volume of this work.
[^3] MS, XXI (September 10, 1859), p. 582.
[^4] Painesville Telegraph, Painesville, Ohio, January 18, 1831. Supporting this statement is a letter written by Sidney Rigdon which introduces Elder Whitmer to the new converts in Ohio. Rigdon said:
[^5] HC, VI, pp. 318-319.
[^6] JD, XII, p. 165. Having described the beauty of the nation's capitol and its adjacent grounds to his daughter, Heber C. Kimball wrote: "O that we had such a place!" He then added resolutely: "We will when we build up a sure place."—Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, XI (December 15, 1882), p. 106.
[^7] JD, VIII, p. 10.
[^8] Ibid., X, p. 147.
[^9] Ibid., p. 172.
[^10] Ibid., p. 147.
[^11] There is some question regarding the accuracy of some details of the original plat and other instructions which accompanied it. After the original materials were sent, Oliver Cowdery wrote another letter correcting certain items contained in the first communication. "Those patterns previously sent you, per mail, by our brethren, were incorrect in some respects, being drawn in great haste," he said of the description of one of the temples in the initial letter. "They have therefore drawn these, which are correct." He then added: "The form of the city was also incorrect, being drawn in haste. We send you another."—Letter of Oliver Cowdery, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, in "Zion, City of Town Plat," subject file box 34, folder 9.
[^12] Journal History, under date. This view of the origin of the plat of the City of Zion is consistent with other evidence. A month before the plat of the city of Zion was sent to Missouri, a revelation instructed the Prophet to lay out a city at Kirtland, Ohio, "according to the pattern" which God had given to him.—D&C 94:1-2. See also D&C 95:13-14; HC, I, p. 352. The general features of the Kirtland plat were the same as those in the plat of the City of Zion. See Lowry Nelson, The Mormon Village: A Pattern and Technique of Land Settlement (Salt Lake City, 1952), Appendix B. A temple was also to be built at the Center Place of Zion "like unto the pattern which I [God] have given you."—D&C 97:10. The same was true of the temple to be built at Far West, Missouri, and at Nauvoo, Illinois.—D&C 115:14-16; 124:42.
[^13] HC, I, pp. 357-358. The size of the city as charted on the original plat was not exactly one mile square. Excluding the outside roads, etc., it was 5342 feet by 5672 feet. The original plat called for 840 lots in the regular blocks plus 120 in the middle range, making a total of 960 lots. This meant that for a city of 15,000 people there would have to be an average of over 15.6 people living on each lot. This may have been one factor which was dealt with in the corrected plat mentioned in a footnote at the beginning of this chapter.
[^14] Ibid., p. 357. Though the written description stated that this was the design, a study of the existing plat reveals that only some lots in the city were laid out to meet these specifications.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 358-359.
[^16] Ibid. The published explanation merely indicates that these arrangements were to be made on the south of the city, but the manuscript makes it clear that such arrangements were to be made on both the north and the south sides.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Ibid. The published explanation contains an error in describing these features of the plat. The explanation given above is from the unpublished manuscript.
[^19] Ibid., p. 359.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] Ibid.
[^27] Ibid.
[^28] Ibid., p. 358.
[^29] Ibid., III, pp. 67-68.
[^30] This did not include the civic program.
[^31] JD, XXIV, p. 25.
[^32] St. George Stake Historical Record, No. 97707, November 20, 1881, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Of this revelation, Wilford Woodruff said: "President [Young] said, I have asked the Lord what kind of a temple we should build, and the answer of the Lord was that he did not make two things alike, and we need not make two temples alike; so we need not look for two temples alike."—Journal of Wilford Woodruff, June 1, 1873.
[^33] See D&C 38:38; 42:9; 84:100. There may also have been changes made due to the press of circumstances in which the Saints found themselves in Missouri. Popular prejudice forced them into some compromises and modifications of program as they sought to build up cities of Zion. As a case in point, the city of Far West, in Caldwell County, was expanded to two square miles after it had been laid out according to the original scale. See HC, II, p. 525. This action should be seen in light of the total historical picture of their settlement in Caldwell County and the effort of other citizens to restrict them to that county.
[^34] Swartzell, Mormonism Exposed, p. 23.
[^35] D&C 94:1-2. See also D&C 104:40, 48.
[^36] MA, III (September, 1837), p. 561.
[^37] For the historical picture leading up to the settlement of the Saints at Far West, see HC, II, pp. 444-445; TS, I (February, 1840), p. 51; Journal History, July 7, 1836.
[^38] HC, III, pp. 34-37.
[^39] Ibid., pp. 67-68. A map showing the layout of the city of Adam-ondi-Ahman noted that it was located twenty-five miles north of Far West and thirteen miles north of Seth.—Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. This accords with Joseph Smith's statement that he traveled "some fourteen or fifteen miles from Far West, directly north," to the site of this city, then added: "We found a new route home, saving, I should think, three or four miles."—HC, II, pp. 67, 68. Because of mob activities which were increasing against the Saints at this time, little was done to build up the city of Seth, and the next month Governor Lilburn W. Boggs issued his infamous exterminating order to drive the Saints out of the state of Missouri.
[^40] HC, III, p. 67. For the New Jerusalem as a city of refuge, see D&C 45:66ff. The prophetic picture which Joseph Smith gave of Zion as a place of refuge will be treated in the next volume of this study.
[^41] A comparison of the two documents shows that many parts are identical.
[^42] HC, IV, p. 249. John C. Bennett did the writing, but a clerk who was working in the Prophet's office said:
[^43] HC, I, p. 358.
[^44] Elders' Journal, I (August, 1838), p. 53.
[^45] Ibid.
[^46] Ibid. (Italics in the original.)
[^47] See, for example, D&C 38:24-27; 78:5-7.
[^48] Elders' Journal, op. cit., pp. 53, 54. In fulfilling the over-all purposes of life, this order of society was expected to work to the advantage of all people regardless of their vocation in life. "It will be found that farming, as well as all other business, can be carried on to better purpose, through a well arranged order of things by living in cities, than it possibly can, by living in any other situation of life," President Rigdon argued; "and the opportunities of education be complete, so that not only the rising generation, but that which has risen also, be able to obtain all the education that heart can wish, and that which will be well pleasing to God."—Ibid., p. 54.
[^49] See the statement by Dr. John Stafford, in The Saints Herald (Plano, Illinois), XI, p. 167.
[^50] Oramus Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris Reserve (Rochester, 1852), p. 214. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter two entitled "Educational Opportunities of Joseph Smith."
[^51] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith By His Mother (Salt Lake City, 1954), p. 82.
[^52] Ibid.
[^53] See Ray B. West, Jr., Kingdom of the Saints (New York, 1957), p. 61.
[^54] A study of Joseph Smith's journal gives evidence of his interest and activities. Among the many references to his study of grammar, he wrote:
[^55] HC, V, p. 340.
[^56] TS, III (December 15, 1841), p. 631.
[^57] D&C 130:18-19.
[^58] HC, V, p. 499.
[^59] Letter of Oliver Cowdery, written at Kirtland, Ohio, to Dr. S. Avard, December 15, 1835, in Cowdery Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, California.
[^60] HC, II, p. 357.
[^61] Oration Delivered by Mr. Sidney Rigdon on the 4th of July, 1838 (Far West, Missouri, 1838), pp. 9-10.
[^62] Preface to his Key to Theology.
[^63] JD, XII, p. 325.
[^64] Ibid., pp. 325-326. The alternatives he proposed will be discussed in greater detail in the next volume of this work.
[^65] HC, II, p. 8. For a discussion of the Prophet's views on this point, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter four entitled "Faith Leads to Knowledge," the section in chapter six entitled "Channel of Divine Truth," the section in chapter nine entitled "Spirit of Revelation," and the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Purposes Of The Second Comforter."
[^66] Having spoken of knowledge acquired through Christ in accordance with the gospel plan, Joseph Smith said of the principle of revelation and its several facets of expression:
[^67] Moses 6:52.
[^68] Moses 8:24.
[^69] Mormon 9:21. See the verses which follow this statement for further testimony, admonition, and caution on this subject.
[^70] HC, VI, p. 78.
[^71] Ibid., p. 308.
[^72] Ibid., IV, p. 425.
[^73] Ibid., VI, p. 51.
[^74] D&C 93:36. The details of the program Joseph Smith marked out by which man could obtain truth by revelation from God has been treated in the preceding volume of this study. See, in particular, chapters three through fourteen.
[^75] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter five entitled "The Divine Nature of God."
[^76] D&C 93:19-20, 28.
[^77] HC, VI, p. 77.
[^78] Ibid., II, p. 23.
[^79] D&C 50:24.
[^80] D&C 93:12-17.
[^81] D&C 93:19-20.
[^82] D&C 93:21-22, 26-28.
[^83] D&C 93:37-40. The great principles enunciated in this revelation were stated in another divine communication which dealt with man's acquisition of the divine nature of God. "My voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound," it declared. "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things."—D&C 88:66-67. To the end that the Saints might be filled with light and truth, the revelation then admonished them to sanctify themselves that their minds might "become single to God." In this way they could finally penetrate the veil of this fallen spiritual state and see God, and partake of His glory.
[^84] D&C 131:6.
[^85] D&C 131:5.
[^86] See D&C 76:67. The Lord stated concerning those who will be made celestial in the resurrection: "These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn." Prior to the resurrection, they must have made sure their calling and election to celestial glory and communed with those who dwell in the presence of God.
[^87] HC, V, p. 387.
[^88] Ibid., p. 389. In another statement where he declared that "knowledge is the power of salvation," Joseph Smith spoke of man's making sure his calling and election to celestial glory by acquiring "all things that pertain unto life and godliness." "How did he obtain all things?" he inquired. Then he answered: "Through the knowledge of Him who hath called him. There could not anything be given, pertaining to life and godliness, without knowledge."—Ibid., pp. 402-403.
[^89] D&C 88:118.
[^90] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fourteen entitled "Way to All Truth."
[^91] D&C 90:15.
[^92] D&C 93:53.
[^93] D&C 25:8.
[^94] He declared that if men do not comprehend God and their relationship to diety, "they know but little above the brute beast, or more than to eat, drink and sleep." Without comprehending God, the Prophet declared that men "do not comprehend themselves." HC, VI, p. 303.
[^95] D&C 93:53.
[^96] HC, VI, p. 206. See this point in light of his efforts to develop schools for the instruction of the priesthood and the Saints in general.
[^97] D&C 88:77.
[^98] D&C 88:80.
[^99] HC, V, pp. 387-389.
[^100] Ibid., p. 340.
[^101] Curti, The Growth of American Thought, pp. 267-270.
[^102] William Warren Sweet, Revivalism in America: Its Origin, Growth and Decline (New York, 1945), p. 116.
[^103] D&C 55:4.
[^104] D&C 57:11-13.
[^105] HC, I, p. 196.
[^106] The Colesville School was the first school established within the present boundaries of Kansas City. See the article by the Missouri Valley Historical Association, in the Kansas City Star, September 12, 1932.
[^107] Journal History, January 24, 1832.
[^108] The Evening And The Morning Star, I (June, 1832), p. 6. See also HC, I, pp. 276-277.
[^109] Ibid., II (July, 1833), p. 214.
[^110] D&C 124:95.
[^111] D&C 124:39.
[^112] HC, IV, p. 604.
[^113] D&C 90:7.
[^114] D&C 90:8. See also D&C 88:117-137; HC, I, p. 342; II, pp. 169, 175-176; JD, XII, pp. 157-159.
[^115] D&C 88:137.
