Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

10

The Social Order of Zion

They shall call thee, The City of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.—ISAIAH.

Joseph Smith began to build the new society by laying out cities of Zion as habitations for the Saints, beginning with the City of Zion at the Center Place of Zion—Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. [^1] This central city, with its associated cities or stakes, was also called the New Jerusalem. [^2] The Saints, blessed with the enlightening influence of the Holy Spirit, were expected to build this new social order as a divine system in which all truth woud be gathered to Zion, integrated into the gospel, and raised to a spiritual plane. Charles W. Penrose wrote that under these circumstances, the Saints in the last days would "progress in arts, sciences, and everything that will produce happiness, promote union, and establish them in strength, righteousness, and everlasting peace." [^3]

The Nature And Design Of The New Jerusalem

The Scope of the New Jerusalem

The New Jerusalem was not to be one great city, but a network of small municipalities called cities of Zion, organized administratively under the direction of the councils of the priesthood at the Center Place of Zion, in Jackson County, Missouri. Some early reports of the Prophet's activities give insight into the territory which the New Jerusalem was expected to occupy. When converts were made in northeastern Ohio and John Whitmer was sent to preside over the new churches, the Painesville Telegraph said of his arrival there: "The more important part of the mission was to inform the brethren that the boundaries of the promised land, or the New Jerusalem, had just been made known to Smith from God—the township of Kirtland, a few miles west of this, is the eastern line and the Pacific Ocean is the western line; if the north and south lines have been described, we have not learned them." [^4]

Unfortunately, this statement does not give more specific details on the size and expanse of the New Jerusalem. Joseph Smith later announced that "the whole of America is Zion itself from north to south." [^5] But what his declaration meant in regard to the size of the New Jerusalem, as a great complex of cities of Zion, was not made clear.

The Aspirations to Build Beautiful Cities

The vision of Zion stimulated in the Saints the desire to build beautiful homes and communities. Their work in building up Zion, as Brigham Young saw it, was to be accomplished "by building cities and temples, redeeming countries from the solitude of nature," until the earth was prepared for the "residence of God and angels." [^6] If the "enemies of truth" would let the Saints alone, he said,

We will show them the most civil community—a community farther advanced in the arts of refinement than any other upon the earth. We will show them men and women the most profound in learning, and mechanics the most expert and ingenious. We will show them men endowed with the most brilliant natural talent and the most wisdom that can be found in the world. [^7]

Other associates of the Prophet repeated the views that he gave to the Saints. In a notable statement, John Taylor said:

We believe that we shall rear splendid edifices, magnificent temples and beautiful cities that shall become the pride, praise and glory of the whole earth. We believe that this people will excel in literature, in science and the arts and in manufactures. In fact, there will be a concentration of wisdom, not only of the combined wisdom of the world as it now exists, but men will be inspired in regard to all these matters in a manner and to an extent that they never have been before, and we shall have eventually, when the Lord's purposes are carried out, the most magnificent buildings, the most costly clothing, and be the most healthy and the most intellectual people that will reside upon the earth. This is part and parcel of our faith. . . . This is only a faint outline of some of our views in relation to these things, and hence we talk of returning to Jackson county to build the most magnificent temple that ever was formed on the earth and the most splendid city that was ever erected; yea, cities, if you please. The architectural designs of those splendid edifices, cities, walls, gardens, bowers, streets, &c., will be under the direction of the Lord, who will control and manage all these matters; and the people, from the President down, will all be under the guidance and direction of the Lord in all the pursuits of human life, until eventually they will be enabled to erect cities that will be fit to be caught up—that when Zion descends from above, Zion will also ascend from beneath, and be prepared to associate with those from above. The people will be so perfected and purified, ennobled, exalted, and dignified in their feelings and so truly humble and most worthy, virtuous and intelligent that they will be fit, when caught up, to associate with that Zion that shall come down from God out of heaven. This is the idea, in brief, that we have entertained in relation to many of these things. [^8]

The City of Zion, in particular, would be a place of beauty and splendor. It would, Brigham Young declared, "outstrip anything that is now known upon the earth." [^9] Said John Taylor: "Zion will become the praise of the whole earth; and as the Queen of Sheba said anciently, touching the glory of Solomon, the half of it had not been told her, so it will be in regard to Israel in their dwelling places." [^10]

The Plat of the City of Zion

On date of June 25, 1833, the First Presidency at Kirtland, Ohio, sent a drawing to their brethren in Missouri setting forth the design of the City of Zion which was to be built at Independence, the Center Place of Zion. [^11] Apparently the Prophet was shown the basic plan in vision. In reporting the proceedings of the General Conference held April 6, 1837, Wilford Woodruff said of Joseph Smith:

He . . . presented us in some degree with the plot of the city of Kirtland, which is the stronghold of the Daughter of Zion. The plan which he presented was given to him by vision, and the future will prove that the visions of Joseph concerning Jackson County [Missouri], all the various stakes of Zion and of the redemption of Israel will be fulfilled in the time appointed of the Lord. [^12]

The explanation which was sent with the plat of the City of Zion stated that the land area of the city was to be one square mile, and that all city blocks (except for a middle row) were to "contain ten acres each, being forty rods square." Each regular block was to contain twenty lots of one-half acre each—66 feet in front by 330 back. The city was "to contain from fifteen to twenty thousand people." [^13]

In one respect the lots were unique in their arrangements. They were to be "laid off alternately" in the regular blocks. In one block the lots would run "from the south and north to the line through the center" of the block; and in the next, the lots would "run from the east and west to the center line." Thus no one street would be built on entirely through the street; but in one block the houses would stand on one street, and in the next block on another street. [^14]

The blocks in the middle range were to be an exception in some respects. In size, they were to be forty rods by sixty, making each block fifteen acres in size. The three center blocks of the city, of fifteen acres each, were to be used for municipal buildings. The remaining blocks on each side in the middle range were each to be divided into thirty residential lots. These lots, however, were not to be laid off alternately like the regular blocks, but all of them were to run north and south.

All streets were to be eight rods wide—one hundred thirty-two feet—and each street was to be straight and to intersect on the square. No lot in the city was "to contain more than one house," which was "to be built of brick or stone" and set back twenty-five feet "from the street, leaving a small yard in front, to be planted in a grove, according to the taste of the builder." The remaining portion of the lot was to be used for gardens. [^15]

With the general residential area arranged so that no two houses faced each other across the street (except those in the middle range of blocks), members of each family within the city could enjoy a daily retreat by returning to the quiet of their home and gardens while retaining all the conveniences of urban life. Limiting the size of each city to twenty thousand people would also eliminate congestion and the many and varied problems of large municipalities.

The land immediately north and south of the city, one block in depth, was to be kept as non-residential areas, presumably for city parks or playgrounds. Next to this on the north and south sides the land was "to be laid off for barns, stables, etc., for the use of the city." There would therefore be no barns or stables in the city among the houses. "The ground to be occupied for these," the instructions stated, "must be laid off according to wisdom." [^16]

North and south of the city the land was to be laid off as "farms for the agriculturist, and sufficient quantity of land to supply the whole plot." If sufficient land could not be laid off by going too great a distance from the city, there was to be some laid off on the east and west. [^17] Presumably, when cities were built in industrial areas, industries would also be located outside the city. The city was to be a residential area, with the means of support for its inhabitants located outside their living area.

The City Center Complex

The three blocks in the center of the City of Zion were for public buildings, making a total complex which covered forty-five acres. Upon the center block of the city and the block immediately south of it, consisting each of fifteen acres, two great temple complexes were to be built. The central complex was to be for the use of the presidential offices and functions of the priesthood in Zion. The complex south of this block was to be for the offices and functions of the lesser priesthood, excluding those of the Bishop in Zion whose office was in the center complex. The third block of fifteen acres, north of the central one, was to be "for store-houses for the Bishop, . . . to be devoted to his use." [^18] From there the central functions of the united order of Zion were to be administered.

Since Zion was to be a great priesthood order, or system, designed to perfect the Saints and enable them to provide for the fulfilment of every legitimate human need, the administrative functions of the Center Place of Zion were to be carried on in a complex of temples built according to the proper order. The priesthood, arranged in its several orders and offices, was to send forth the law of God through a living prophet to govern all the Saints in Zion.

The center block of the City of Zion was to consist of a complex of twelve temples. The three temples on the west side of the block (numbered 10, 11, and 12 on the plat) were to house the central administrative offices and functions of the priesthood in Zion. Together, these temples made up one unit of the center complex and were called, "House of the Lord, for the Presidency of the High and most Holy Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of the Son of God, upon Mount Zion, City of the New Jerusalem." [^19]

East of these buildings were to be three more temples (numbered 7, 8, and 9 on the plat) comprising a second unit in the central complex, called "The Sacred Apostolic Repository, for the use of the Bishop." [^20]

Next to these buildings on the east three more temples were to be constructed (numbered 4, 5, and 6 on the plat) to make up a third unit in the central complex, called "The Holy Evangelical House, for the High Priesthood of the Holy Order of God." [^21]

Finally, on the east side of the center block three temples were to be built (numbered 1, 2, and 3 on the plat) comprising a unit called "The House of the Lord, for the Elders of Zion, an Ensign to the Nations." [^22]

The block south of the center block in the City of Zion was also to consist of a complex of twelve temples. The three temples on the west side of this block (numbered 22, 23, and 24 on the plat) comprised a separate unit called, "House of the Lord for the Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the Order of Aaron, a Standard for the People." [^23]

East of this unit, three temples were to make another segment of the complex (numbered 19, 20, and 21 on the plat). This unit was to be designated, "House of the Lord, the Law of the Kingdom of Heaven, and Messenger to the People; for the Highest Priesthood after the Order of Aaron." [^24]

Next to this unit on the east, three more temples were to be constructed (numbered 16, 17, and 18 on the plat), called, "House of the Lord for the Teachers in Zion, Messenger to the Church." [^25]

Finally, on the east side of the block another row of temples was to be built. These three edifices (numbered 13, 14, and 15 on the plat) formed a unit which was to be called, "House of the Lord for the Deacons in Zion, Helps in Government." [^26]

Under the name of each unit of temples in the two great complexes was to be written:

HOLINESS TO THE LORD [^27]

This was the City of Zion, the Center Place of the New Jerusalem. All things within this great administrative center were to be raised to a spiritual plane and made holy by the powers and the program of the restored gospel.

The Cities of Zion

Besides the City of Zion, other cities of Zion were to be built as part of the great network of communities within the New Jerusalem. Having described the plat of the City of Zion, Joseph Smith wrote: "When this square [i. e., city] is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days." [^28] When the Prophet laid off a city of Zion, he stated that within it the Saints were to "be organized according to the laws of God." [^29] This meant that a stake presidency, high council, and bishop would administer the ecclesiastical affairs of the Saints and their social and economic programs in the city. [^30] Economically, it would be established on the law of consecration and stewardship. City lots would be delegated to heirs, and the religious and social programs of Zion would be put into operation. Implicit in this master plan was an evident awareness of the needs of man in an on-going and complex society. There were also implied insights into the social relations of men in regard to such matters as education, recreation, industry, and agriculture.

Though the general plan was given to Joseph Smith by revelation, all cities were not necessarily to be laid out in identical form. Orson Pratt reasoned that the Lord was "not confined to an exact pattern" in such matters any more than He was "confined in the creation of worlds to make them all of the same size. . . . There is variation as much as there is in the human form," he continued. "There are general outlines that are common to all, but did you ever see two faces alike among all the millions of the human family?" [^31] So it would be in the building of cities of Zion.

The same principle applied to temples. When Brigham Young inquired of God if the Saints were to "build all temples after the same pattern," he was told: "Do you all build your houses after the same pattern used when your family is small? So shall the growth of the knowledge of the principles of the Gospel among my people cause diversity in the pattern of temples." [^32]

Though the cities of Zion had many of the general features of the central community which Joseph Smith planned to build at Independence, Missouri,—the town site of one square mile, divided by streets running at right angels into regular blocks, except for the large public square in the center of town—they were not identical in their form or municipal arrangement to the Center Place of Zion. The City of Zion was to be an administrative center, and the ultimate design was to gather together all things within the total program of the New Jerusalem and place them under the law to be sent forth from that great center. [^33] For this reason the City of Zion had features which were distinct from other cities of Zion which the Prophet laid out and sought to build.

One difference between the City of Zion and its associated communities was the size and nature of their temple complexes. Though each subordinate city was to have an administrative center, which included a temple, a storehouse, and other facilities, these were designed only to serve the needs of the given community, while the administrative center of the City of Zion was for the whole system. The temple lot at Adam-ondi-Ahman, for example, was said to cover four acres, [^34] compared to the forty-five acre complex in the City of Zion.

In May, 1833, Joseph Smith was instructed by revelation to begin organizing "the city of the stake of Zion . . . in the land of Kirtland . . . according to the pattern" which he received from the Lord, beginning at the temple site. [^35] Kirtland was referred to as the "first fruits of the cities which the Lord has begun to build unto himself in these last days." [^36] Far West was laid out in Caldwell County, Missouri, in the summer of 1836. [^37] In May, 1838, the Prophet designated the site for the city of Adam-ondi-Ahman, in Daviess County, Missouri, twenty-five miles north of Far West, on the north side of the Grand River. [^38] On September 1 of that year, he appointed the site for still another city of Zion about half-way between Far West and Adam-ondi-Ahman, which was probably named Seth. [^39] Like other cities of Zion, this was eventually to be a city of refuge for the Saints "from the storm which will soon come upon this generation," the latter-day Seer observed, "and that the brethren may be together, and that they may receive instructions to prepare them for that great day which will come upon this generation as a thief in the night." [^40]

Nauvoo

By the time the Saints began to build up Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1839, they had shown their reluctance freely to apply the economic law of Zion, and there was no serious effort made to establish the city on the law of consecration and stewardship. Their failure significantly altered their program. Yet many other elements of Zion's law were implemented at Nauvoo. In addition, Joseph Smith developed new features of the divine system among the Saints, particularly some which pertained to the divine patriarchal order. It was also true that some programs at Nauvoo were developed to meet the practical needs of the time in establishing a place of gathering for the Church and a headquarters for its program. For these reasons Nauvoo was not significant in every way as a complete and accurate reflection of Joseph Smith's thought on the kingdom of God.

One significant thing was the political system which Joseph Smith set up at Nauvoo. This was not necessarily the ideal municipal plan of a city of Zion under the government of God, but it did reflect the Prophet's thought in the field of city organization. Though he apparently used the charter of the city of Springfield, Illinois, as a basic format for the Nauvoo Charter, [^41] he made such changes and additions that he could appropriately say:

The City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party. [^42]

The political aspects of the Prophet's thought will be treated in a later chapter.

Benefits of Urban Living

In describing the City of Zion as the basic pattern for all other cities of Zion, Joseph Smith counselled: "Let every man live in the city, for this is the city of Zion." [^43] Under the new system, farmers, artisans, professional men, businessmen, and teachers were to share the cultural aspects of their respective vocations with each other.

But more than this, only in such an order could every person have an equal opportunity to acquire the blessings of education and cultural refinement. The Prophet held that it was necessary to lay the foundation of society on correct principles, otherwise flaws and deficiencies would appear as the superstructure was raised which would curtail the ability of the system to offer equal blessings and privileges to all its members. The gathering of the Saints "into the Cities appointed," therefore, was viewed as a major factor in the achievement of social equality and justice. This achievement, Sidney Rigdon explained, was "the object for which the saints are gathered together." [^44]

Equal opportunities for education were chief among the advantages in such an order of things. "As intelligence is the great object of our holy religion, it is of all things important, that we should place ourselves in the best situation possible to obtain it," President Rigdon reasoned. "And we wish it to be deeply impressed on the minds of all, that to obtain all the knowledge which the circumstances of man will admit of, is one of the principle objects the saints have in gathering together." Their purpose for doing so was obvious. "Education can only be obtained by living in compact society," he said; "so compact, that schools of all kinds can be supported, and that while we are supporting schools, we, without any exception, can be benefited thereby." [^45] Indeed, to obtain equal opportunities for education, "compact society is absolutely necessary: it cannot be obtained without it, at most only by the few, to the exclusion of the many; which is a principle at war with the principles of the church of Christ; for the principle of the church is, that what one has, all have; and equal privileges must be granted to all, or else it is not the church of Christ." [^46]

This was a strong, but consistent, statement, based upon the underlying principles of Zion's social order. [^47] President Rigdon therefore suggested that if the Saints neglected "to do their duty in this matter," they would be "found transgressors." Those who refused to see that society had to be established on a correct foundation to provide a proper basis for achieving social equality and justice, or who failed to act accordingly, would be held responsible before God for the fruits of their negligence. He concluded: "Let parents then see to it, that they deprive not their children of their just rights, by not complying with this order." [^48]

Education In Zion

The Prophet's Interest in Education

With but a meagre formal education, supplemented by Bible study in the home [^49] and activity in a local debating club where "some portentous questions of moral or political ethics" were discussed, [^50] Joseph Smith developed a vital interest in education. His mother stated that by nature he was "given to meditation and deep study"; [^51] and though "he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books" than his brothers and sisters, [^52] he had an insatiable thirst for knowledge. When asked how the Prophet fared in his study of English grammar in a school which he himself had started, one of his teachers replied: "Joseph was the calf that sucked three cows. He acquired knowledge very rapidly." [^53]

The Prophet placed great emphasis upon the need to acquire knowledge. [^54] "Knowledge does away with darkness, suspense and doubt," he affirmed; "for these cannot exist where knowledge is." But more than this, he explained: "In knowledge there is power." As a case in point, he said: "God has more power than all other beings, because he has greater knowledge; and hence he knows how to subject all other beings to Him. He has power over all." [^55] The Saints stressed this point as they announced the curriculum of the newly established University of the City of Nauvoo: "Knowledge is power—a finished education always gives an influence in cultivated society, which neither wealth nor station can impart or contain." [^56]

There were also long-range purposes for acquiring truth and improving self in all spheres of human endeavor. Man was an eternal entity. Earth life had purpose and consequences. And acquisitions acquired here would yield benefits beyond this life. "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection," Joseph Smith wrote in a revelation. "And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." [^57]

Such views on the acquisition of knowledge caused Joseph Smith to declare that "one of the grand fundamental principles" of the system he introduced was "to receive truth, let it come from whence it may." [^58] In a similar spirit, Oliver Cowdery wrote in 1835: "I am a lover of science, and admire a spirit to learn and a disposition to teach, and I can bear the same testimony concerning the heads of the church. I believe the day is not far distant when this church will be inferior to no society in our country, in point of intelligence, learning and science." [^59] The Prophet looked for the day to come, when Zion became universal, when the earth would "be filled with sacred knowledge, as the waters cover the great deep." [^60]

A New Synthesis of Knowledge

But Joseph Smith did more than encourage a general interest in the many facets of education; he set the mold for a distinctly new approach to learning. Since Zion was to be a new society, resting upon regenerating truths and spiritual powers not before given to modern man, new and exalting relationships were to be developed in the home, in the economy, and in the social spheres of life. This meant that Zion represented a new synthesis—the combination of separate and subordinate elements of thought into a new form, a new whole—in which all known truth would be integrated into the supreme truth of Christ, and be exalted and sanctified by His divine power.

Consistent with this approach, Joseph Smith's philosophy of education suggested the need, first, for a practical program to assist the Saints to acquire divine truth by revelation through the Holy Spirit; and, second, for a program to promote learning by human reason and analysis, and to integrate that knowledge into the central core of spiritually acquired truth. On the basis that the Saints would follow this approach, the Prophet encouraged them to seek for and acquire knowledge in all fields of inquiry.

Sidney Rigdon expressed the Latter-day Saint philosophy of education in an address, July 4, 1838, at the cornerstone ceremony of the temple which the Saints planned to build at Far West, Missouri: "The object of our religion is to make us more intelligent, to make men better by making them wiser; more useful, by making them more intelligent; not intelligent on subjects only, but on all subjects, on which intelligence can be obtained." But there had to be a proper approach to true and complete learning. Human means alone would not suffice. "One part of the house shall be set apart for a place of worship, where we shall invoke our God for revelations, when we have gone as far as human skill can carry us," he stated, "that by revelations, visions, etc., we may fill the vacuum still left, after science and philosophy have done all they can do: so that we may have that understanding and that wisdom which brings salvation, and that knowledge which is unto eternal life." Continuing, he explained:

When science fails, revelation supplies its place, and unfolds the secrets and mysteries of the unseen world, leads the mind into knowledge of the future existence of man, makes it acquainted with angels, principalities, and powers, in the eternal world; carries it into heaven and heavenly places, makes it acquainted with God, its Redeemer, and its associates in the eternal mansions; so that when science fails, and philosophy vanishes away, revelation, more extensive in its operations, begins where they end, and feasts the mind with intelligence, pure and holy, from the presence of God—tells of eternal mansions, of immortal glories, of everlasting dominions, of angelic throngs, of heavenly hosts, of flaming seraphs, of crowns of glory, of palms of victory, of the saints' eternal triumph through a glorious resurrection, of songs of everlasting joy, of God the Father of all, of Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. [^61]

Knowledge acquired by human reason and analysis alone could not save man, either here or in the world to come, but such knowledge merged with the greater truth of Christ received by revelation was a vital means of giving man eternal life. In the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, all things were to be gathered together in Christ. It was not sufficient merely to inject some of the teachings of Christ into man-made disciplines or schools of thought leaving their basic assumptions unmodified or their essential elements unregenerated by the power of the Holy Spirit. Ultimately it was the task of squaring all things with divine truth and elevating man and society into the presence of God.

The Saints were aware that theirs was a revolutionary age, requiring an upgrading of the spiritual sphere of life and a new synthesis of knowledge. "A new era has dawned upon our planet," Parley P. Pratt wrote, "and is advancing with accelerated force—with giant strides." [^62] In speaking of the progress being made in the sciences and arts, Brigham Young said:

Do you think the Lord Almighty will reveal the great improvements in the arts and sciences which are being constantly made known and will not revive a pure religion? If any man imagines that with the mighty strides which the sciences have been making for a few years past, there will be no improvement in religion that man is vain in is imagination. God will improve the religion of the nations of the earth in proportion to the improvement made in the sciences. This is true whether you believe it or not. The Lord has commenced the work, and it is a marvelous one. [^63]

Advancement in spiritual and moral excellence would become universal only as man voluntarily accepted the regenerating program of the restored gospel. Let the world reject the divine message and its uplifting program, President Young asserted, and the people would eventually degenerate morally and spiritually "to heathenism." "But," he concluded, "let them favor, foster, nourish and cherish them, and the sciences will advance with double strides from what they have hitherto." [^64] The renewing and inspiring energy which men would receive from God through the restored gospel would make it so.

The Place of Divine Truth

The heart of the new synthesis was the truth regarding God and man's relationship to Him which every faithful soul could receive by personal revelation, as he applied the principles and ordinances of the gospel in his life. Ultimately, that divine plan was designed to bring each up-reaching soul into the presence of God to partake of the revelations and visions which pertained to the Second Comforter. Joseph Smith explained: "We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker, and is caught up to dwell with Him." [^65]

Though many did not believe that the gospel program constituted a valid means of acquiring knowledge, [^66] Joseph Smith held that it was the greatest source of truth opened to mortal man. In a revelation, the Lord affirmed that a man of faith who received the gift of the Holy Ghost could ask "all things" in the name of Christ, that whatsoever he asked would be given unto him, [^67] and that he could have "all things made manifest" unto him. [^68] The prophet Moroni therefore declared: "Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth." [^69]

The Prophet himself was an example of the application of this divine program. "I . . . have heard the voice of God, and communed with angels," he affirmed, "and spake as moved by the Holy Ghost for the renewal of the everlasting covenant, and for the gathering of Israel in the last days." [^70] From these sources he acquired great insight and knowledge. "I am learned, and know more than all the world put together," he proclaimed. "The Holy Ghost does, anyhow, and He is within me, and comprehends more than all the world; and I will associate myself with Him." [^71] Because this channel of knowledge and that of the Second Comforter were realities, the latter-day Seer said: "The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teachings." [^72] Speaking on the subject of personal revelation, he stressed: "I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances [i. e., by the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, etc.], and in answer to prayer." [^73]

The Program of Divine Truth

In classic declarations, Joseph Smith expressed the underlying philosophy of the divine plan by which man could receive truth from God. A major statement was given by revelation in 1833, the heart of which declared: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." [^74]

Taken in the context of the revelation, this statement meant that the glory of God—the divine nature of God which, when made manifest, is like circling flames of fire—consisted essentially of a concentration of divine intelligence, or of truth and light, to a point of brilliance which would eclipse the light of the sun at noonday. [^75] But aside from this vital insight, an important message of the revelation stressed that through the program of the gospel a mortal man of faith could begin to acquire the divine intelligence which constituted God's glory and, finally, be glorified in truth to know all things in the resurrection. [^76]

Here was a way to acquire truth, Joseph Smith explained to a prominent easterner, "that as far exceeds the calculations of numbers as the sun exceeds a candle." [^77] Nor was this program bounded by mortal restrictions. The intelligence of an unregenerated man might remain relatively constant throughout his life, but not necessarily the intelligence of those who received, through the gospel, the divine attributes and powers which led to glorification. The Prophet explained that there was "a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart." [^78] That divine principle of intelligence, or of truth and light, could grow "brighter and brighter until the perfect day" when the recipient received a fulness of the glory of God. [^79]

Jesus set the example. The major revelation cited above explained that He did not possess the full glory of the Father at first, but that He applied the principles required to receive divine truth and light until He was finally endowed with a fulness of the intelligence and power of the Man of Holiness. [^80] Through Christ, man was challenged to do the same, until he was glorified in Christ, as Christ was glorified in His Father. [^81] Having set forth this great objective, Jesus said to the Prophet:

I was in the beginning with the Father [in pre-earth life], and am the Firstborn;

And all those who are begotten through me [by subscribing to the articles of adoption in which they become the sons and daughters of Christ] are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the church of the Firstborn. . . .

The Spirit of truth is of God. [Being the source of this intelligent substance for man,] I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth;

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. [^82]

This divine method of obtaining truth by revelation demanded more than an intellectual effort by man. He had to forsake evil and conform his life to the principles of eternal truth through a sincere upward reach to God and through obedience. It required the exertion of the whole soul, a reaching up from the depths of man's being, until the proper connection was formed. Assisted by the legal rights to revelation which were given through the covenants and ordinances of the gospel, man would then begin to learn by faith. In a final statement in the above revelation, the Lord explained these points and instructed the Saints in the course they were to follow:

Light and truth forsake that evil one.

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again in their infant [mortal] state, innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the traditions of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. [^83]

In another statement quoted repeatedly among the Saints, Joseph Smith stressed man's need to obtain divine truth through the processes of the gospel plan: "It is impossible to be saved in ignorance." [^84]

In context, this statement had reference to the man of faith who finally received the knowledge that he was "sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood." [^85] The Prophet seems to have held that unless such knowledge was received before the resurrection, man could not be saved in the celestial kingdom of God. [^86]

"The principle of knowledge is the principle of salvation," Joseph Smith said of man's challenge to make sure his calling and election to celestial glory and power. "Every one that does not obtain knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned." The salvation to which he referred was given "through the knowledge of Jesus Christ." [^87] Again he affirmed: "Then knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven"—"that unlocks the heavens and puts in our possession the glories of the celestial world." [^88]

Obtaining knowledge by revelation demanded more mature faith than many of the Saints possessed. For this reason the Lord instructed them to begin on a lesser spiritual plane and employ the processes of intellectual analysis as well as the faith they could exert. "And as all have not faith," He directed, "seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." [^89] Through the correct use of intellectual processes, man could acquire evidence and knowledge which would strengthen and build his faith, and thus aid him in obtaining knowledge through the greater avenues of revelation. Properly combined, true study and faith could bring man to a knowledge of eternal truths.

The Place of Secular Truth

Since the gospel of Christ reached out and encompassed all truth, [^90] the statements that man could not be saved in ignorance, and that the glory of God is intelligence, extended of necessity to all spheres of truth. Consequently they each gave the Saints impetus to increase their knowledge in other than spiritual spheres.

The Prophet and his counselors were told specifically to "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." [^91] Again, the Lord said to them: "It is my will that you should . . . obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man." [^92] In the same vein of thought and purpose, Emma Smith was told that her time was to "be given to writing, and to learning much." [^93]

There were practical reasons why the Saints were to increase their knowledge of secular things. Of itself and purely for itself such knowledge had little lasting value. The Prophet held that in the final analysis there was nothing particularly honorable about an educated heathen. [^94] But placed in proper perspective and given proper relationship to divine truth, secular knowledge had great purpose and significance. Knowledge in the areas mentioned in the preceding paragraph was to be procured, a revelation explained, "for the salvation of Zion." [^95]

The Prophet also sought to develop "a learned Priesthood." [^96] In addition to teaching "one another the doctrines of the kingdom," the brethren were instructed to obtain knowledge "of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms." [^97] With the benefits which would come from being an enlightened people, knowledge of these things would aid them to teach the gospel to the nations and peoples of the earth. Having enjoined the Saints to gain knowledge of the above things, the revelation continued: ". . . that ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." [^98]

Educational Programs

Kinds of Programs

The educational program Joseph Smith sought to develop among the Saints reflected to a degree his vision of the social order of Zion. He expressed the view that all knowledge is not of equal value. The knowledge of some kinds of truth unlocked the heavens and put man in possession of "the glories of the celestial world." [^99] By contrast, he spoke of "correct (though useless) knowledge" which one might have to acquire in order not to be ignorant of it, and to prevent contentions in such areas. [^100] Other knowledge man was to obtain primarily for the sake of getting along in the world. Finally, the Saints were to obtain some knowledge and skills in order more effectively to disseminate the saving truths of the gospel and to build up Zion.

Though the Prophet was not able to develop the full educational system of Zion, some basic points can be suggested on the basis of what he established. First, there were to be various educational programs suited to the needs and circumstances of the people. Second, instruction in all of those programs was to be within the framework of the spiritual and moral elements of the restored gospel of Christ. Third, there was to be a program at the apex of the new educational system to teach and apply the divine principles by which the Saints could learn by revelation and vision of the things of God. Finally, the latter program, in particular, was to have its center in the temple of God. And men, having been taught the doctrine and order of the kingdom, were to teach those things to their families, in their homes. The central program of Zion's educational system sprang from the divine patriarchal order, and all aspects of the educational system were to be auxiliary to the home.

Early Efforts in Education

After organizing the Church in 1830, Joseph Smith gave much of his time and energy to the cause of education, both in acquiring the benefits of education himself and in developing programs by which the Saints could do likewise. This was not easy. Along with the task of marking out a new approach to life and setting the mold of a new society, the Prophet was confronted with the opposing forces of frontier and semi-frontier conditions and backward, antagonistic neighbors. Considering all the factors involved, his was a herculean task. Merle Curti notes that "Almost overwhelming obstacles . . . stood in the way of the growth of formal intellectual life in the early West." These obstacles included "inadequate communications, the sparseness of population, the lack of homogenous backgrounds on the part of the settlers in a given community, the great numbers of illiterate or semi-literate people that sought the new country, [and] the anti-intellectualism of great numbers of plain folk and some preachers." Of these deterring factors, the latter was probably the most significant. [^101]

Owing to the circumstances and challenges which confronted new settlers in the West, Horace Bushnell said:

The first generation can hardly be said to have lived. They let go life, threw it away, for the benefit of the generations to come after them. . . . Whatever men or family removed to any new country . . . made a large remove . . . toward barbarism. [^102]

Though limited himself in formal education, the Prophet began early to develop educational programs among the Saints which reflected his philosophy of learning. In June, 1831, Oliver Cowdery and William W. Phelps were appointed to select and write books for schools in the Church. [^103] Shortly after this appointment, these brethren went with Joseph Smith to dedicate Missouri as the land of Zion, and to begin the work of establishing the Saints in the New Jerusalem where Elder Phelps was instructed to set up a printing press. [^104] On the second day of August, the Prophet and his associates participated in ceremonies with the Colesville Branch of the Church—which consisted of about sixty members who had a few days earlier arrived in Jackson County, Missouri—in laying "the first log, for a house, as a foundation in Zion, in Kaw township." [^105] This building was to be used for worship and for a school. [^106]

These efforts continued as the Saints gathered to Missouri. In January, 1832, members of the new faith met in conference in Jackson County and "proceeded to take into consideration the subject of schools." After "deliberate discussion," the resolution was passed unanimously: "That this conference appoint Brothers Oliver Cowdery, William W. Phelps and John Corrill to superintend schools in the churches in this land." [^107] When their printing press was established later that year, the Saints gave further emphasis to the cause of education. "The disciples should lose no time in preparing schools for their children," the editor wrote in the first number of The Evening And The Morning Star, "that they may be taught as is pleasing to the Lord, and brought up in the way of holiness." [^108] Noting some failures among the rapidly increasing population of Saints in Missouri, the editor of the Star wrote again in July of the succeeding year:

Brethren, if you want your children to be useful, industrious, temperate, humane, meek and charitable, teach them so; if you want them to be prayerful, watchful, and godly, teach them so, and if you want them saved in the celestial kingdom, teach them faithfully the doctrines of that kingdom, and they will soon come to the day, that they will grow up without sin unto salvation, and walk with God where the wicked will not trouble. [^109]

The School of the Prophets

The central program in Zion's educational system—the apex of the total structure—was called the School of the Prophets. The primary objective of this program, as stated earlier, was to teach the brethren the divine principles and processes by which they could receive personal revelation from God and enter, eventually, into His presence to partake of His glory. The temple was to be a most holy place, where the Saints might receive instruction necessary to "ask and receive" the things of God, [^110] or instruction by which they could "receive conversations." [^111] Joseph Smith therefore spoke of "delivering the keys of the Priesthood" to worthy Saints, in the house of the Lord, that those whose integrity had "been tried and proved faithful, might know how to ask the Lord and receive an answer." [^112]

Certain pertinent facts reveal the nature and purpose of the School of the Prophets: First, the school was a sacred priesthood program whose keys centered in the First Presidency. [^113]

Second, it was organized so that its members might "be perfected in their ministry for the salvation of Zion, and of the nations of Israel, and of the Gentiles, as many as will believe." [^114]

Third, the spiritual powers of the gospel were to be manifested prominently in the school. "Ye are called to do this [i.e., meet in the school] by prayer and thanksgiving, as the Spirit shall give utterance in all your doings in the house of the Lord, in the school of the prophets," the Lord said, "that it may become a sanctuary, a tabernacle of the Holy Spirit to your edification." [^115]

Fourth, members of the school were to sanctify themselves that their minds might "become single to God" and their bodies "be filled with light." [^116] To that end, they were to refrain from light speeches, laughter, lustful desires, light-mindedness, idleness, and uncleanliness, and apply themselves with diligence and prayer to learn and live the gospel. [^117]

Fifth, predicated upon their obedience, the Lord promised to make a personal visit to the brethren of the school. To William W. Phelps, the Prophet wrote: "You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the Prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on condition of our obedience He has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His presence." [^118] The revelation which commanded the organization of the school also said: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." [^119]

This objective was evident in the subject matter which the brethren of the school studied. During the winter of 1834-35, Joseph Smith prepared a series of seven lectures on theology known as the Lectures on Faith. [^120] These lectures, which were published as part of the Doctrine and Covenants in 1835 and in several later editions, expressed the main theme of doctrine and purpose which the latter-day Seer tried to apply in the School of the Prophets. They dealt with basic principles and assumptions by which the Saints could acquire true faith, and by the expression of such faith develop in spiritual truth and power to commune directly and openly with God. [^121] In expressing the central theme which ran through all the lectures, Joseph Smith wrote: "After any portion of the human family are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God, who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they shall obtain faith in God, and power with him to behold him face to face." [^122] Again, as he spoke of ancient saints: "By their faith they could obtain heavenly visions, the ministering of angels, have knowledge of the spirits of just men made perfect, of the general assembly and church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven, of God the judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and become familiar with the third heavens, see and hear things which were not only unutterable, but were unlawful to utter." [^123]

Sixth, the school was to aid the brethren to obtain the great spiritual endowment which they expected to receive when the Kirtland Temple was dedicated and the solemn assembly held. [^124] "I called it to order and made some remarks upon the object of this school," Joseph Smith said of the school of the Elders which took the place of the earlier program, "and the great necessity of our rightly improving our time and reining up our minds to the sense of the great object that lies before us, viz—the glorious endowment that God has in store for the faithful." [^125]

Finally, it was in the School of the Prophets that Joseph Smith expected to attain synthesis of all knowledge. Brigham Young later said of that school: "It was expressly designed for the education of the Elders of Israel in the science of Theology, and the design was to connect this branch with every other branch of useful knowledge." [^126] Significantly, the revelation directing the Prophet to organize the school instructed the brethren to study a variety of secular subjects. [^127]

When viewed in its proper light, the School of the Prophets was to be an important feature of the restoration of the true order and program of the Holy Priesthood. Such organizations existed among the people of God in ancient times. Moses wished "that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them"; [^128] and a faint outline of an order of prophets can be found in the law which he gave to the Israelites. [^129] Samuel later instituted schools of prophets at Ramah, [^130] Bethel, [^131] Jericho, [^132] Gilgal, [^133] and elsewhere. [^134] These schools were instrumental in teaching the religion and culture of Israel to the people. [^135]

Some centers of instruction in colonial America were called Schools of the Prophets, [^136] after the precedent of educational programs in biblical times. But Joseph Smith sought to do more than to imitate the outward ancient patterns. He wanted to restore the full ancient order of things and perfect divine institutions within the kingdom of God.

On December 27, 1832, a revelation instructed Joseph Smith to call a solemn assembly and to organize worthy brethren into the School of the Prophets. [^137] Members of the school were to be carefully selected, and only those who were "clean from the blood" of that generation through their work in the ministry were to be admitted by the ordinance of washing of feet. The Lord said, "For unto this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet instituted." [^138] That sacred rite, administered according to the pattern given in the thirteenth chapter of John, [^139] served as a token and witness of brotherhood, humility, and service. It also suggested that those who received it were sealed unto eternal life, their calling and election to celestial glory having been made sure, [^140] so that they qualified by faith for the blessings and manifestations of the Second Comforter. It therefore pertained to the order of the house of the Lord. In this respect, the Prophet indicated that the solemn assembly at Kirtland, wherein the washing of feet was administered, was designed to organize the brethren of the School of the Prophets. He instructed the Twelve "to attend the solemn assembly of the first Elders [those who were clean from the blood of that generation], for the organization of the School of the Prophets; and attend to the ordinance of washing of feet; and to prepare their hearts in humility for an endowment with power from on high." [^141]

In conducting the school, the presiding officer, or teacher, was to enter the house of the Lord first and to "offer himself in prayer upon his knees before God, in token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant." When the members of the school arrived, the teacher was then to rise and "with uplifted hands to heaven . . . salute his brother or brethren," saying:

Art thou a brother or brethren? I salute you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant, in which covenant I receive you to fellowship, in a determination that is fixed, immovable, and unchangeable, to be your friend and brother through the grace of God in the bonds of love, to walk in all the commandments of God blameless, in thanksgiving, forever and ever. Amen. [^142]

Having received this salutation, the members were to return it, or say "Amen, in token of the same." [^143]

Joseph Smith organized the School of the Prophets, January 22 and 23, 1833. During a special conference called for that purpose, the latter-day Seer reported that "the Lord poured out His Spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders spake in tongues." "Great and glorious were the divine manifestations of the Holy Spirit," he said. "Praises were sung to God and the Lamb; speaking and praying, all in tongues, occupied the conference until a late hour at night, so rejoiced were we at the return of these long absent blessings." [^144]

At a session of conference the next day, amid like spiritual manifestations, Joseph Smith admitted several brethren into the School of the Prophets. [^145] That term continued until the following April, [^146] with the Prophet as the presiding officer of the school. [^147] He wrote that he and his brethren had "many glorious seasons of refreshing. [^148] "Great joy and satisfaction continually beamed in the countenances of the School of the Prophets, and the Saints," he added, "on account of the things revealed, and our progress in the knowledge of God." [^149] During one session, Joseph Smith recorded:

I exhorted the brethren to faithfulness and diligence in keeping the commandments of God, and gave much instruction for the benefit of the Saints, with a promise that the pure in heart should see a heavenly vision; and after remaining a short time in secret prayer, the promise was verified; for many present had the eyes of their understanding opened by the Spirit of God, so as to behold . . . a heavenly vision of the Savior, and concourses of angels, and many other things, of which each one has a record of what he saw. [^150]

John Murdock was one who recorded his experience on this occasion. In speaking of the school which was held "in the Prophet's Chamber," he said:

In one of these meetings the Prophet told us that if we could humble ourselves before God, and exercise strong faith, we should see the face of the Lord. And about midday the visions of my mind were opened, and the eyes of my understanding were enlightened, and I saw the form of a man, most lovely, the visage of his face was sound and fair as the sun. His hair a bright silver grey, curled in most majestic form, His eyes a keen penetrating blue, and the skin of his neck a most beautiful white; and he was covered from the neck to the feet with a loose garment, pure and white, whiter than any garment I have ever before seen. His countenance was most penetrating, and yet most lovely. And while I was endeavoring to comprehend the whole personage from head to feet it slipped from me and the vision was closed up. But it left on my mind the impression of love, for months, that I never felt to that degree. [^151]

Zebedee Coltrin, one of the original members of the school, also recalled some of the blessings the brethren received:

At Kirtland we were called to the School of the Prophets, and at one time when Joseph was in the translating room [in the temple which adjoined their place of meeting], myself and others were talking about the gift of tongues, when the spirit of tongues fell upon me and I spoke under its influence. Joseph came into the room and said, "God bless you Brother Zebedee, that is the Spirit of God." He told me to continue, and the gift of tongues and prophecy rested upon the greater part of the brethren present, and we continued speaking in tongues and prophesying through that day and the greater part of the following night.

At another time, after fasting and prayer, Joseph told us that we should see the glory of God, and I saw a personage passing through the rooms as plainly as I see you now. Joseph asked us if we knew who it was, and answered himself: "That is Jesus, our elder brother, the Son of God." And again I saw passing through the same room a personage whose glory and brightness was so great that I can liken it to nothing but the burning bush that Moses saw, and its power was so great that had it continued much longer I believe it would have consumed us. [^152]

The Hebrew School

Before the fall term of the School of the Prophets began in 1835, the decision was made to study the Hebrew language in conjunction with the regular studies. "We calculate to commence a 'School of the Prophets' as soon as we can," William W. Phelps wrote, October 27, 1835. "We shall begin to study Hebrew this winter, according to our present calculations." [^153] Apparently the Hebrew School was carried on as a separate function, for the Prophet wrote, in January, 1836, that the two schools occupied adjoining rooms in the Kirtland Temple. [^154]

Orson Pratt later explained why they studied Hebrew. The classes "were intended by the Prophet Joseph to furnish aid and assistance to the Elders when they went forth to promulgate the gospel of the Son of God," he said. "An Elder understanding Hebrew was likely to have more influence over the minds of the scattered tribes of Israel who understood the Hebrew language, by being able to meet them on their own ground." For this reason, also, the Elders were encouraged to study history, so "that the Spirit of God might more easily impress their minds with what was going to take place." [^155]

In preparing for the Hebrew school, Oliver Cowdery was sent to New York to purchase books and supplies. [^156] He returned November 20, bringing "a quantity of Hebrew books, for the benefit of the school." [^157] Being disappointed in the initial teacher they sought to obtain, the members of the school employed Joshua Seixas, from the Hudson Theological Seminary, in Ohio, to teach forty scholars for "seven weeks, for three hundred and twenty dollars." [^158] Professor Seixas arrived at Kirtland late in January, 1836, sometime after the brethren had started their study of Hebrew on their own, [^159] and began immediately to instruct the school, [^160] which was divided into two classes. [^161]

The brethren were hindered by a lack of sufficient books, but they were determined to do the best they could, and after two weeks Professor Seixas stated that they "were the most forward of any class he ever instructed for the same length of time." [^162] The Prophet, in particular, applied himself to the task. "My soul delights in reading the word of the Lord in the original," he wrote, "and I am determined to pursue the study of the languages, until I shall become master of them, if I am permitted to live long enough." [^163] He made good his pledge and was well on his way to mastering other languages, including German, at the time of his death. [^164]

General and Higher Secular Education

Joseph Smith indicated that there was a definite place in Zion's educational system for the teaching of secular truth, and he did much to foster its study. In December, 1834, he started to develop a high school at Kirtland, for the education of both sexes. [^165] In February, 1835, William E. M'Lellin gave the following report of the new program:

When the school first commenced, we received into it both large and small, but in about three weeks the classes became so large and the house so crowded that it was thought advisable to dismiss all the small students, and continue those only who wished to study penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, and geography. Before we dismissed the small pupils, there were in all about one hundred and thirty who attended; since that time there have been upon an average about one hundred; the most of whom have received lectures upon English grammar; and for the last four weeks about seventy have been studying geography one-half the day, and grammar and writing the other part. Burdick's Arithmetic, Kirkham's Grammar, and Olney's Geography have been used, and Noah Webster's Dictionary as standard. Since the year 1827, I have taught school in five different states, and visited many schools in which I was not engaged as a teacher; in none, I can say, with certainty, I have seen students make more rapid progress than in this. [^166]

There was a spring term as well as a winter one. [^167] From this beginning the Board of Trustees, consisting of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, [^168] expanded the program of the Kirtland High School to include some higher secondary educational activities, including "the higher branches of English literature." [^169] Joseph Smith wrote of the school's activities in 1836-37:

During the week the "Kirtland High School" is taught in the attic story [of the temple], by H. M. Hawes, Esq., professor of the Greek and Latin languages. The school numbers from one hundred and thirty-five to one hundred and forty students, divided into three departments—the classic, where the languages only are taught; the English department, where mathematics, common arithmetic, geography, English grammar, writing, and reading are taught; and the juvenile department, the last two having each an assistant instructor. The school commenced [that year] in November, and on the first Wednesday in January the several classes passed a public examination in presence of the trustees of the school, parents and guardians, and their progress in study was found of the highest order. [^170]

Other educational programs were developed in addition to the above. "Great exertions are being made in schools," William W. Phelps wrote in December, 1835. "There are two evening grammar schools and one writing school, and as soon as the attic rooms are completed in the Lord's House one or two more schools will commence." [^171] Besides studying grammar, Benjamin F. Johnson recalled: "I also attended an evening class in geography in which I rapidly acquired the elements of that study, which inspired in me a thirst for history and other reading." [^172]

Similar efforts were made in Missouri, though not with as much success because of the opposition of mob elements. After the Saints were driven from their homes in Jackson County in the summer and fall of 1833, they spent a disorganized interim scattered in other parts of the state. But they immediately established schools as they began to gather in Caldwell County. William W. Phelps wrote from Far West that on July 4, 1837, the "school section" provided by law for that county was sold for from $3.50 to $10.20 an acre, making their first school fund $5070. [^173] In March the next year, Oliver Cowdery wrote that two schools had been conducted in that area, one having been in operation for three months and the other for two. [^174]

Consistent with the view that the temple was the center of the new social order, Sidney Rigdon explained that the Far West Temple was to be constructed "for the double purpose, of a house of worship and an institution of learning." He referred to the temple as a house of God in which "all the sciences, languages, etc., which are taught in our country, in the schools of the highest order, shall be taught." The object was to have a program "accessible to all classes," he declared, "the poor, as well as the rich, that all persons in our midst, may have an opportunity to educate their children, both male and female, to any extent they please, so that all the talents in our midst may be called forth." [^175]

The Prophet contemplated an expanded program of general and higher education as the Saints began to settle at Nauvoo, Illinois. Though faced with the challenge of converting a veritable swamp into a city, they lost no time in establishing schools in their midst. The Nauvoo Charter, signed by the Governor of the state December 16, 1840, provided for the organization of an institution of learning "for the teaching of the Arts, Sciences, and Learned Professions, to be called the 'University of the City of Nauvoo.'" [^176] The following month the First Presidency wrote: "We hope to make this institution one of the great lights of the world, and by and through it to diffuse that kind of knowledge which will be of practical utility, and for the public good, and also for private and individual happiness." [^177]

The University of the City of Nauvoo was officially organized February 3, 1841, [^178] and began its program later that year. In August, Chancellor John C. Bennett announced that the Department of Mathematics and English Literature was "in successful operation under the supervision of Professor Orson Pratt." Included in the offering of that department were courses in mathematics which encompassed "Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Conic Sections, Plane Trigonometry, Mensuration, Surveying, Navigation, Analytical, Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, Analytical Geometry, and the Differential and Integral Calculus." Courses were also to be offered in philosophy, astronomy, and chemistry. [^179]

Other departments were announced later that year. The Department of Languages was placed under the direction of Orson Spencer, a graduate of Union College and the Baptist Literary and Theological Seminary in New York. The Department of History was directed by Sidney Rigdon, a recognized Belles-Lettres scholar and a noted orator. A Department of Rhetoric and Belles-Lettres was also planned. [^180] Finally before the year closed a petition was presented to the Board of Regents to appoint a professor in the Department of Music, and Gustavus Hills was given the position. [^181]

The Nauvoo Educational System

Besides supervising the above departments of higher education, the Board of Regents of the University of the City of Nauvoo was given the responsibility to direct a much wider educational program. Of the master plan, Joseph Smith wrote:

The Regents of the University will take the general supervision of all matters appertaining to education, from common schools up to the highest branches of a most liberal collegiate course. They will establish a regular system of education, and hand over the pupil from teacher to professor, until the regular graduation is consummated and the education finished. [^182]

This system was put into operation February 22, 1841. [^183] The city of Nauvoo had been divided into four municipal wards, [^184] and school wardens were placed in control of each of these wards, which were set up as common school districts. [^185] The "School Wardens of the University for Common Schools" were then directed to organize the schools in their respective wards, and teachers were required to procure a "certificate of competency from the Chancellor and Registrar." [^186] The Board of Regents also selected and approved textbooks to be used in the schools throughout the system. [^187]

As part of the system, a concerted program of music instruction was started. Besides designating Gustavus Hills to head the Department of Music in the University of the City of Nauvoo, the Board of Regents appointed a warden to supervise music instruction in the schools in each of the four wards of the city. These wardens, under the direction of Professor Hills, were "to constitute a board for the regulation of Music" in the city. [^188] The board of music met immediately and began to develop a program of music instruction in the city. [^189]

Individual Educational Activities

The spirit of learning which existed among the Saints was reflected both in the type of people the restored gospel drew to its standard and in the interests they expressed in educational activities. Many of the Saints did not wait for the Church or the community to organize schools. Individual effort was encouraged, [^190] and many started schools on their own initiative, [^191] with the purpose of contributing to the building up of Zion. [^192]

Such efforts marked the beginning of education in some areas of Missouri. "The first schools were taught by Mormons," a history of Caldwell County states. "In the vicinity of Kingston, the first school was taught by a young lady Mormon, Miss Mary Ann Duty, in an abandoned cabin on Long Creek." [^193] In reporting that she taught school for three months while the Saints were in Caldwell County, Eliza Maria Partridge said: "It was no uncommon thing in those days for our Mormon girls to go out among the Missourians and teach their children for a small remuneration. I received but thirty dollars and my board while I was gone." [^194] Another who taught "a few children in reading, spelling, and writing" was Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, who added, "I was well versed in geography and continued teaching with success for two years." [^195]

Many individuals conducted private schools at Nauvoo. [^196] Joseph W. and Miss Adelia Cole opened one on the second story of Joseph Smith's store, [^197] then moved to the Seventies Hall, where Eli B. Kelsey joined their staff. [^198] A Miss Mitchell occupied Hyrum Smith's office for a school during off hours, [^199] and J. M. Monroe offered a curriculum in which the common studies were stressed. But upon demand the higher mathematics, philosophy, chemistry, Greek, Latin, French, and Spanish were taught. He also conducted a night school three nights a week for ten weeks, in which "older students were taught grammar, writing, and composition for $1.50 apiece." [^200] Alexander Neibaur, a dental surgeon and a Jewish convert from Germany, announced that he would teach classes in Hebrew and German. [^201] A. J. Banister publicized the opening of a "select school" where the "first principles and rudiments of the English language" would be taught until the students knew them "to perfection." [^202] A. Blake and J. Hatch, Jr., expressed confidence that they could please "even the most scrupulous patron." [^203] Jesse Haven conducted a school which catered to poorer families. Reading and writing cost 17 per week, and geography, grammar, arithmetic cost 21, as did philosophy, chemistry, and astronomy. [^204]

In addition to regular schools, many individuals offered evening and extension courses. One writer said: "David Courtland, Jesse Fox, Julian Moses, and scores of others assigned studies and heard recitations." [^205]

Special Programs

Music

Joseph Smith either organized or encouraged the organization of special programs aimed at developing the talents and abilities of the Saints. At Kirtland, he "organized the first choir in the church and . . . was a constant attendant at their singing schools." [^206] Several revelations stated that in the last days the Saints would flock to Zion, singing songs of everlasting joy. [^207] In appointing Emma Smith "to make a selection of sacred hymns" for the Church, in July, 1830, the Lord said by revelation: "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." [^208]

The Prophet expressed a unique philosophy in regard to music, consistent with the basic assumption upon which Zion was to rest. Not only was man to be raised in a general way from his natural fallen state in mortality to a newness of life, by utilizing enlightening spiritual powers from God, [^209] but all aspects of life were to be transformed in like manner, including the expressions of music. "Man of himself is an instrument of music; and when the chords of which he is composed are touched, and salute the ear, the sounds appeal to his spirit and the sentiment to his understanding," Joseph Young, Sr., an older brother of Brigham Young, stated in describing the Prophet's views of the subject. "If the strains are harmonious, he endorses and enjoys them with supreme delight, whether the tones are from a human voice or from an instrument, they arrest his attention and absorb his whole being." [^210]

"This subject came under the especial notice of Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Elder Young observed. "He recommended the Saints to cultivate as high a state of perfection in their musical harmonies as the standard of the faith which he had brought was superior to sectarian religion." To this end, "he gave them to understand that the refinement of singing would depend on the attainment of the Holy Spirit: that the combined talent of the sainted compositors, when united with those inspirations, will bring compositions of tunes that have their origin with the sacred choirs that sing the new song [i. e., the regenerated song] in the presence of God and the Lamb, who join their symphonies with the compositors that dwell with the Saints on earth; and when the music performed here is acceptable to their spirits, they can co-operate with the choirs in our earthly courts." [^211] Concluding his report, Elder Young wrote:

When this subject is studied and sought after by the singers of the Saints, with their whole hearts, their songs and anthems and their minstrelsy will soften into celestial melody, melt the hearts of the Saints and draw them together, as the magnet needle is drawn to the loadstone. When these graces and refinements and all the kindred attractions are obtained that characterized the ancient Zion of Enoch, then the Zion of the last days will become beautiful. She will be hailed by the Saints from the four winds, who "will gather to Zion with songs of everlasting joy." Then Zion will be free, and to God and the Lamb will be the glory, to Saints the boundless joy. [^212]

The Library Institute

A circulating library with a supporting Library Institute was established at Nauvoo, including a reading room for the public. [^213]

Lyceums

Lyceums were also fostered by the Saints as a means of obtaining and disseminating knowledge. Josiah Holbrook, who organized the first lyceum in America in 1826, explained that such an organization could be started by a few neighbors or citizens agreeing "to hold meetings for their mutual improvement," appointing a place to meet, deciding upon a topic of study, and procuring "a few articles or apparatus to illustrate" the subject. [^214] Such groups were often small, but at other times they took the form of public lectures and discussions, and many noted figures in the United States participated in the programs.

Several of the Saints organized a lyceum at Kirtland, known as The Young Men's United Lyceum, [^215] to improve their "minds, manners and morals." The constitution of the organization stated that the society would "meet Thursday evening of each week for the discussion of questions, reading of compositions and selected pieces, declaim, and for instruction in various branches of scientific and useful knowledge." It was provided that fifteen minutes only would "be allotted to a speaker at any one time." The president was to hold office for one evening, with a new presiding officer elected each meeting for the one to follow. [^216]

Lyceums were encouraged by Joseph Smith, particularly at Nauvoo. "Get into your lyceums, and investigate doctrine," he told the brethren, "and if you run against a snag, I am here, I will help you off." [^217] The Prophet also attended such meetings and gave "instructions and assistance." [^218] Wandle Mace was a member of a lyceum at Nauvoo which provided a more liberal time period for speakers to express themselves than did the one in Kirtland, because it was designed to help improve public speaking. Elder Mace said:

Our Lyceum was composed of eighteen members, each presided over the meeting in turn. One of the principles of the Gospel was chosen as a subject, and each member spoke a half hour upon it. Three evenings were taken up with the one principle before another was touched. Six members occupied the first evening; the second evening six other members spoke upon the subject, and the remaining six occupied the third evening, so that each one of the eighteen had equal time and opportunity to talk upon the subject. [^219]

A music lyceum was also organized, called The Teacher's Lyceum of Music in the University of the City of Nauvoo, with Professor Gustavus Hills ex officio President and the wardens ex officio Directors. The purpose of their weekly meetings was to improve "in the art of Music, . . . with a view to extend and elevate musical science." [^220]

Debates and Lectures

Debates were promoted, beginning at Kirtland. [^221] By the time the Saints moved to Nauvoo this activity was widespread among them. Writing in February, 1842, Joseph Smith said: "At this time debates were held weekly, and entered into by men of the first talents in the city, young and old, for the purpose of eliciting truth, acquiring knowledge, and improving in public speaking." [^222] Lectures were also supported by the Saints. [^223]

Drama

The Saints staged dramatic productions, contrary to the feelings of many religionists in America who held that the theatre was an instrument of the devil, perpetuated by his earthly helpers, and that to indulge in playgoing would cost a person his immortal soul. But Joseph Smith wanted to elevate the theatre and gave it a place in the scheme of life. "He fostered the drama by organizing a dramatic company and was foremost in encouraging the production of classical plays," one writer said of the Prophet. "He believed the theatre had its mission—that the drama could be made a medium of instruction." [^224]

Painting

In other ways, Joseph Smith promoted the arts. In the spring of 1844, he reported that Benjamin West's painting, "Death on the Pale Horse," was being exhibited in his reading room. [^225] West, an American-born painter, gained international fame after going to Europe.

Museums

In 1843, the Prophet initiated a movement to establish a museum and made the first contribution toward its erection. The museum was to "be a receptacle of every thing new and old, ancient and modern, antique, fanciful and substantial—indeed any thing and every thing that has a tendency to throw light upon ancient nations, their manners, customs, implements of husbandry and of war, their costume, ancient records, manuscripts, paintings, hieroglyphics, models of any new invention in the arts and sciences, any thing that has a tendency to throw light upon Geology, Mineralogy, Anatomy, Philosophy, Mechanics or any thing that is calculated to enlighten the mind, enlarge the understanding, gratify the curiosity, and give general information." All this was to be done so that the Saints might "indeed be the 'blessed of the Lord,'—'the Zion of the Holy one of Israel.'" [^226]

Summary

In his desire to prepare a people for the coming of Christ, Joseph Smith attempted to build Zion as a new society based upon the spiritual truths and powers of the restored gospel, and designed to gather all things together in Christ. Cities of Zion were to be built according to the divine pattern, and a unique educational system was to be developed, aimed at bringing about a new synthesis of knowledge. "The Mormon Prophet and his people are the most ardent friends and promoters of literature and science," a prominent easterner acquainted with their views wrote in a letter to the editor of the New York Herald. "These are elementary principles in their social system." [^227] To the same editor, a United States Artillery Officer wrote in May, 1842: "Ecclesiastical history presents no parallel to this people, inasmuch as they are establishing their religion on a learned footing." [^228]

Similar social and cultural developments were to be made. "God has made us social beings," the Quorum of the Twelve wrote in an epistle to the Saints; "He has endowed us with capacities for enjoying each other's society, and it is our duty to bring those powers and privileges into exercise, so far as we can." [^229] This was a concept quite different from that of New England Puritanism which "almost succeeded in reducing the staple of a Christian man's legitimate recreation to 'seasonable meditation and prayer.'" [^230] Joseph Smith held that the complete individual was to be developed. It was consistent for him to note: "A large party supped at my house, and spent the evening in music, &c., in a most cheerful and friendly manner." [^231]

Footnotes

The Lord has made known unto us some of the great things which he has laid up for them that love him, among which the fact (a glory of wonders it is) that you are living on the land of promise, and that there [at Kirtland] is the place of gathering, and from that place to the Pacific Ocean, God has declared to himself, not only in time, but through eternity, and he has given it to us and our children, not only while time lasts, but we shall have it again in eternity, as you will see by one of the commandments, received day before yesterday. Therefore, be it known to you, brethren, that you are dwelling on your eternal inheritance.—Published in Daniel P. Kidder, Mormonism and Mormons (New York, 1842), pp. 77-79. (Italics in the original.)

This letter indicates that the original plat was prepared under the Prophet's direction by some brethren other than himself or Oliver Cowdery, and that it was sent to Missouri before it was checked for accuracy. Unfortunately historians do not have sufficient information to determine the corrections which were made. Another known plat contained an additional row of blocks and made other alterations. But it is not known if this is the corrected plan; nor is its true significance known. It is also unfortunate that the Saints in Missouri did not have time to carry out the instructions which they received and thereby leave evidence of the true and complete plan. In less than a month after the original letter was sent from Kirtland, mob violence burst upon the Saints in Jackson County, and that fall they were driven from the county.

To compound the problem, some errors were made in copying the existing draft of the plat of the City of Zion into the manuscript history of the Church, and these have been perpetuated in its published editions.—TS, VI (February 1, 1845), pp. 785-787; MS, XIV (September 4, 1852), pp. 438-439; HC, I, pp. 357-359. Inaccurate statements will be corrected in this work and a note made to that effect.

As the Nauvoo Temple was being built, the architect opposed some features of its design, contending that they were "a violation of all the known rules of architecture." But the Prophet countered his objections. "I have seen in vision the splendid appearance of that building illuminated," he explained, "and will have it built according to the pattern shown me."—HC, VI, pp. 196-197. While visiting Nauvoo in the spring of 1844, Josiah Quincy was shown the temple which was nearing completion. Near its entrance a man was carving the figure of a face from a huge stone, as part of the design of the building. "General Smith," said the man, looking up from his task, "is this like the face you saw in vision?"

"Very near it," answered the Prophet, "except . . . the nose is just a thought too broad."

Quincy said of the temple:

It was a wonderful structure, altogether indescribable by me. Being, presumably, like something Smith had seen in vision, it certainly cannot be compared to any ecclesiastical building which may be discerned by the natural eyesight. Quincy, Figures of the Past, p. 389.

John C. Bennett was occupying a portion of the room engaged in writing the Nauvoo Charter; Joseph dictated much of the charter. I could overhear the instructions he gave Bennett, and know it was gotten up mainly as Joseph required.—Howard Coray folder, Church Historian's Library Salt Lake City, Utah.

Attended school during school hours, made rapid progress in our studies. In the evening lectured on grammar at home.—HC, II, p. 301.

Attended school during school hours. Spent the evening around my fireside, teaching my family grammar.—Journal History, November 11, 1835.

The First Presidency were engaged in writing the Church history and in recitation of grammar lessons, which recitations at this period were usually attended each morning before writing.—HC, III, p. 26.

From the many references in the Prophet's journal to his study of Hebrew the following illustrate his interest and activities:

Spent the day in the Hebrew school, and made rapid progress in our studies.—Ibid., II, p. 363.

Spent the day at school. The Lord blessed us in our studies. This day we commenced reading in our Hebrew Bibles with much success. It seems as if the Lord opens our minds in a marvelous manner, to understand His word in the original language; and my prayer is that God will speedily endow us with a knowledge of all languages and tongues, that His servants may go forth for the last time the better prepared to bind up the law, and seal up the testimony.—Ibid., pp. 376-377.

Having found time to study German and other languages later in his life, he made an observation regarding the German translation of the Bible:

I have an old edition of the New Testament in the Latin, Hebrew, German and Greek languages. I have been reading the German, and find it to be the most [nearly] correct translation, and to correspond nearest to the revelations which God has given to me for the last fourteen years.—Ibid., VI, p. 307.

Compare this principle once with Christendom at the present day, and where are they, with all their boasted religion, piety and sacredness while at the same time they are crying out against prophets, apostles, angels, revelations, prophesying and visions, &c. Why, they are just ripening for the damnation of hell. They will be damned, for they reject the most glorious principle of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and treat with disdain and trample under foot the key that unlocks the heavens and puts in our possession the glories of the celestial world.—HC, V, p. 389.

In considering these points, see also Volume I of this study, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "Without Christ Man is Nothing."

"The reason why we have been thus particular on this part of our subject, is that this class may see by what means it was that God became an object of faith among men after the fall; and what it was that stirred up the faith of multitudes to feel after him—to search after a knowledge of his character, perfections and attributes, until they became extensively acquainted with him, and not only commune with him and behold his glory, but be partakers of his powers and stand in his presence."—Lectures on Faith, op. cit.

Such institutions apparently continued for several centuries among the Israelites. Elisha ministered in educational activities among the sons of the prophets, and King Saul and David may have been associated with these schools. It may be, also, that Saul of Tarsus, who sat at the feet of Gamaliel, was given instruction in such an institution, patterned after the more ancient systems of education.

About the time the school was first organized some wished to see an angel, and a number joined in the circle, and prayed. When the vision came, two of the brethren shrank and called for the vision to close or they would perish, these were Bros. [Levi] Hancock and [Solomon] Humphreys. When the Prophet came in they told him what they had done and he said the angel was no further off than the roof of the house, and a moment more and he would have been in their midst.—Minutes of the School of the Prophets, September 27, 1883, pp. 69-70. (Spelling and punctuation added.)

In the summer and fall of 1833, a similar school was conducted as part of the educational activities of the Saints in Missouri. See D&C 97:3-5. Brigham Young referred to this school as being part of the program of the School of the Prophets.—JD, XII, p. 157. Parley P. Pratt directed the Missouri school and wrote:

This class, to the number of about sixty, met for instruction once a week. The place of meeting was in the open air, under some tall trees in a retired place in the wilderness, where we prayed, preached and prophesied, and exercised ourselves in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Here great blessings were poured out, and many great and marvelous things were manifested and taught. The Lord gave me great wisdom and enabled me to teach and edify the Elders, and comfort and encourage them in their preparations for the great work which lay before us.—Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 99-100.

Elder Pratt stated: "To attend this school I had to travel on foot, and sometimes with bare feet at that, about six miles."—Ibid., p. 100.

Attended school, and assisted in forming a class of twenty-two members to read at three o'clock, p. m. The other twenty-three read at eleven o'clock. The first class recites at a quarter before ten, a. m., and the second a quarter before two, p. m.—Ibid., p. 391. See also ibid., p. 390.

After their scheduled course in the winter of 1836, another class was apparently organized the next year. Having noted that many of the Elders were on missions teaching the gospel, so that there was not then a school being held for their instruction, the editor of the Messenger and Advocate wrote in June, 1837: "It is expected that a course of instruction in Hebrew will be given, to continue 12 weeks, commencing as soon as a sufficient number have signed to warrant the undertaking."—MA, III (June 1837), p. 519.

The main schoolhouse at Far West was described by a student as being "a large fine building, with an entry, which the Saints had built on the outskirts of the town." The school "was taught by Brother Jesse Haven and his sister, who had lately come there from Massachusetts."—Helen Mar Whitney, Woman's Exponent, X, (October 1, 1881), p. 66. Joseph Holbrook also reported having built a schoolhouse in the vicinity of Plum Creek, which was three miles west of Far West. See The Life of Joseph Holbrook, by himself, 1806-1871, typewritten manuscript in Brigham Young University Library, p. 38.

I received all those who wished to attend school whether they could pay or not. I think no scholar was rejected or kept from my school because of means to pay. I made but little above my expense but had this consolation, I was schooling my neighbor's and my own children, and doing good in building up the Kingdom of God on the earth.—Biographical Sketch of the Life of Luman Andros Shurtliff, 1807-1864, taken from his personal journal, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 52.

As a result of their colonizing activities or because of mob action against them, many of the Saints were repeatedly on the move. Helen Mar, the daughter of Heber C. Kimball, stated: "The first thing my parents thought of wherever we stopped was to send us to school."—Helen Mar Whitney, Women's Exponent, X (April, 1882), p. 162. Some Saints also taught schools. Having been driven with the Church from Missouri, David Osborn went to Indiana where, in the winter of 1839-40, he "took a school of 50 scholars and earned $80.00." He then moved to Illinois, where he again taught school that fall and winter.—Diary of David Osborn, typewritten copy, Brigham Young University, pp. 11, 12. Eliza Maria Partridge also taught school at Lima, Illinois, after leaving Missouri.—Journal of Eliza Maria Partridge Lyman, p. 4.

Mr. Martin makes the following offer to the citizens of Nauvoo, that he will give a second course of lectures in the month of April, to a class of one hundred and twenty, for one hundred and twenty dollars, the room procured, warmed if necessary, and lighted at the expense of the class.—Nauvoo Neighbor, I (March 4, 1844), p. 2.

Mr. Thomas A. Lyne, a tragedian from New York, assisted by George J. Adams and others, got up a theatrical exhibition in the lower room of the Masonic Hall, which was fitted up with very tasteful scenery. They performed "Pizarro," "The Orphan of Geneva," "Douglas," "The Idiot Witness," "Damon and Pythias," and other plays with marked success. The Hall was well attended each evening, and the audience expressed their entire satisfaction and approbation.—HC, VI, pp. 349-350. See also ibid., p. 362.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, VI, p. 608.
[^2] TS, V (June 1, 1844), pp. 547-548.
[^3] The manuscript of the Book of Lehi which Joseph Smith translated in the spring of 1828, and which Martin Harris lost, contained Mormon's abridgement of the large plates of Nephi, which gave "an account of the reign of the kings" among the Nephites down to King Benjamin. See 1 Nephi 9:4. Though this manuscript was never published, it undoubtedly gave some detail concerning the political system of the Nephites, which was patterned after the government of God.
[^4] HC, IV, p. 537.
[^5] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith By His Mother, pp. 82-83; Journal and Memoirs of Wandle Mace, pp. 46-47. For a statement by George Q. Cannon, see JD, XXIII, p. 362.
[^6] HC, VI, pp. 289-290.
[^7] D&C 38:21-22.
[^8] D&C 41:4; 45:59.
[^9] D&C 58:22-23.
[^10] HC, VI, pp. 260-261, 263, 264. Wilford Woodruff placed the date of organization as March 10th. See his journal, under date.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 274, 343, 356, etc.
[^12] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle: The Diaries of John D. Lee, 1848-1876, I, p. 89. The Journal History also refers to this body as "the council" or "our council," during the early Utah period of the Church.
[^13] George Miller, a prominent bishop in the Church at that time, stated that "up to the number of fifty three" men were given membership in the council.—George Miller, Sr. and George Miller, Jr., A Mormon Bishop and His Son, p. 48. Bishop Miller's statement is partially supported by Brigham Young, who said: "The Council was composed of about fifty members."—"History of Brigham Young," MS, XXVI (May 21, 1864), p. 328. Benjamin F. Johnson, another member, wrote that the council would at times "exceed fifty in number."—Johnson, "An Interesting Letter," unpublished letter from Johnson to George S. Gibbs, April to July, 1903, Brigham Young University Library, p. 9.
[^14] There is some evidence that Brigham Young added considerably to its number. See Miller, op. cit., pp. 28-29.
[^15] See Ibid., p. 49.
[^16] JD, XVII, p. 156.
[^17] Minutes of the Council of Fifty, Saturday, April 10, 1880, City Hall, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^18] Miller, op. cit., p. 48. The Prophet was then studying plans to move the Saints west.
[^19] JD, II, p. 309.
[^20] HC, VI, p. 261.
[^21] "History of Brigham Young," MS, XXVI (May 21, 1864), p. 328.
[^22] The westward move of the Saints and the prophetic picture regarding the setting up of the government of God as a world power will be treated in Volume IV of this work.
[^23] "History of Brigham Young," op. cit.
[^24] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 80. (The writer has supplied some punctuation marks and corrected misspelled words in this statement.)
[^25] Journal of Benjamin F. Johnson, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 94.
[^26] This included the divine patriarchal order which will be treated later in this volume.
[^27] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 10. Orson Hyde stated that the Prophet made this charge "in the presence of about sixty men"; this corroborates Johnson's report. See JD, XIII, p. 180.
[^28] Pratt, The Seer, I (October, 1853), p. 145.
[^29] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 318.
[^30] For this reason, members of the General Council in the pioneer company which was leading the Saints to the Great Salt Lake Basin repaired to a secluded spot on Sunday, May 30, 1847, and engaged in sacred temple rites as they prayed for success upon their efforts. See William Clayton's Journal, p. 202; Journal of Amasa Lyman, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, p. 37.
[^31] MS, XVII (October 27, 1855), p. 673.
[^32] TS, V (March 1844), pp. 470-471; MS, V (June, 1844), pp. 8-10.
[^33] JD, II, pp. 188-189. This was not an idle expression. Brigham Young later said:
[^34] Pratt, The Seer, I (October, 1853), p. 149.
[^35] Ibid., II (May, 1854), p. 266.
[^36] See Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, pp. 7-8.
[^37] JD, IX, p. 27. The anticipated establishment of these two great centers of law and power will be discussed in the next volume of this work.
[^38] HC, II, p. 7.
[^39] Alma 4:12, 16, 19. In this action, Alma was acting according to established precedent. His father brought a group of people to achieve social and economic justice by converting them to the true gospel of Christ and applying the law of God among them in its social and economic expressions. In this way, they "were all equal" and became "far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their church."—Mosiah 18:7-29; Alma 1:26-31.
[^40] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 8.
[^41] D&C 98:5-7.
[^42] JD, XXI, p. 31.
[^43] Ibid., II, pp. 170-171.
[^44] Ibid., III, pp. 72-73. He said further:
[^45] Ibid., VII, p. 215.
[^46] Ibid., XXI, p. 31.
[^47] JD, VII, p. 14.
[^48] Ibid., III, p. 71.
[^49] Pratt, The Seer, I (October, 1853), pp. 147-148.
[^50] JD, III, p. 72.
[^51] Ibid., XIII, p. 126. Brigham Young extended these views to the American flag. "When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule," he said, "the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on the flag staff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity." Ibid., II, p. 317.
[^52] This was not to be a theocracy like many religious systems of the past, which Brigham Young asserted "would say, without the shadow or provocation or just cause, 'Cut that man's head off; put that one on the rack; arrest another, and retain him in unlawful and unjust dress which you plunder and pollute his wife and daughters; massacre here and there.'" He explained: "The Lord Almighty does nothing of that kind, neither does any man who is controlled by his Spirit."—JD, VI, pp. 346-347.
[^53] See again Joseph Smith's statement to Henry Clay.
[^54] JD, III, pp. 71-72.
[^55] Ibid., VII, p. 8.
[^56] Ibid., V, pp. 329-330.
[^57] Ibid., VI, p. 342.
[^58] Ibid., VII, p. 8.
[^59] Ibid., VI, p. 346.
[^60] Ibid., VII, p. 8.
[^61] Ibid., VI, pp. 346-347.
[^62] Pratt, The Seer, II (May 1854), pp. 266-267.
[^63] Deseret Evening News, VIII (October 2, 1875), p. 1.
[^64] Madison, The Federalist, No. X.
[^65] Ibid.
[^66] Senators were to be chosen by the several state legislatures, and members of the House of Representatives were to be elected by the people.
[^67] The electoral college has ceased to function according to the original plan. Its members no longer act as independent agents without party consideration.
[^68] Madison, op. cit.
[^69] Ibid.
[^70] E. E. Schattschneider, Party Government (New York, 1942), pp. 6-10. He stated further: "Everyone who has thought about it at all has recognized that the parties and the law are nonassimilable. The extra-legal character of political parties is one of their notable qualities. In a highly legalistic system of government such as the government of the United States, therefore, the parties seem to be a foreign substance."—Idem.
[^71] Cited in Friedrich A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, with a foreword by John Chamberlain (Chicago, 1944), p. 219.
[^72] For further considerations of this statement, see the sections in this chapter entitled "The Maintenance of Individual Freedom" and "Zion's Role in the Kingdom."
[^73] HC, VI, p. 199.
[^74] Ibid., pp. 198, 199.
[^75] Ibid., V, p. 64.
[^76] Deseret News, V (August 1, 1855), p. 162.
[^77] JD, X, p. 19.
[^78] Alma 4:16.
[^79] See again the section in chapter six entitled "The Principle of Revelation."
[^80] Deseret News, July 19, 1861.
[^81] MS, XXIX (November 23, 1867), p. 746. Technically, it was not the President of the Church who was the head of the political system, but the living prophet who, as God's mouthpiece, presided over both the Church and the state.
[^82] Journal History, July 12, 1865.
[^83] JD, XIV, p. 93, citing D&C 38:27.
[^84] JD, XIV, p. 93.
[^85] Lee, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 173.
[^86] HC, VI, p. 156. (Italics in the original.)
[^87] D&C 46:2.
[^88] JD, I, p. 139.
[^89] Lee, op. cit.
[^90] Revelation to John Taylor, June 27, 1882.
[^91] The revelation said: "Ye are my Constitution and I am your God and ye are my spokesman, therefore from henceforth keep my commandments."
[^92] The Reminiscences of James Holt. A Narrative of the Emmett Company," ed. Dale L. Morgan, Utah Historical Quarterly, XXIII (January, 1955), p. 7.
[^93] See the treatment of the subject in Walter F. Dodd, Cases And Materials On Constitutional Law (4th ed., St. Paul, 1950), pp. 7-8.
[^94] JD, VI, p. 346.
[^95] Ibid., XV, p. 161.
[^96] D&C 98:9-10.
[^97] HC, III, p. 9.
[^98] JD, VI, p. 345; VII, pp. 11, 14.
[^99] D&C 98:5.
[^100] HC, V, pp. 289-290.
[^101] JD, VI, p. 345.
[^102] D&C 98:8.
[^103] D&C 101:78.
[^104] This was the Lockean tradition of political philosophy which took root in America, rather than that of Rousseau which was accepted in parts of Europe.
[^105] JD, III, p. 256.
[^106] HC, II, pp. 6-7.
[^107] JD, VI, p. 343. Joseph Smith's idea of individual freedom was deeply imbedded in his philosophy of life. Life must be independent in the sphere in which God places it. To destroy the condition of independence is to destroy life. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "All Truth and Intelligence Independent," and the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Nature of the Pre-earth Conflict." Christ's mission on earth was to re-establish a condition of independence in which man could be free by the power of His atonement, after the fall of Adam critically disrupted the basic order upon which life and agency had existed. The Prince of Life died to make man free, not merely to give him salvation. Lehi wrote that men being redeemed from the fall of Adam by the atonement of the Messiah, "have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day."—2 Nephi 2:26. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Spiritual and Moral Freedom given by the Atonement."
[^108] JD, XI, p. 254.
[^109] Ibid., VI, p. 345.
[^110] HC, V, p. 498.
[^111] Ibid., VI, p. 56.
[^112] Ibid., V, p. 498. In a letter to Joseph L. Heywood, Joseph Smith wrote: "Although I never feel to force my doctrines upon any person, I rejoice to see prejudice give way to truth, and the traditions of men dispersed by the pure principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ."—Journal History, February 13, 1844.
[^113] HC, V, p. 499. So much did the latter-day Seer subscribe to these principles that he said: "In my feelings I am always ready to die for the protection of the weak and oppressed in their just rights."—Ibid., VI, p. 57. Again:
[^114] JD, XII, pp. 113-114.
[^115] D&C 101:77.
[^116] D&C 98:5.
[^117] JD, I, p. 139.
[^118] HC, VI, p. 208. (Italics in the original.) Oregon and Texas were not then part of the union.
[^119] JD, XX, p. 204.
[^120] HC, VI, p. 57.
[^121] Ibid. (Italics in the original.)
[^122] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "All Truth and Intelligence Independent."
[^123] See Genesis 9:6; D&C 42:18-19. For comments by Joseph Smith on the subject, see HC, IV, p. 359.
[^124] See Leviticus 20:10ff. See also D&C 132:26, where a revelation referred to transgressors being "destroyed in the flesh" for some grievous sins other than murder.
[^125] Alma 46:35.
[^126] Alma 62:9-10.
[^127] See Isaiah 28:16-17.
[^128] JD, VII, p. 13. This view implied that Article IV, Section 4, of the United States Constitution should be understood to carry a reciprocal obligation in its declaration: "The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and, on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic violence." Conversely, each state should be required to maintain a republican form of government with all its implied rights and immunities guaranteed to the people. See also Article I, Section 10, where it is implied that the respective states were subordinate to the Federal Government.
[^129] JD, XVII, p. 156.
[^130] HC, III, p. 304.
[^131] Ibid.
[^132] Ibid.
[^133] See chapter two, the section entitled "Sequence in Building the Kingdom."
[^134] JD, XV, p. 44. See also p. 45.
[^135] Deseret News, V (August 1, 1855), p. 162.
[^136] JD, XXV, p. 336.
[^137] JD, II, p. 317.
[^138] Revelation 4:9-11.
[^139] Revelation 1:5-6; 5:9-10; 20:4, 6.
[^140] Revelation 19:15-16.
[^141] I. R., Revelation 12:1-7.
[^142] Orson Pratt said:
[^143] In connection with this statement, see D&C 5:14; 33:5; 86:3; 109:73.
[^144] I. R. Revelation 12:7. In harmony with these clarifications, Brigham Young taught that the kingdom which the prophet Daniel saw, as recorded in Daniel 2 and 7 (which, when fully developed, was to have political power), was "the very kingdom" that Jesus established during His earthly ministry. "But," he explained, "it was not then the time for the kingdom of God to subdue all other kingdoms as it would in the latter days."—JD, IX, p. 310.
[^145] JD, XXVI, p. 12.
[^146] Ibid., VI, p. 345.
[^147] Ibid., II, p. 317.
[^148] Journal of Benjamin F. Johnson, p. 94.
[^149] Edward Stanwood, A History of the Presidency (Boston and New York, 1898), p. 10.
[^150] JD, XX, p. 204.
[^151] Where social and economic matters are not made the concern of government, there is less reason for the diverging interests and desires of the people to be brought into conflict.
[^152] Pratt, The Seer, II (May, 1854), pp. 266-267.
[^153] Juvenile Instructor, XXXI (February 1, 1896), p. 140; HC, VII, p. 382.
[^154] JD, XXVI, p. 12. For another statement by Elder Cannon, see Ibid., XX. pp. 203-204.
[^155] Ibid., VI, p. 345. For other statements by Brigham Young, see Ibid., II, pp. 309-310, 315-317; VI, pp. 342-343, 345-346; XII, pp. 113-114; XVII, pp. 156-157.
[^156] Ibid., XI, p. 275.
[^157] MS, X (March 15, 1848), p. 87.
[^158] Juvenile Instructor, XXXI (February 1, 1896), p. 140; HC, VII, p. 382.
[^159] MS, XXVI (May 21, 1864), pp. 328-329. John D. Lee stated that "a man by the name of Jackson belonged to it, though he did not belong to the Church."—Lee, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 173. When two ill-informed associates of the Prophet wanted to "call together" the General Council after his death and set the Church in order, they were told that that body "was not a church organization, but was composed of members irrespective of their religious faith."—MS, XXV (February 28, 1863), p. 136.
[^160] Deseret News, V (August 1, 1855), p. 162.
[^161] Revelation to John Taylor, June 27, 1882.
[^162] This is also true in the spiritual realm of life. Only in truth can man be free. But spiritual matters were held to be issues between man and God, or His Church, alone. They were issues in which the state was not involved.
[^163] HC, VI, pp. 56-57.
[^164] See ibid., VI, pp. 307-308, 316, 364.
[^165] See MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^166] Ibid.; HC, II, p. 200. It is not said where this school was housed. In October 1834, Joseph Smith spoke of the lower floor of a printing building which was "nearly finished," as a place planned for educational purposes. See HC, II, pp. 169-170. That it was so used shortly thereafter is clear from a reference to "the new school house under the printing office," in Joseph Young, Sr., History of the Organization of the Seventies (Salt Lake City, 1878), p. 2.
[^167] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^168] Ibid.
[^169] Ibid.
[^170] 170. HC, II, pp. 474-475. William W. Phelps stated that the school was scheduled to start November 2, 1835. See Journal History, October 27, 1835.
[^171] 171. Letter of William W. Phelps, written from Kirtland to his wife Sally, at Liberty, Missouri, December 18, 1835, in Journal History, under date.
[^172] 172. Benjamin F. Johnson, My Life's Review (Independence, Mo., 1947), p. 22.
[^173] 173. MA, III (July, 1837), p. 529.
[^174] 174. Letter written at Far West, Missouri, to Dr. W. A. and Lyman Cowdery, his brothers, at Kirtland, Ohio, Cowdery Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, California.
[^175] 175. Oration Delivered By Mr. S. Rigdon on the 4th of July, 1838.
[^176] 176. HC, IV, p. 243.
[^177] 177. Ibid., p. 269.
[^178] 178. Ibid., p. 293. [^232]
[^179] 79. TS, II (August 16, 1841), p. 517; III (December 15, 1841), pp. 630-631. Though Orson Pratt was self-taught, his biographer stated that he "was capable of teaching the subjects" named above. See Thomas Edgar Lyon, "Orson Pratt—Early Mormon Leader," unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Chicago, 1932, p. 26. According to his own statement, Elder Pratt was "thoroughly acquainted with algebra, geometry, trigonometry, conic sections, differential and integral calculus, astronomy, and most of the physical sciences."—"Biographical Sketch," in Orson Pratt's Works, ed. Parker Pratt Robison (Salt Lake City, 1945), p. xiv. His published works in these fields included Key To The Universe, Or A New Theory Of Its Mechanism, and Pratt's Cubic and Bi-Quadratic Equations. While touring and lecturing in America, the English astronomer, Richard Anthony Proctor, expressed the opinion that "there were but four real mathematicians in the world, and that Orson Pratt was one of them."—Introduction to Masterful Discourses And Writings Of Orson Pratt, ed. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City, 1939), p. 15.
[^180] 180. TS, III (December 15, 1841), pp. 630-631. See also ibid. January 1, 1842, p. 646.
[^181] 181. See ibid., January 1, 1842, p. 653; January 15, 1842, p. 666.
[^182] 182. HC, IV, pp. 269-270.
[^183] 183. On that day, Joseph Smith presented a resolution before the City Council providing "that all matters and powers whatever in relation to common schools, and all other institutions of learning, within the City of Nauvoo be . . . transferred from the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, to the Chancellor and Regents of the University of the City of Nauvoo."—TS, II (March 1, 1841), p. 336.
[^184] 184. HC, IV, pp. 305-306.
[^185] 185. See TS, III (December 15, 1841), p. 631; (January, 1842), p. 653.
[^186] 186. Ibid., December 15, 1841, p. 632.
[^187] 187. Ibid., January 1, 1842, p. 652.
[^188] 188. Ibid., p. 653. When the Chancellor suggested that the Regents instruct the board "to prohibit the flat sound of the notes, and adopt the broad" in their style of music, Joseph Smith observed, "I move the instruction, for I was always opposed to any thing flat."—Ibid. (Italics in the original.)
[^189] 189. Ibid., January 15, 1842, p. 666.
[^190] 190. Addressing himself to the "Young Men in Kirtland," S. W. Denton stressed individual effort. MA, III (February, 1837), p. 456.
[^191] 191. Orson Hyde conducted his own school at Kirtland, and Eliza R. Snow taught "a select school for young ladies" while boarding at the home of Joseph Smith. Evan M. Greene and Elias Smith, the Prophet's cousin, also taught schools at Kirtland.—HC, II. p. 335: Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 5: Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), p. 65; Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, Brigham Young University Library, p. 101.
[^192] 192. Of a school he conducted in Nauvoo, Luman A. Shurtliff said:
[^193] 193. History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, Missouri (St. Louis, 1886), p. 99. This was in the summer of 1838.
[^194] 194. Journal of Eliza Maria Partridge Lyman, copied and abridged by A. R. Lyman, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 3.
[^195] 195. Journal and memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, dictated to her granddaughter, Elsie E. Barrett, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, p. 6.
[^196] 196. The following are also known to have conducted schools there: Truman Barlow, Luman A. Shurtliff, Hannah Holbrook, David Candland, Emeline B. Woodward, and Howard Coray, assisted by his wife. See Woman's Exponent, X (February 15, 1882), p. 138; "Biographical Sketch of the Life of Luman Andros Shurtliff," pp. 52, 63; "The Life of Joseph Holbrook, 1806-1871," typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, p. 72; "Diary of David Candland, 1819-1902," typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, p. 1; "Letters of a Proselyte: The Hascall-Pomeroy Correspondence," Utah Historical Quarterly, XXV (January, 1957), pp. 62, 70; "Autobiography of Howard Coray," manuscript copy, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 14, 15, 17, 19.
[^197] 197. Nauvoo Neighbor, Nauvoo, Illinois, I (July 12, 1843), p. 3.
[^198] 198. Journal History, February 10, 1844; Nauvoo Neighbor, I (April 3, 1844), p. 2; Reta Latimer Halford, "Nauvoo—The City Beautiful," unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Utah, 1945, pp. 122-123.
[^199] 199. Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (January 1, 1892), p. 24.
[^200] 200. Halford, op. cit., p. 123.
[^201] 201. TS, III (December 15, 1841), p. 638.
[^202] 202. Nauvoo Neighbor, II (July 5, 1843), p. 3.
[^203] 203. Halford, op. cit., p. 124.
[^204] 204. Nauvoo Neighbor, II (November 27, 1844), p. 3.
[^205] 205. Halford, op. cit., pp. 124-125.
[^206] 206. Joseph Young, Sr., "Vocal Music," in his History of the Organization of the Seventies, p. 15.
[^207] 207. D&C 45:71; 66:11; 101:18; 109:39; 133:33.
[^208] 208. D&C 25: 11-12.
[^209] 209. See chapter two, the section entitled "Spiritual Nature Of The Kingdom."
[^210] 210. Young, "Vocal Music," pp. 14-15.
[^211] 211. Ibid., p. 15.
[^212] 212. Ibid.
[^213] 213. Halford, op. cit., p. 129.
[^214] 214. American Lyceum, or Society for the Improvement of Schools, and Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (Boston, 1829), pp. 16-17.
[^215] 215. Also called The Kirtland United Lyceum Society.
[^216] 216. Journal History, December, 1835.
[^217] 217. Journal and memoirs of Wandle Mace, 1809-1890, typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, p. 83.
[^218] 218. Ibid. Mercy R. Thompson said of the Prophet: "I have seen him in the lyceum and heard him reprove the brethren for giving way to too much excitement and warmth in debate, and have listened to his clear and masterly explanations of deep and difficult questions."—Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (June 15, 1892), p. 399.
[^219] 219. Diary and memoirs of Wandle Mace, op. cit.
[^220] 220. TS, III (January 15, 1842), p. 666.
[^221] 221. HC, II, pp. 317, 330.
[^222] 222. Ibid., IV, p. 514. See also pp. 495, 501. Luman Shurtliff wrote that during the winter of 1841-42, he attended "debates one night each week."—Biographical Sketch of the Life of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 52. In November, 1843, it was noted: "The young men of Nauvoo had at this time established a debating society to discuss topics of various descriptions."—Journal History, November 24, 1843.
[^223] 223. John Finch, an English socialist, expounded his views in September, 1843.—HC, VI, pp. 32-33. In March, 1844, the following notice appeared:
[^224] 224. G. D. Pyper, The Romance of an Old Playhouse (Salt Lake City, 1937), pp. 24-25. Thomas A. Lyne, who was converted to the restored gospel at Philadelphia after appearing in several stage productions, came to Nauvoo and, with encouragement from Joseph Smith, produced several plays. The Prophet wrote:
[^225] 225. HC, VI, p. 471.
[^226] 226. TS, IV (May 15, 1843), p. 201, 203.
[^227] 227. HC, V, p. 172.
[^228] 228. Republished in MS, III (September, 1842), p. 84.
[^229] 229. Ibid., IV, p. 558.
[^230] 230. Smith, The Age of the Reformation, p. 483. See also Carl Russell Fish, The Rise of the Common Man (New York, 1929), p. 235.
[^231] 231. HC, VI, p. 134.
