Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

11

The Government of God

The kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.—DANIEL.

In Joseph Smith's thought the government of God, as the political organ of the kingdom, was capable of extending the principles of freedom, justice, and human dignity to all men on earth. "We have the revelation of Jesus," he explained, "and the knowledge within us is sufficient to organize a righteous government upon the earth, and to give universal peace to all mankind." [^1] But to establish the divine order would necessitate an upgrading of the spiritual and moral standard of life. To Henry Clay, the latter-day Seer wrote: "I long for a day of righteousness, when 'He whose right it is to reign shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth'; and I pray God, who hath given our Fathers a promise of a perfect government in the last days, to purify the hearts of the people and hasten the welcome day." [^2]

The Establishment Of The Government Of God

Early Knowledge of the Government of God

Joseph Smith had some understanding of the government of God very early in his ministry. The principles and doctrines of the divine system are intricately and consistently woven into the text of the Book of Mormon. [^3] The Prophet later stated that in September, 1823, the angel Moroni gave him a vision of "the aboriginal inhabitants of this country," the people of the Book of Mormon, including a sketch of their "origin, progress, civilization, laws [and] governments." [^4] So familiar was Joseph with the ancient society that his mother said he often described the details of their civilization "with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them." [^5]

Sidney Rigdon reflected this early understanding of the kingdom when, nearly a month after Joseph Smith organized the General Council, in March, 1844, he said of his meetings with the Church in 1830:

We talked about the people coming as doves to the windows; and that nations should flock unto it; that they should come bending to the standard of Jesus. . . . There we sat in secret and beheld the glorious visions and powers of the kingdom of heaven pass and repass. . . . I do not know that anything has taken place in the history of this Church which we did not then believe. [^6]

Other evidence of the Prophet's early knowledge of the government of God is found in several revelations. "In time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I will be your king and watch over you," the Lord declared early in January, 1831, then added: "Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and what can stay my hand?" [^7] After two more revelations which alluded to the subject, [^8] a third one commanded, in August, 1831: "Be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet." Having given this counsel, the Lord then made an astute clarification. "Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth," He explained. "Behold, here is wisdom." [^9] There were other laws which pertained to the political order of the kingdom, but the ecclesiastical program and Zion had to be developed first. In that light the Saints were to view the kingdom and to present it to the world, so they could claim the religious immunities guaranteed by the Constitution. In the Lord's own time the government of God would be developed.

The Organization of the Government of God

On March 11, 1844, Joseph Smith organized the nucleus of the government of God in the form of a "special council," [^10] later designated as the "General Council," [^11] and often abbreviated as the "Council." [^12] Because slightly more than fifty men were members of this body before the Prophet's death in June that year, it was popularly referred to as the "Council of Fifty." [^13] (This number did not imply, however, that it would be composed of only fifty men.) [^14] Since it was held to be the nucleus from which God's government on earth would be developed, it was also called the "Council of the Kingdom." [^15]

Brigham Young stated that the "constitution" of the government of God, or a statement giving the basic principles upon which that political organ would one day rest, was "given by revelation" to Joseph Smith. [^16] One source dates this revelation April 7, 1842. [^17] Though the date is not certain, it may have been given before the Prophet organized the General Council.

As the body from which the government of God was to be developed at some future time, the General Council was organized when a group of men, who had been sent to Wisconsin Territory (to a place on the Black River which they called the "Pineries") to get out lumber for construction work at Nauvoo, wrote to Joseph Smith suggesting that they move to "the tablelands of Texas" and establish a place to gather the Saints from the South. Upon receiving the letter, the Prophet mused: "I perceive that the Spirit of God is in the pineries as well as here, and we will call together some of our wise men, and proceed to set up the [nucleus of the political division of the] Kingdom of God by organizing some of its officers." [^18] He obviously had the government of God well in mind at that time and understood the basic nature of its organization.

The Prophet's statement indicates that his immediate intent in organizing the General Council was to settle the Saints in a new region. The Council was not then to function as a new government, nor is there evidence that it did so during the lifetime of Joseph Smith. Brigham Young referred to that which the Prophet established among the Saints as being "the principles, doctrine, germ, and . . . marrow" of the divine government. Since it was something less than a political organ, it would take time and circumstances for the actual government to be formed. President Young used a kernel of wheat to illustrate the point. "When wheat is planted and germinates," he explained, "you first see the blade, and by and by the head forming in the boot, from which in due time it bursts forth and makes its appearance." [^19]

In recording the organization of the General Council in his journal, Joseph Smith stated that it was formed to consider the request made by the brethren in the Black River Lumber Company, and also to determine "the best policy for this people to adopt to obtain their rights from the nation and insure protection for themselves and children; and to secure a resting place in the mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution of our country." [^20] Brigham Young gave a similar report. The object of the new body was to determine "the best manner to settle our people in some distant and unoccupied territory," he said, "where we could enjoy our civil and religious rights, without being subject to constant oppression and mobocracy, under the protection of our own laws, subject to the Constitution." The key to his explanation is the statement that they hoped to settle the Saints under their "own laws, subject to the Constitution." [^21] They were considering the organization of a new government, but it was to be in a new and unoccupied region. [^22] Brigham Young continued: "We held a number of sessions, and investigated the principles upon which our national government is founded; and the true foundation and principles of all governments." [^23]

But it was expected that out of the General Council the government of God would one day develop. John D. Lee, a member of the Council, said: "This council alluded to is the municipal department of the kingdom of God set up on the earth, from which all law emanates, for the rule, government and control of all nations, kingdoms, and tongues and people under the whole heavens, but not to control the Priesthood, but to council, deliberate and plan for the general good and upbuilding of the kingdom of God on the earth." [^24] Benjamin F. Johnson also explained: "About this time was organized his [Joseph Smith's] private council of Fifty,—the embryo kingdom of God upon the earth—an organization distinct from the Church, a nucleus of popular government which will exist for all people, 'when the heathen are given for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth as a possession' to Him whose right it is to reign; a government formed of representatives from every nation, principality or tribe upon the earth; a government of God for the people and by the people, in which man will be taught to know his origin and to govern himself." [^25]

Having previously received the law and having set forth the program of other features of the millennial system, [^26] Joseph Smith expressed the view that the organization of the General Council completed the work of laying the foundation of the kingdom of God upon the earth. After the organization of that body, Benjamin F. Johnson said of one of their meetings shortly before the Prophet's death:

He stood before that association of his select friends, including all of the Twelve, and with great feeling and animation he graphically reviewed his life of persecution, labor and sacrifice for the church and the Kingdom of God, both of which he declared were now organized upon the earth, the burden of which had become too great for him longer to carry, that he was weary and tired with the weight he had so long borne, and he then said, with great vehemence: "And in the name of the Lord, I now shake from my shoulders the responsibility of bearing off the Kingdom of God to all the world, and here and now I place that responsibility, with all the keys, powers and privileges pertaining thereto, upon the shoulders of you the Twelve Apostles, in connection with this council; and if you will accept this, to do it, God shall bless you mightily and shall open your way; and if you do it not you will be damned." [^27]

The Nature Of God's Government

Government as an Order of the Priesthood

Within the kingdom of God, municipal authority was "not separate and distinct from the Priesthood," but was "a branch" of the divine system. [^28] Political functions were centered in Christ and administered by His authority. The Holy Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek included political figures as well as prophets and priests. [^29] Though political matters could be administered temporarily under the priesthood, without perfecting the divine government, the perfected system would center in the divine patriarchal order and would be the municipal organ of that eternal family. [^30]

This arrangement meant that there was to be a union of political and ecclesiastical power in the prophet who held the keys of the priesthood on earth, even though the two systems were separate and functioned as separate entities. A Latter-day Saint writer observed correctly that a "leading feature" of the kingdom of God restored through Joseph Smith was the blending together of "the spiritual and temporal, the heavenly and earthly." [^31] Though the Saints deprecated any alliance of church and state that had "a tendency to deprive the sons of liberty of their rights," they published the declaration in two of their leading periodicals: "We cannot but think that the course taken by many of our politicians is altogether culpable, that the division is extending too far, and that in our jealousy lest a union of this kind should take place, we have thrust out God from all our political movements." [^32] After inquiring who "in the eyes of eternal justice" had a right to sit in high political office, "to be countenanced, adored, loved, and reverenced in his capacity, and be justified therein by the heavenly hosts," Brigham Young answered: "It is that man who is sanctified before God, and who loves the Lord Jesus with all his heart, or in other words, who is endowed with wisdom from on high, and has revelations, visions, and dreams, giving him understanding to provide for the welfare of every portion of the nation, and a willingness to preserve to every one their fair and just religious rights, as well as political, for the good and benefit of all." [^33]

The Universality of the Government of God

The government of God would eventually become universal, as the millennial government of Jesus Christ. "Thou didst lift up thy voice and cry to the nations, Behold here are liberty and freedom for all," Orson Pratt said of the United States Constitution; "but that which came after thee shall thoroughly purge the floor, and restore everlasting peace and liberty to the whole earth." [^34] As a world order, the government of God would have two great centers of power: the City of Zion, on the Western hemisphere, and Jerusalem, in the Old World. "The law for the government of all nations will go forth from Zion," Elder Pratt explained, "the same as the laws for the government of the United States now go forth from Washington." [^35] But Jerusalem would also become a center of political law for the Eastern hemisphere. [^36] Heber C. Kimball reported the Prophet as saying that at a "great council of God in Jerusalem," there would "be a uniting of the two divisions of God's government." [^37]

The Government of God as a Non-socialized State

The government of God was to be a strictly political system—an unsocialized state concerned solely with political matters. This kind of government could be achieved within the kingdom of God if Zion was built up as a free and independent economic order based upon covenant principles. Political systems are socialized when the social and economic problems of society go unsolved except by the intervention of the state, and as man seeks to achieve the ideals of social and economic justice without knowing how to attain them. But in the kingdom of God social and economic problems were to be solved and true justice in these areas achieved by building Zion in a framework of freedom and civil justice. This would check the tendency to socialize the state; and by centralizing political power in the presiding councils of the kingdom, whose members knew how to build up Zion and establish freedom, the government of God could be confined strictly to the political sphere of society.

Joseph Smith held that there was a limit to what the state could successfully accomplish, or what man should attempt to accomplish through the state. "The laws of men may guarantee to a people protection in the honorable pursuits of this life, and the temporal happiness arising from a protection against unjust insults and injustices," he wrote of the state; "and when this is said, all is said, that can be in truth, of the power, extent, and influence of the laws of men, exclusive of the law of God." [^38]

Nephite prophets were not confused on the basic principles of freedom and government. It was not the function of the state to legislate righteousness or establish social and economic justice, except as it had an indirect bearing on these objectives by the maintenance of freedom and civil justice. By teaching the law of God and applying it to the social and economic areas of society, Nephite prophets sought to raise a true standard of spiritual, moral, and social precepts that would persuade the people by an inward motivation to reform society according to Christian principles. When Alma, as High Priest over the Church and Chief Judge over the Nephite nation, confronted a situation of "great inequality among the people," he did not seek a solution through the state, though being Chief Judge he could have. Instead, he resigned his political office in favor of "a wise man" who would "enact laws . . . and . . . put them in force according to the wickedness and the crimes of the people." In this action, he shored up the state in its role of establishing freedom and civil justice. Alma then went "among the people of Nephi, that he might preach the word of God unto them, to stir them up in remembrance to their duty, and that he might pull down, by the word of God, all the pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among his people, seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them." [^39]

The United States Constitution and the Government of God

In Joseph Smith's thought, the Constitution of the United States was a vital instrument directly related to the government of God. He taught that all people would one day "learn war no more" by "adopting the God-given Constitution of the United States as a Palladium of Liberty and Equal Rights." [^40] The Lord revealed to the Prophet that the Constitution set forth the central concept of God's government. Having declared that the Constitution was "justifiable before me," the Lord said: "And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." [^41] A system providing less powers and functions of government than the Constitution proposed would not protect the freedoms guaranteed to man, or provide the necessary machinery to establish justice and domestic tranquility. A system that governed more than the Constitution allowed, with its original philosophy of limited government, would regiment where it ought not regiment. The Prophet held that either system would produce evil to the degree the deficiencies in the first existed or the perversions in the latter were adopted.

John Taylor stated that by setting forth correct principles of government, the Constitution of the United States was "the entering wedge for the introduction of a new era, and in it were introduced principles for the birth and organization of a new world." [^42] The Saints held that that great document was designed to be associated with the kingdom of God in three ways: First, it was a preparatory program. Brigham Young stated that without it there would not have been "sufficient liberty of conscience" to restore the gospel and develop the program of the kingdom. [^43] Orson Pratt referred to the Constitution as being "like John the Baptist's mission, merely to prepare the way." He concluded: "It was for this purpose, then, that a republic was organized upon this continent to prepare the way for a kingdom which shall have dominion over all the earth to the ends thereof." [^44]

Second, the Constitution was a major step toward the millennial government that would guarantee freedom and equal rights to all men. "With all its glory and greatness and perfection," Orson Pratt said, "it was only a stepping-stone to a form of government founded upon Divine laws, with all its institutions, ordinances, and officers appointed by the God of heaven." [^45] John Taylor agreed: "It was one of those stepping stones to a future development in the progress of man to the intelligence and light, the power and union that God alone can impart to the human family." That higher order had been revealed through Joseph Smith. President Taylor thus observed: "While we acknowledge, as citizens of the United States, the laws and institutions thereof, . . . we have a higher law, more noble principles, ideas that are more elevated and expansive; principles that reach to the whole human family." [^46]

Finally, the Constitution, perfected as a political instrument and adapted to the program of the higher universal order, was expected to become part of that divine order—the millennial kingdom of Jesus Christ. To establish that divine system, man would have to utilize the powers and blessings of the Holy Spirit. Free institutions in America had their basis in the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God which was given to the gentiles. To perfect those institutions by establishing the government of God would require a greater utilization of divine powers as they were given to man through the Holy Priesthood.

Though they respected the Constitution greatly, the Saints did not consider it a perfect instrument of government. Brigham Young said:

The signers of the Declaration of Independence and the framers of the Constitution were inspired from on high to do that work. But was that which was given to them perfect, not admitting of any addition whatever? No; for if men know anything, they must know that the Almighty has never yet found a man in mortality that was capable, at the first intimation, at the first impulse, to receive anything in a state of entire perfection. They laid the foundation, and it was for after generations to rear the superstructure upon it. It is a progressive—a gradual work. [^47]

Orson Pratt agreed. Having stated that God "had a hand in framing" the Constitution, he continued: "Why did not the Lord, at that time, introduce a perfect government—a theocracy? It was simply because the people were . . . far from being prepared for the government of God, which is a government of union." [^48] Again, he said in greater detail:

A theocratical government, under an inspired Priesthood, would have been better still; but the people were not prepared for such a form of government; and would not have received it, if it had been proposed; consequently God gave them the next best, or such a one as He saw they would receive. . . . This Republic, therefore, was established of God, not as a perfect form of government, but as a stepping-stone to one that was perfect, and of His own order, founded on the revelation of the Priesthood, and its laws and ordinances. . . . The Constitution, and the Republican form of government are good as far as they go, but they stop infinitely short of the glorious privileges and powers enjoyed in the more perfect form of God's government. [^49]

The imperfections of the Constitution pertained not to its basic principles but to the methods it provided in guaranteeing the blessings of freedom and civil justice to all. Though he admitted that the Constitution was not perfect, Elder Pratt said, "It is perfect so far as it pertains to the rights and privileges of the children of men." [^50] When the divine system for guaranteeing those rights and privileges was developed,

All the great and glorious principles incorporated in this great republic will be incorporated in the kingdom of God and be preserved. I mean the principles of civil and religious liberty, especially, and all other good principles that are contained in that great instrument framed by our forefathers will be incorporated in the kingdom of God; and only in this manner can all that is good in this and in foreign governments be preserved. [^51]

The Theocratic Nature of Government

As a theocratic system, the will and law of Christ would be expressed in the government of God through a living prophet, with the people having the right to participate in the lawmaking process and to accept or reject the divine dictation. [^52] Such a system would be a perfect order of government. [^53] It would combine the law and intelligence of God with the principles of human dignity and agency, and it would provide the means, without deficiency or departure from correct principles, to establish true freedom, civil justice, and peace among men. "There is a nucleus of a government, formed since that of the United States, which is perfect in its nature," Orson Pratt therefore observed. "It is perfect, having emanated from a Being who is perfect." [^54] Brigham Young shared this view. The new theocracy, he said, would be "the only true form of government on the earth." [^55]

Since the divine system would perfect the basic political system provided by the Constitution of the United States, Brigham Young explained that, as a theocracy, the government of God would "be controlled upon the same basis, in part, as that of the Government of the United States." [^56] He also noted:

But few, if any, understand what a theocratic government is. In every sense of the word, it is a republican government, and differs but little in form from our National, State, and Territorial Governments; but its subjects will recognize the will and dictation of the Almighty. . . .

The Constitution and laws of the United States resemble a theocracy more closely than any government now on earth. . . . Even now the form of the Government of the United States differs but little from the Kingdom of God. [^57]

This statement has several significant points: First, the government of God would be a republican form of government—a system of government administered under the forms of law by officers who would represent the people and act in their interest. The divine system, President Young stated, would possess "all the true principles of republicanism." [^58] In addition, the voice of the people directly would be considered. For this reason he also called the government of God "a true democratic theocracy." [^59] It would therefore be "a Republican Democratic Government." [^60]

Second, in its general form, the government of God would be very much like the system of government provided by the United States Constitution, in its national, state, and territorial divisions. It would be a federal system. As a world government, it would be a great confederation of nations and peoples.

Third, the citizens of the divine political order would recognize the will and dictation of God in matters of government. In practical terms this meant firs,t that by divine inspiration and revelation the living prophet and his properly constituted representatives would be given the right to nominate the officers of government, subject to the consent of the people, and, second, that the law and will of God in their civil expressions would be made the basis of the government.

To a form of government like that provided by the Constitution of the United States, a true theocracy would add the beneficial manifestations and endowments of God's power as an enlightening and directing influence in the lives of public officials. "What do I understand by a theocratic government?" Brigham Young inquired. "One in which all laws are enacted and executed in righteousness, and whose officers possess that power which proceedeth from the Almighty." That was the kind of government he envisioned when he talked about "a theocratic government, or the kingdom of God upon the earth." [^61]

A Government Without Political Parties

As a theocracy, the government of God would not use political parties as instruments for installing men in office, or as devices to formulate the policies of government. Orson Pratt observed that in the divine system there would be "no party politicians." [^62] Instead, he said that the principles of the Constitution would be carried out "according to the order of union and oneness which prevails among the people of God." [^63]

This concept of government was a perfection of the general ideal of government espoused by the founding fathers of the United States Constitution. They sought for a stable and united system which would properly separate the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government and exclude, largely, if not completely, political parties from a role in government. They purposely devised the machinery of government to minimize the influence of political parties. James Madison thus wrote as an argument in behalf of the Constitution that "among the numerous advantages promised by a well-constructed union, none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control" the influence of self-interested factions or parties. [^64]

The founding fathers sought for a stable, impartial, and righteous government which, as Madison wrote, would protect "the diversity in the faculties of man" (that is, protect man's freedom and his right to different opinions and interests) as its first object, regulate the "various and interfering interests arising from freedom and diversity among men by providing for justice . . . to hold the balance between them," and do all these things without government itself being controlled or unduly influenced by a given party or group of parties. "To secure the public good and private rights against the danger" of such organizations, while preserving at the same time "the spirit and form of popular government," wrote the Father of the Constitution, "is then the great object to which our inquiries are directed." A person, he therefore concluded, "will not fail . . . to set a due value on any plan which, without violating the [personal] principles to which he is attached, provides a proper cure" for party influence. [^65]

The founding fathers maintained that one way to achieve this ideal of government was to devise a method of placing qualified men in office by popular consent without using political parties or party influence. For this purpose they established the electoral college, whose function was to elect the President and Vice President of the United States of America. [^66] In selecting men to fill these offices, members of the electoral college were expected to be above party interests, and to act in the national interest rather than in the interest of a party. [^67]

In the program of the government of God, Joseph Smith apparently intended to replace the electoral college with the presiding priesthood councils of the kingdom of God (those councils that had a right to direct both the church and the state) and to give them the right to nominate men to political office, subject to the expressed consent of the people. The same general procedure would install all officers within the government of God.

James Madison suggested that another way to protect government from the influence of self-interested groups, without "destroying the liberty" essential to their existence, was to establish government upon a republican principle. The "delegation of government" to chosen representatives, he wrote, would "refine and enlarge the public views, by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of citizens" who would be required to balance one interest against another. Wise men in government office, whose "patriotism and love of justice" would be "least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial consideration," could also "best discern the true interests of their country." [^68]

Madison held that the federal system, with political power divided vertically between the federal, state, and local levels of government, would further aid in controlling party influence by making "it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens" or the ability "to act in unison with each other" in attaining such ambitions. In addition, the horizontal separation of power between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of both the federal and state governments provided a means of preserving government against organized party interest. A party might gain control of one branch of government, but seldom would it be able to control all three branches of government on both the state and federal levels. Thus, Madison concluded, "in the extent and proper structure of the union we behold a republican remedy for the disease [i. e., the tendency to spawn self-interested parties] most incident to republican government." [^69]

Because government under the Constitution was originally designed to establish freedom while protecting itself against party influence, E. E. Shattschneider wrote that the founding fathers held "a legalistic concept of government incompatible with a satisfactory system of party government." By organizing government as they did, he suggested, "it was hoped that the parties would lose and exhaust themselves in futile attempts to fight their way through the labyrinthine framework of the government, much as an attacking army is expected to spend itself against the defensive works of a fortress." [^70] This would be true of both majority and minority parties and interests. Lord Acton noted that the federal system "is the only method of curbing not only the majority but the power of the whole people." [^71]

The idea was for government to establish individual freedom, maintain civil justice for all, and carry out specified functions which were clearly political in nature. When such a form of government was established and perfected, there would be no need for political parties. Such a system could be zealously supported without the people organizing themselves into a political party. But for one to seek an influence in government for reasons other than to support those functions stated above was to seek to use government for purposes which it was not designed to accomplish. This was a perversion of the true concept of government under the Constitution. To the degree there was a departure from that pure concept, political parties would come into existence as expressions of the varied opinions and interests of the people. But if the original concept of the founding fathers was maintained and perfected, political parties would not be necessary. [^72]

With this exalted view of government, the founding fathers discouraged in positive terms the expression of party spirit, but asserted that the freedom which permitted it should be maintained inviolate. "Let me . . . warn you in the most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the Spirit of Party, generally," President Washington declared in his Farewell Address.

This Spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its roots in the strongest passions of the human mind.—It exists under different shapes in all Governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or repressed; but, in those of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their worst enemy. . . .

In governments purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged.—From their natural tendency, it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every salutary purpose,—and there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought to be, by force of public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it.—A fire not to be quenched; it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into flame, lest, instead of warming, it should consume.

Joseph Smith spoke highly of the ideal of political union which the founding fathers envisioned. In his "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States," he quoted Washington's First Inaugural Address to Congress: "I behold the surest pledges that as, on one side, no local prejudices or attachments, no separate views or party animosities will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests, so, on another, that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality, and the pre-eminence of free government be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections of its citizens and command the respect of the world." [^73]

"Verily," the Prophet commented, "here shine the virtue and wisdom of a statesman in such lucid rays, that had every succeeding Congress followed the rich instruction in all their deliberations and enactments, for the benefit and convenience of the whole community and the communities of which it is composed, . . . a thousand . . . difficulties would [not] have torn asunder the bonds of the Union." He declared: "Unity is power; and when I reflect on the importance of it to the stability of all governments, I am astonished at the silly moves of persons and parties to foment discord in order to ride into power on the current of popular excitement." [^74]

Legislative Procedures

The theocratic principle of the government of God proposed to modify traditional legislative processes as they are carried out in purely republican or democratic systems of government. In the divine system, the law would not originate with man, but with God. Referring to the government of ancient Israel under Moses as a pattern of how it would be in the latter days, Joseph Smith said: "They had God to make their laws, and men chosen by Him to administer them." [^75] But this did not eliminate the role of men in the lawmaking processes. Brigham Young referred to men as legislators "in that body which will issue laws to sustain the inhabitants of the earth in their individual rights," and he said that that body would "make laws" to govern all nations. [^76]

Nor did it mean that officers in the divine government were merely to wait for God to initiate laws and regulations to govern the people. Brigham Young declared: "Individual self-government lies at the root of all true and effective government, whether in heaven or on earth." [^77] Legislators in the halls of government were to represent the needs and interests of their constituents, and in this function they were to discuss the welfare of the people and make laws. But theocratic principles imposed four major requirements upon government officials. First, the laws which they made were to be based upon the revelations of God. In the Nephite theocracy, for example, a ruler was given "power to enact laws according to the laws which had been given" to them from God. [^78]

Second, legislators were to utilize the Holy Spirit as a source of revelation in the lawmaking processes. Revelation seldom, if ever, came without human effort, and the process of enlightening the mind by the Spirit was no different in matters of government than in more spiritual things. To this end legislators were to apply the principles of study, analysis, and faith by which they could receive inspiration and revelation from God. [^79]

Third, since the living prophet held the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, legislators were to submit their proposed laws and regulations to him for his approval and to modify them accordingly. Here was one of the most vital and significant features of the theocratic program.

Finally, legislators were to be receptive to the Spirit of revelation when it was expressed directly through the living prophet.

By applying these procedures, the government of God was to be a system of open and enlightened union, rather than one of party politics and discord. Instead of an opposing party or a loyal opposition to inform the public of counter-views and proposals, all officers would act in that free and open union which was made possible by the blessings of the Holy Spirit. The Deseret News reflected the Latter-day Saint view when it declared editorially that "people only disagree where they have not sufficient knowledge on the subject under consideration, or through wickedness, which is itself the off-spring of ignorance." [^80]

But in case of disunion or a failure to see eye to eye on a given issue, legislators were to submit the matter to the prophet who held the keys of the kingdom, for a clarification by the wisdom and revelation of God. Concerning this procedure in the legislative functions of the government of God, a Latter-day Saint writer said:

The utmost freedom of speech from abuse is indulged in; but any measure that cannot be unanimously decided on, is submitted to the President of the Church, who, by the wisdom of God decides the matter, and all the Councillors and Legislators sanction the decision. There are no hostile parties, no opposition, no Whig and Tory, Democrat or Republican. They are all brethren, legislating for the common good, and the word of the Lord, through the head of the Church, guides, counsels, and directs. Thus political union is secured, and the shameful displays of party spirit, recrimination, and pet schemes for individual or sectional aggrandizement, which disgrace the Congresses, Parliaments, and Senate-chambers of the world are . . . things only to be despised. [^81]

The Saints held that a great distinction existed between blind obedience and the free and open union which was possible through applying the principles of true theocracy. The two approaches were poles apart—at opposite ends of the scale of human relations. With a knowledge of the union which could prevail among the Saints, George A. Smith explained: "What we do we should do as one man." [^82] This included political actions. In stressing this fact, Brigham Young quoted the words of Christ in a revelation, "If ye are not one, ye are not mine." [^83] Not democracy, but true theocracy was the order of heaven. "Would it be democratic to get up an election in heaven and have opposition?" President Young inquired. Not in a system which exalted intelligence, and where free and open union prevailed by the natural attraction which light had to light and truth had to truth. If a "party spirit" was developed, he concluded, the Saints would have to "admit the existence of error and corruption somewhere." [^84]

This was a high standard, and the Saints were the first to admit that it could not be achieved by the world in general, or by man alone without the divine truth and power which were found in the kingdom of God. But within the kingdom man could act politically in free and open union, and perfect that great system of government which the founding fathers of the United States Constitution had established.

General Council as a Living Constitution

Joseph Smith maintained "that no legislature could enact laws that would meet every case, or attain the ends of justice in all respects." [^85] He therefore held that government should act primarily on the basis of truth, justice, and equity, rather than merely on the basis of law; and each case ought to be judged on its merits. When he and his people were the victims of a situation where the existing interpretation of the United States Constitution afforded them no legal remedy for their injuries, he exclaimed in a letter to John C. Calhoun, "Why—tell me why are all the principal men held up for public stations so cautiously careful not to publish to the world that they will judge a righteous judgment, law or no laws? for laws and opinions, like the vanes of steeples, change with the wind." [^86]

Sometime before the Prophet wrote to Calhoun, a revelation dealt with the principle he stressed. "Notwithstanding those things which are written," the Lord counseled, "it always has been given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit." [^87] The same principle applied to the affairs of government. "The great question . . . is," Parley P. Pratt explained, "not the operations of the instruments, the beauty of the writing, the formation of the language, or the principle of liberty guaranteed therein, but the administration of those principles." "It is the living administration, after all, that is the government," he stressed, "although a good form opens the way for good results, if carried out." [^88]

Though the details are not clear, there was apparently provision made in the government of God to apply truth and justice—not merely law—to all cases under its administration, and for this reason the General Council "was called the 'Living Constitution.'" [^89] After the death of Brigham Young, a revelation given to that body through John Taylor said: "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I have instituted my Kingdom and laws, with the keys and the power thereof, and I have appointed you as my spokesman and my Constitution, with John Taylor at your head, whom I have appointed to my Church and my Kingdom as Prophet, Seer and Revelator." Again: "I have taught and instructed you and organized you according to my eternal laws. Ye are my Constitution, and I am your God." [^90] The minutes of the Council for April 21, 1880, contain a similar statement, quoting either a revelation given that day or at an earlier date. [^91]

This view of the General Council seems to imply that it would be an appellate body with power to review political actions within the government of God, to see that they were taken in the interest of truth and equity. In this respect it is of interest to note that one of the members of that body referred to the Council as "the highest court on the earth." [^92]

Whether or not the General Council would exercise the power of judicial review was not made clear, but the evidence implies that such power was within the scope of its authority. Before 1789, the power of judicial review was exercised in different ways in the several states. [^93] But the Constitution did not designate which branch of the federal government would have that right, and it was not until 1803, in the case of Marbury v. Madison, that Chief Justice John Marshall assumed that the Supreme Court had the power of judicial review and centered it in that body. It appears that the General Council, as a Living Constitution, would perform this function in the government of God. It would not be carried out independent of priesthood jurisdiction.

Officers in the Government of God

As a practical system of law and order, Brigham Young explained that in the government of God there would be as "many officers and branches" as there were then in the government of the United States. There would be "such helps, governments, etc., as the people required in their several capacities and circumstances." [^94] This would include a system of courts. In short, the divine system would have "every office, law and ordinance necessary for the managing of those who are unruly, or who transgress its laws," he said, "and to govern those who desire to do right, but can not quite walk to the line." [^95]

But even the finest political forms and procedures could not of themselves assure good government. Joseph Smith therefore stressed the need for men of integrity and ability to fill public offices. Having spoken of the true form of government as set forth in the United States Constitution and declared that both the law of God and that of the land made the Saints free, the Lord in a revelation said: "Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil." [^96] Consistent with this need, the Prophet expressed the hope that government by righteous and intelligent men would "live for ever." [^97]

The Saints held that tenure in office should be based upon demonstrated ability and integrity rather than be dictated by the number of years or terms a man could serve. This policy could be carried out better under the theocratic order of the kingdom than through men being installed in office by democratic processes. "Whenever we have good officers, strive to retain them," Brigham Young advised, "and to fill up vacancies with good men, until there are none who would let the nation sink for a can of oysters and a lewd woman." [^98]

The Constitution In The Perfected System

The Constitution vs. Law That Is Constitutional

Joseph Smith distinguished between the Constitution and a law which was constitutional. The first is the document which the founding fathers devised, and the second is a law duly made and enacted according to the provisions of the Constitution. In a revelation, the Lord referred to "that law of the land which is constitutional." [^99] The Prophet explained:

The Constitution is not a law, but it empowers the people to make laws. For instance, the Constitution governs the land of Iowa, but it is not a law for the people. The Constitution tells us what shall not be lawful tender. The 10th section declares that nothing else except gold and silver shall be lawful tender, that is not saying that gold and silver shall be lawful tender. It only provides that the states may make gold and silver lawful tender. . . .

The Constitution is not law to us, but it makes provision for us whereby we can make laws. . . . The Constitution provides to regulate bodies of men and not individuals. [^100]

Within the kingdom of God, the Constitution of the United States perfected in its original concept would regulate the general political order and prescribe that which could be done by government within the system. Laws would be made consistent with the provisions of that document.

The Maintenance of Individual Freedom

The primary concern of government within the kingdom of God was to maintain individual freedom and justice. Brigham Young declared: "The municipal laws of that kingdom are designed for the protection of all classes of people in their legitimate rights." [^101] This was the primary reason why God inspired the founding fathers to formulate the Constitution of the United States. In a revelation, the Lord declared that by its provisions the Saints were made free, [^102] and in another one He stated specifically that the Constitution had been established "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." [^103]

The word futurity derives from the word future, and in this statement it refers to the time yet to come in an individual's life. To "act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity according to the moral agency" given him by God meant that each person could act unrestrictedly, according to the doctrine and principles he personally accepted to determine his future course and destiny in life.

This was a vital point. Individual freedom—not merely the freedom of the individual to act as part of a group or through a group, but the right of the individual to be free as a person—this was the central purpose for which the Constitution was established. When a person acts as part of a crowd (or as one of a group), he cannot be entirely free or accountable, except in the exercise of his agency in joining the group and for the influence he exerts upon it. But that is not freedom as an individual, for the individual is often swallowed up in the masses or influenced in his actions by external forces from the group. Joseph Smith held that the best form of government—that form which acts in the best interest of man—was founded upon the maintenance of individual freedom, rather than upon expressing the popular will of the majority. [^104]

Some religious figures of the past have erroneously concluded that because they had the "truth," they had the right and, if necessary, the obligation to impose that "truth" upon others. But the government of God was not based upon this false assumption. It would sustain the agency of man as the fundamental truth. No other truth in the realm of human relations could have meaning or, ultimately, exist unless the agency of man was held inviolate. Concerning that government, Brigham Young said: "It will sustain all the religions, sects, and parties on the earth in their religious rights, . . . not that the diverse creeds are right, but the agency of the believers therein demands protection for them." [^105]

Man was not to be free merely out of respect for another's diverging opinions. This was not freedom, but tolerance. Man was to be free because God gave him agency as a principle concomitant to the life within him. "We deem it a just principle, and it is one the force of which we believe ought to be duly considered by every individual, that all men . . . have the privilege of thinking for themselves upon all matters relative to conscience," Joseph Smith wrote. "Consequently, then, we are not disposed, had we the power, to deprive any one of exercising that free independence of mind which heaven has so graciously bestowed upon the human family as one of its choicest gifts." [^106] In full accord with the Prophet, Brigham Young said: "The Creator has given agency to every son and daughter of Adam, and he does not infringe upon our agency. We are at liberty to believe in him and in his son Jesus Christ, or to let it alone." [^107]

But freedom was not license. Though man would not be forced to do right, he was subject to the penalty of broken law. "Many are disposed through their own wickedness 'to do as I damned please,'" Brigham Young observed, then added: "and they are damned."

The volition of the creature is free, to do good or to do evil; but we are responsible to God for our acts, as man is responsible to man if he breaks the laws which man enacts. When we boast of our independence to act, it would be well for us to remember that we are bounded by these limits; if we transcend them and violate the laws of God, and man, we shall sooner or later be made to suffer the penalty without any reference to our choice whether we are willing to suffer that penalty or not. Hence, true independence and freedom can only exist in doing right. [^108]

In this philosophy of freedom, the just rights and interests of others limited man's agency. For example, Brigham Young pointed out that some religious bodies in the world once burned the widow of a deceased man upon the funeral pyre. Under the kingdom of God this would not be permitted, "for that would interfere with individual rights." [^109]

These principles occupied a place deep in the Prophet's heart, and they were woven into the very fiber of Latter-day Saint thought. "It is a love of liberty which inspires my soul," Joseph Smith declared—"civil and religious liberty to the whole of the human race." [^110] Again: "It is one of the first principles of my life, and one that I have cultivated from my childhood, having been taught it by my father, to allow every one the liberty of conscience." [^111] On another occasion he said: "Love of liberty was diffused into my soul by my grandfathers while they dandled me on their knees." [^112] Because he subscribed to this great principle of human agency, he said:

If I esteem mankind to be in error, shall I bear them down? No. I will lift them up, and in their own way too, if I cannot persuade them my way is better; and I will not seek to compel any man to believe as I do, only by the force of reasoning, for truth will cut its own way. [^113]

In these statements, the Prophet reflected the philosophy of freedom within the kingdom of God. Brigham Young declared:

Go into the world . . . and tell them plainly that the law of God is going to be the law of the land, and they would be terrified. . . . But tell them that the law of liberty, and equal rights to every person, would prevail and they could understand that, for it is according to the Constitution of our country. . . .

The Holy Priesthood and the laws thereof . . . will secure the rights of men. . . . You can believe in one God, or in three gods, or in a thousand gods; you can worship the sun or the moon, or a stick or a stone, or anything you please. . . . They can do as they please, so long as they do not infringe upon the rights of their fellow beings. [^114]

The Principles of the Constitution Belong to All Men

Joseph Smith held that the principles of freedom and justice embodied within the Constitution of the United States belonged as natural rights to all men on earth and would, through the program of the kingdom of God, be extended to them. In a revelation the Lord declared that "the laws and constitution" which had been established in the United States "should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles." [^115] In another revelation He also stated: "That law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me." [^116]

In expressing this view of the Constitution, Parley P. Pratt said in a July Fourth oration: "The principles of the Constitution . . . embrace eternal truths, principles of eternal liberty, not the principles of one peculiar country, or the sectional interest of any particular people, but the great, fundamental, eternal principles of liberty to rational beings—liberty of conscience, liberty to do business, liberty to increase in intelligence and in improvement, in the comforts, conveniences, and elegances of this life, and in the intellectual principles that tend to progress in all lives." [^117]

Because the Prophet held this view, he wanted to extend the constitutional system of the United States throughout the Western hemisphere, and the world. In his "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States," which set forth his proposals in the presidential campaign of 1844, he wrote:

When the people petitioned to possess the territory of Oregon, or any other contiguous territory, I would lend the influence of a Chief Magistrate to grant so reasonable a request, that they might extend the mighty efforts and enterprise of a free people from the east to the west sea, and make the wilderness blossom as the rose. And when a neighboring realm petitioned to join the union of liberty's sons, my voice would be, Come—yea, come, Texas; come Mexico, come Canada; and come, all the world: let us be brethren, let us be one great family, and let there be a universal peace. [^118]

George Q. Cannon expressed the Prophet's view of the Constitution's potential to guarantee universal freedom and justice. After stressing that the divine system would protect all men "in their equal rights," he said:

That is the kind of kingdom we have to contend for; that is the kind of kingdom we have to establish, and it is already provided for in the Constitution given unto us by God, and through the glorious labors of the fathers who laid the foundation of this government, who were inspired and raised up by our Almighty Father for this express purpose. There is no liberty that a human being can desire, neither is there a right that can be exercised properly, that we do not have under the Constitution of our land. It needs no amendment about it; it is broad enough, if interpreted in its true spirit, to cover the individual, the continent, and the entire globe and furnish freedom for all. [^119]

The Need to Assure Constitutional Guarantees

Joseph Smith pointed out that a people might have a constitution that provided freedom and justice to its citizens, but it was another matter to establish adequate guarantees that those rights and freedoms would actually be extended to all of the people. Because the United States Constitution could not give that guarantee, the Prophet held that it had a major weakness. He said:

The only fault I find with the Constitution is, it is not broad enough to cover the whole ground.

Although it provides that all men shall enjoy religious freedom, yet it does not provide the manner by which that freedom can be preserved, nor for the punishment of Government officers who refuse to protect the people in their religious rights, or punish those mobs, states, or communities who interfere with the rights of the people on account of their religion. Its sentiments are good, but it provides no means of enforcing them. It has but this one fault. Under its provision, a man or a people who are able to protect themselves can get along well enough; but those who have the misfortune to be weak or unpopular are left to the merciless rage of popular fury. [^120]

The Latter-day Saint leader proposed that strict provisions be established to assure all men their constitutional rights. "The Constitution should contain a provision that every officer of the Government who should neglect or refuse to extend the protection guaranteed in the Constitution should be subject to capital punishment," he declared; "and then the President of the United States would not say, 'Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you,' or a governor issue exterminating orders, or judges say, 'The men ought to have the protection of law, but it won't please the mob.'" [^121]

This provision was designed to promote peace and good order in society, for when men are not sustained in their just rights they understandably foment discord. The Prophet's proposal was provoked by abuses he and the Saints suffered from their fellow Americans; nevertheless, its basis lay in his respect for the agency of man as a pre-condition upon which human life must ultimately rest. [^122] Divine law would impose the death penalty for injustices such as premeditated murder, [^123] and some serious moral transgressions. [^124] Among the Nephites, the flagrant, wilful denial of man's free agency ranked among injustices which demanded capital punishment. General Moroni caused that some who would "not enter into a covenant to support the cause of freedom, that they might maintain a free government, . . . be put to death," [^125] according to the law of the Nephite people. [^126] It seems probable that Joseph Smith would have included such provisions in the government of God. In that system, judgment would be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet. [^127]

Brigham Young also expressed the need to require all branches of government to fulfil their duties. States ought not to be totally autonomous, rather "amenable to the General Government" for their actions; they should be obliged to guarantee freedom and civil justice to the people. If they transcended their bounds, their acts ought to be made null and void, and their officials held responsible for their conduct. "The General Government should never give any portion of the nation license to say they are free and independent," he explained. "This should only apply to the nation as a whole." [^128]

Interdependence Of Zion And The Government Of God

The Spheres of Zion and the Government of God

Zion and the government of God were to be mutually dependent upon each other, although they occupied different spheres and performed different functions within the kingdom of God. Each of the systems was founded upon the principle of covenant, but they differed in their requirements and in the benefits recipients would receive. The government of God, based upon the covenant of freedom, justice, and equity before the law, would maintain an open society with all of the blessings of freedom and civil justice. But Zion, as the center of the kingdom, was based upon the divine covenant of human regeneration by which the faithful could receive the transforming gifts and powers of the Holy Spirit and build a new social and economic order characterized by a free and open union of mature individuals. Referring first to the program of Zion, Brigham Young said of the two systems within the kingdom:

When we organize according to these laws and ordinances we make this people one, but we do not bring in the Methodists, Presbyterians or Calvinists, they are independent of themselves. But the [political program of the] kingdom of God, when it is established and bears rule, will defend the Methodists in their rights just as much as Latter-day Saints, but it will not allow them to infringe upon the rights of their neighbors. [^129]

In a letter to the Saints written during an unjust imprisonment in a Missouri dungeon, Joseph Smith referred to the essential characteristics of the two systems within the kingdom of God. "Here is a principle . . . which we are bound to be exercised with, that is, in common with all men, such as governments, and laws, and regulations in the civil concerns of life," he said concerning freedom in the open society which the government of God would sustain. "This principle guarantees to all parties, sects, and denominations, and classes of religion, equal, coherent, and indefeasible rights." That principle and its associated guarantees "are things that pertain to this life," he continued; "therefore all are alike interested; they make our responsibilities one towards another in matters of corruptible things." [^130] Since the Constitution of the United States was designed to guarantee those principles of freedom and civil justice, the Prophet then said in a classic declaration:

Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. [^131]

The system of Zion which the Saints were to build within the framework of the open society was based upon divine principles and powers, and it carried greater obligations. "There is a love from God that should be exercised towards those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself," Joseph Smith explained, "but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another." The Saints were to cultivate this love and these characteristics by truly applying the principles of Zion's covenant society. "These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because it is like God, or Godlike," the Prophet continued. They would not destroy the principles of freedom and civil justice which underlaid the open society, he concluded, "but bind us stronger, and make our responsibilities not only one to another, but unto God also." [^132]

The Role of the Church in Producing the Government of God

Though a climate of freedom was necessary to introduce the gospel on earth and build up Zion, the Saints held that eventually, the Church would have to produce the government of God. Being a divine system, the new political organ could not be brought into being by unregenerated men who did not understand or accept the principle of revelation. And it had to be established among a people bound together by the gospel in free and open union. Only through the Church could a true theocratic order be established which would perfect the original concept of government as envisioned by the founding fathers of the United States Constitution. [^133]

Because of the unique nature of the government of God and its necessary spiritual core, Orson Pratt considered the Church to be "the nucleus" of a political system which would eventually be established on earth and prevail forever. [^134] Brigham Young and Charles W. Penrose agreed. "That kingdom grows out of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," President Young explained, "but it is not the church." [^135] Elder Penrose explained to the Saints: "This Church to which you and I belong is not the Kingdom in its fullness, but it contains within it the germ of that kingdom which it has been predicted shall be established upon the earth—the mightiest government that the world ever saw." [^136]

The Saints, acting under divine direction, would one day establish the government of God. Brigham Young said:

The Church of Jesus Christ will produce this government, and cause it to grow and spread, and it will be a shield round about the Church. And under the influence and power of the [political program of the] Kingdom of God, the Church of God will rest secure and dwell in safety, without taking the trouble of governing and controlling the whole earth. The [political organ of the] Kingdom of God will do this, it will control the kingdoms of the world. [^137]

Apparently Joseph Smith initially expressed these views. In his Inspired Revision of the Bible, he revised the wording of John's vision on Patmos to show clearly that the Book of Revelation deals with the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth in its full power and program. Early in the Book of Revelation reference is made to Christ sitting upon His throne, worthy "to receive glory and honour and power," [^138] and to the fact that the righteous will reign with Him as kings and priests on earth. [^139] The concluding chapters reveal the great vision of Christ coming to rule the nations with a rod of iron, as King of kings and Lord of lords. [^140] In chapter twelve of the Prophet's Inspired Revision, John wrote:

And there appeared a great sign in heaven, in the likeness of things on the earth; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

And the woman being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.

And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up unto God and his throne.

And there appeared another sign in heaven; and behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman which was delivered, ready to devour her child after it was born.

And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore years.

And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon and his angels fought against Michael:

And the dragon prevailed not against Michael, neither the child nor the woman which was the church of God, who had been delivered of her pains, and brought forth the kingdom of God and his Christ. [^141]

The first sign John saw in heaven, in the likeness of things on the earth, was a woman who represented the Church of God. She brought forth a man child who symbolized the kingdom or government of God. He was to rule all nations with a rod of iron. John therefore saw that the Church would produce the government of God.

The next sign in heaven was a great red dragon representing Satan, who had made war against God and caused one third of the hosts of heaven to be cast out. When the Church of God was established on earth during Christ's earthly ministry, and pained to be delivered in bringing forth the government of God to rule the nations of the earth in that day, the dragon stood ready to devour the child after it was born. Consequently, the woman, or the Church, was taken from among men [^142]—she fled into the wilderness to a place prepared of God until the ushering in of the latter-day dispensation through Joseph Smith. [^143] But John saw that the final outcome of the struggle between Michael and the dragon would witness the triumph of the Lord's kingdom. "The dragon prevailed not against Michael, neither the child, nor the woman which was the church of God, who had been delivered of her pains, and brought forth the kingdom of God and his Christ." [^144]

The Government of God as a Shield Around Zion

By maintaining a political program that would guarantee freedom, equity, and civil justice to all, the government of God would be a shield around the Holy Priesthood and the system of Zion. Not that the Saints would receive preferential treatment above other citizens in political rights, but by giving all men the guarantees of a free society, Zion would be shielded from unlawful encroachments.

George Q. Cannon explained that the government of God would "shield and protect the Church of Christ against every attack, against every unlawful aggression, against every attempt to deprive it of its legitimate rights." [^145] Brigham Young agreed. God's government would be "a shield to the ordinances of his house," he explained, "in the endowments, and in all the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God with which the Priesthood . . . is clothed." [^146] Within the divine system, the Church would "rest secure and dwell in safety, without taking the trouble of governing and controlling the whole earth." [^147] The municipal organ of the kingdom would do that. Meanwhile, through the program of the Church the Saints would teach others the great principles of spiritual renewal and temporal salvation embodied in Zion, until all would come to understand them. Another associate of the Prophet observed that the government of God would "continue through the millennial period as the outer wall or government around the inner temple of priesthood, until all are come to the knowledge of God." [^148]

Zion's Role in the Kingdom

Zion was expected to play an important role in the kingdom of God in several ways. First, as an ensign and a standard, Zion would demonstrate to all men how power in organized society could be sanctified and made to uplift man, how man could achieve social and economic justice through covenant relationships, and how enlightening spiritual powers could be acquired to bless man's life and endow him, eventually, with glory in the presence of God. Others could then measure their religious, social, and economic systems by Zion's example and standard, and by the persuasion of that example could be induced to upgrade and perfect their several systems. Zion would thus exert a vital uplifting influence in the world.

Second, the building of Zion would establish a necessary foundation of free and open union upon which the government of God could be established and by which it could extend its program of freedom and justice throughout the earth. At a time when the desire for freedom and union burned to a degree in the hearts of many Americans, the founding fathers of the United States Constitution set forth their great ideal of a stable and just government uncontrolled by political parties. But with the possible exception of the Era of Good Feelings (during which James Monroe was elected to the presidency in 1820 by receiving all but one electoral vote), later generations, as one authority noted, "departed from what seems to have been their original intention." [^149] The powers of free and enlightened union were not strong enough to sustain the original ideal of the founding fathers. But the Saints held, as George Q. Cannon stated, that when the government of God was established they would restore "the government to its primitive condition when all the political parties shall have fallen into chaos." [^150] This could only be done by first building up Zion as a system of free and open union.

Third, by the influence of Zion as a free, progressive, and independent economic system based upon covenant relationships, the government of God could limit itself strictly to the political sphere of society and be perfected in an unsocialized form as an instrument of freedom and civil justice.

Fourth, the sustaining influence of Zion as an ensign would make it possible to develop a world government on the principles of true theocracy. A world order founded upon democratic processes, with the ballot as the basis of appointment to political office, would place power predominantly in the masses of uneducated and inexperienced people of the earth, causing a leveling down rather than a lifting up action in human relations. People in highly developed cultures with limited populations would be reluctant to accept or sustain a system subject largely to the will of the majority, where that will could encroach upon them and their interests. In such an order, one population group would be pitted against another by the general operations of the system.

On the other hand, a system which placed control in small and powerful minorities of unregenerated men would not be acceptable to the great masses of humanity. But with Zion as an ensign of truth, brotherly union, and economic independence, and with theocratic procedures for installing men in political office, a world government based firmly upon the principle of consent could be developed. The divine system would not foster lust for power, or incite a clash of interests, or pit one culture or population group against another. Political conflict would be minimized by limiting the role of government strictly to the task of establishing freedom and civil justice, and in carrying out necessary political operations. [^151] The rule of law, rather than the personal interests and desires of the people in social and economic matters, would prevail in establishing freedom and civil justice.

Finally, such a system would build confidence and respect among the people. Orson Pratt said:

Zion will be the seat of government, and her officers will be far more respected, and have far more influence, than those of any government upon the earth; all nations will yield the most perfect obedience to their commands and counsels. There will be no party politicians, and party newspapers to speak evil of them, as they now do of the President and highest authorities of this nation; a word from them will control all the inhabitants of the earth as one man. This great influence and high respect will not be obtained by swaying the sceptre of tyrants by binding the people down with the strong arm of oppression; but it will be because of their righteousness, and their faith in God, and because their power is given to them from God; and they act, and speak, and counsel, and command in His name and by His authority. [^152]

Non-Church Members In The Government Of God

The Guarantee of Constitutional Rights

Non-members of the Church would have full privileges of citizenship within the government of God and would be protected in the free exercise of their civil and religious rights. This point Joseph Smith made clear in his "particular instructions" on the subject. George Q. Cannon reported that he taught that the divine system would "not be for the protection of the Church of Jesus Christ alone, but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be." Under its rule, no one would "be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others." [^153] After asking if the government of God would be "a shield to the Latter-day Saints alone," President Cannon said on another occasion:

No. The apostate will have his civil rights under that kingdom. . . . The Chinaman, the negro and the Indian—each of them will have his rights under that kingdom, and yet not be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . . It will protect the worshipper of idols in his civil rights, in his rights as a man and as a citizen. A man may be an infidel, . . . and yet so far as the civil authority is concerned, so far as the power that is wielded by that which we call the Kingdom of God is concerned, that man will receive the amplest protection; he will have the fullest enjoyment of his rights. [^154]

Brigham Young expressed the same views. Were the kingdom of God fully established "and the New Jerusalem built upon this continent," he explained, ". . . the Latter-day Saints would not alone enjoy its blessings, but all denominations and communities would be alike protected in their rights." [^155] He stated further:

If the Latter-day Saints think, when the Kingdom of God is established on the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth will join the church called Latter-day Saints, they are egregiously mistaken. I presume there will be as many sects and parties then as now. Still, when the Kingdom of God triumphs, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, to the glory of the Father. Even the Jews will do it then; but will the Jews and Gentiles be obliged to belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? No; not by any means. Jesus said to his disciples, "In my Father's house are many mansions." . . . There are mansions in sufficient numbers to suit the different classes of mankind, and a variety will always exist to all eternity, requiring a classification and an arrangement into societies and communities in the many mansions which are in the Lord's house. [^156]

The Saints hoped that the work of establishing the divine government and spreading its blessings abroad would be a cooperative effort between the members and non-members of the Church. In this light, the Quorum of the Twelve wrote in 1847:

Come then, ye Saints; come then, ye honorable men of the earth; come then ye wise, ye learned, ye rich, ye noble, according to the riches and wisdom, and knowledge of the Great Jehovah; from all nations, and kindreds, and kingdoms, and tongues, and people and dialects on the face of the whole earth, and join the standard of Emmanuel, and help us to build up the Kingdom of God, and establish the principles of truth, life and salvation. . . .

The Kingdom of God consists in correct principles; and it mattereth not what a man's religious faith is; whether he be a Presbyterian, or a Methodist, or a Baptist, or a Latter-day Saint or "Mormon," or a Catholic, or Episcopalian, or Mohammedan, or even pagan, or anything else, if he will bow the knee and with his tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, and will support good and wholesome laws for the regulation of society,—we hail him as a brother, and will stand by him while he stands by us in these things; for every man's religious faith is a matter between his own soul and his God alone. [^157]

Non-Church Officers in the Government

Non-members of the Church were also to have a place as officers within the government of God. George Q. Cannon quoted the Prophet as saying that there would "be men acting as officers" in that system "who had no standing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^158] Brigham Young made similar explanations. Having noted that "several" men not members of the Church were included in the General Council, [^159] he said in another statement:

A man may be a legislator in that body which will issue laws to sustain the inhabitants of the earth in their individual rights and still not belong to the Church of Jesus Christ at all. And further though a man may not even believe in any religion it would be perfectly right, when necessary, to give him the privilege of holding a seat among that body which will make laws to govern all the nations of the earth and control those who make no profession of religion at all; for that body would be governed, controlled and dictated to acknowledge others in those rights which they wish to enjoy themselves. [^160]

A revelation to John Taylor dealt with the role of non-members in the General Council, as the nucleus from which the government of God would be developed on earth. Speaking of the organization of that council by Joseph Smith, the Lord said:

Because, according to my eternal decrees, the free agency of men should be guaranteed to all men, I moved upon him to introduce into my Kingdom certain parties not in my Church, for the purpose of exhibiting unto my Kingdom that I would still maintain the free agency of man, and that I hold inviolate that principle, and will still maintain it to the end. . . .

They [non-members of the Church] may be admitted to the rights of representation in the manner appointed, after subscribing [politically] to my covenants and commandments, and have a full and free opportunity of presenting their views, interests and principles, and enjoying all the freedom and rights of this Council; but they shall acknowledge me and my laws in this Council, saith the Lord God; for my people's rights and immunities and free agency shall be acknowledged as well as those of all other people, and my laws and government shall be sustained, or I will not acknowledge you. . . . Shall all men be free? Yes, free to do right; free to express their sentiments and opinions and have a full, fair and free representation; but no man shall violate his covenants, pervert my laws, subvert others' free agency, and trample upon mine authority in this Council, saith the Lord your God. [^161]

There are several significant points in this revelation: First, non-members of the Church were deliberately admitted into the General Council to demonstrate that the government of God would sustain the freedom of all men, and that non-members of the Church would have a place in that government. Second, the divine government was based upon the principle of covenant. In their appointment to be members of the General Council, non-members of the Church would, with others, be required to subscribe to the secular covenants upon which the system was based. Third, non-members of the Church would have a full and free right to present their views, interests, and principles before the council. But in doing so, they would have to acknowledge Christ and His law, and the authority of His living oracles. Fourth, non-members would have to sustain the Saints and all men in their just rights. Finally, though all would be free, true freedom within the government of God carried corresponding responsibilities and obligations. There could be no such thing as true freedom in error, which meant when applied to political economy, that men were free to do right. [^162] That is, they were free to act in accordance with the principles of freedom and their concomitant responsibilities and obligations. The law would have claim upon those who acted to the contrary. No member of the council had a right to violate his covenant to sustain freedom and justice, pervert the laws of the system, subvert the agency of another person, or destroy the authority of God which was in the council.

Concessions and Benefits

Acceptance and support of the government of God required two major concessions by non-members of the Church: first, they had to grant to the appropriate priesthood councils the right to nominate men to political office, with the consent of the people expressed in the appointment; second, they had to grant to the living prophet the right to set the policy of government and to establish the law to secure freedom and civil justice for the citizens of the kingdom.

These might appear to be concessions which non-members of the Church would not willingly make or freely sustain. But there were benefits and advantages which non-members could receive under the divine order which were unobtainable in any other way. First, they would receive the guarantee of freedom and civil justice in common with the Saints. The Prophet contended that it was not unreasonable to expect good men to uphold political forms which were bound by constitutional provisions to sustain individual freedom, administer justice to all, and leave the people free to carry out their respective religious, social, and economic interests.

Second, non-members of the Church would share in the blessings of strength and stability which would result from building up Zion.

Third, this arrangement would infuse enlightening spiritual and moral influences into government, to uplift the functions of government and make them more responsive to the Christian principles and ideals of justice and equity. Centuries ago, Aristotle suggested that democracy was the best form of government, provided a high degree of morality existed among the people. But he rated the same form of government as the least desirable when moral principles were lacking in the people. Whatever its form, uplifting spiritual and moral elements are essential to good government. The closer the will of the people approaches the will of Christ as expressed in a true theocracy, the greater freedom, justice, and union they enjoy.

Fourth, non-members of the Church would be blessed by the many and varied benefits which would result from Zion being raised as an ensign and a standard, showing the world how to Christianize society, achieve true social and economic justice, maintain freedom and civil justice, and promote a kind of union which was ideal in individualism. In short, they would share in the blessings of a system which would exalt intelligence and orient power to uplift all men.

Finally, not only would non-members of the Church receive the full rights of citizenship and share in the benefits of the system, they would be given a meaningful role as officers in the government of God and have their interests properly represented in that system.

Summary

The government of God derived its primary authority from the Holy Priesthood. Being an unsocialized state, it was a true theocracy designed to perfect the Constitution of the United States in the direction of its original concept, as an instrument of freedom and civil justice uncontrolled by political parties. For this reason, the Prophet declared: "I am the greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the earth." [^163]

Officers of the government of God were to utilize the Spirit of revelation to supplement rule by law. In this respect, the General Council was to act as a Living Constitution. The establishment of individual freedom and civil justice was the primary concern of government. Under the divine system, these blessings would be guaranteed to all men, with provision to see that men actually received them. But Zion was expected to play an important role in the divine plan. The Church would produce the government of God. And while that government would be a shield around the Church, Zion, as an ensign and a standard, would provide the foundation of free and open union upon which the state would rest; it would show all men the way to social and economic justice; and it would make possible a world government that would not foster lust for power, incite a clash of interests among people, or pit one group against another. Non-Church members would enjoy full civil and religious liberty and meaningful positions as officers within the government of God.

Footnotes

This name was also abbreviated the "Fifties." See Heman Hale Smith, "The Lyman Wight Colony in Texas, 1846-1858," unpublished typewritten manuscript, Brigham Young University Library, p. 22.

When Mr. Fillmore appointed me Governor of Utah, I proclaimed openly that my Priesthood should govern and control that office. I am of the same mind today. . . . Whatever office I hold from any Government on this earth shall honor the Government of heaven, or I will not hold it.—Ibid., X, p. 42.

At an earlier time, when the people were "stiffnecked" and had difficulty understanding the true course away from "contentions and destructions," a Nephite prophet wrote: "There was nothing save it . . . was preaching and prophesying . . . and exceeding great plainness of speech, would keep them from going down speedily to destruction."—Enos 23.

It was said of John that among all that were born of women there were none greater than he, and yet the least in the kingdom of heaven [i.e., Christ] was greater then he; and of all governments that had arisen among men, there were none so great and good, as the government of the United States, and yet the government of God in its very infancy was greater than it. And why was this? Because its laws emanated from a more perfect Being.—Ibid.

These statements accurately reflect the Prophet's view and attitude. Peter Burnett, an intimate legal counselor in Missouri and later the first governor of California, said about the Prophet: "He was courteous in discussion, readily admitting that he did not intend to controvert, and would not oppose you abruptly, but had due deference to your feelings."—Peter Hardeman Burnett, An Old California Pioneer (Oakland, 1946), pp. 40-41. Other associates similarly testified. William Clayton, the Prophet's private clerk, said: "Never did I hear him breathe out curses or raillery at any man because he saw fit to differ in religious matters."—MS, XXIII (September 7, 1861), p. 578. Wilford Woodruff said: "He manifested a greatness of soul which I had never seen in any man."—JD, VII, p. 101. He also reported: "I have heard Joseph Smith say that if he were emperor of the whole world, holding the destinies of all men in his hands, he would defend the religious rights of every man, whether his religion was right or wrong."—Ibid., XXIV, p. 237. See also ibid., XXIII, pp. 76-77.

If it has been demonstrated that I have been willing to die for a "Mormon," I am bold to declare before Heaven that I am just as ready to die in defending the rights of a Presbyterian, a Baptist, or a good man of any other denomination; for the same principle which would trample upon the rights of the Latter-day Saints would trample upon the rights of the Roman Catholics, or of any other denomination who may be unpopular and too weak to defend themselves.—Ibid., p. 498.

Jesus made his appearance on the earth in the meridian of time, and he established his kingdom on the earth. But to fulfill ancient prophecies the Lord suffered that kingdom to be uprooted; in other words, the kingdoms of this world made war against the kingdom of God, established eighteen centuries ago, and they prevailed against it, and the kingdom ceased to exist. The great beast that John saw made war with it and prevailed against it, and human institutions, without prophets or inspired men, usurped the place of the ancient kingdom of God.—JD, XIII, p. 125.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Volume II of this study, chapter twelve entitled "The Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^2] HC, V, p. 555.
[^3] Ibid., II, p. 432.
[^4] Letter of Joseph Smith to Precinda Huntington Buell, written at Liberty Jail, Liberty, Missouri, March, 15, 1839: first published in Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 211.
[^5] HC, IV, p. 570.
[^6] Ibid., p. 603. The report of his statement continued: "He calculates to organize the Church in its proper order as soon as the Temple is completed."—Ibid., p. 604.
[^7] Ibid., V, p. 2. Brigham Young said: "The ordinances of the house of God are expressly for the Church of the Firstborn."—JD, VIII, p. 154.
[^8] JD, V, p. 129.
[^9] I. R., Genesis 9:23.
[^10] MS, V (May, 1845), p. 189.
[^11] Orson Spencer, Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (6th ed.; Salt Lake City, 1891), pp. 192-193.
[^12] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Temple and the Fulness of the Priesthood."
[^13] HC, V, p. 2.
[^14] Juvenile Instructor, XV (May 1, 1880), p. 111.
[^15] D&C 76:56.
[^16] Pratt, The Seer, I (October, 1853), p. 145.
[^17] HC, V, p. 555.
[^18] See Moses 1:39.
[^19] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Antiquity of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^20] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled Sealing Family Units Together."
[^21] See MS, V (March, 1845), p. 151.
[^22] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Endowment of Zion with Glory Through Temple Ordinances."
[^23] JD, X, p. 355.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Ibid., IX, p. 41.
[^26] Ibid., X, p. 355.
[^27] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "The Way of Life."
[^28] See, for example, Moses 2:28; D&C 132:63; Mosiah 9:9; 23:20; Alma 50:18; 62:48; Helaman 3:8; 6:12; 11:20; 4 Nephi 10; Ether 6:18.
[^29] See JD, XV, p. 137, for a statement by Brigham Young on this subject.
[^30] See D&C 93:19-20; 3 Nephi 19:29; John 17:4-5, 20-23.
[^31] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter seven entitled "Purpose of Rebirth."
[^32] HC, III, p. 381.
[^33] Moses 6:23.
[^34] See D&C 132:19, 24; HC, V, p. 391; JD, XV, p. 137. For man's pre-earth spirit birth, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter seven entitled "The Organization Of The Human Spirit."
[^35] This phase of Joseph Smith's thought will be discussed in greater detail in the next volume of this study.
[^36] HC, IV, p. 603. The report of his address continues: "Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick, he further remarked, there could be no evil in it, if God gave His sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith, or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration."—Ibid., p. 604.
[^37] JD, XVII, p. 119.
[^38] Conference Report, April, 1921, p. 24.
[^39] HC, IV, pp. 604, 605.
[^40] See 1 Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14; 19:16.
[^41] MS, XIV (July 3, 1852), p. 290.
[^42] TS, VI (June 1, 1845), pp. 921-922.
[^43] Abraham 1:25-26.
[^44] Abraham 1:26.
[^45] HC, II, pp. 20-21. See also ibid., VI, p. 474. Speaking of the Book of Revelation, he added: "In the 20th chapter we find a length of time specified, during which Satan is to be confined in his own place, and the Saints reign in peace, all these promises and blessings we find contained in the law of the Lord, which the righteous are to enjoy."—Ibid., II, p. 21.
[^46] Ibid., VI, p. 319.
[^47] JD, III, pp. 265-266.
[^48] See 1 Chronicles 5:2. This right was given to King David in the house of Judah. See 2 Samuel 7:12-17; Psalms 89:24-37.
[^49] See, for example, Micah 5:2; Matthew 2:6.
[^50] See, for example, Mosiah 1:10; 25:13; 29:6, 13.
[^51] Mosiah 2:5-6. This order was not followed arbitrarily; apparently it conformed to the design of their society. Even though it took more space to thus organize the people, they did not depart from that order by bringing the people together into a mass. Instead, King Benjamin had a tower built so that his voice would carry farther. When this did not suffice, he had his words written and circulated among those who could not hear. See Mosiah 2:7-8.
[^52] Abraham 1:3, 4.
[^53] D&C 107:40.
[^54] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Coming of Elias."
[^55] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Grand Organizational Council."
[^56] Acts 17:24, 26.
[^57] To Israel Moses said:
[^58] The doctrine of election to gospel opportunities on earth and the doctrine of foreordination seem not to be identical in every way. Both men and women were included in the appointments of a chosen lineage and given blessings within the divine patriarchal order, but, technically, foreordination applies only to men who were foreordained in the Grand Organizational Council to hold the priesthood and its keys on earth. Foreordination thus appears to be a more specific and restricted feature of the broader program of election to gospel privileges and opportunities within the divine patriarchal order.
[^59] See Romans 8:15; Galatians 4:5; Ephesians 1:5; Abraham 2:10.
[^60] Ephesians 1:3-5.
[^61] 3 Nephi 21:22. More specifically, the repentant gentiles are to be "numbered among" the descendants of Lehi in their inheritance of the Western hemisphere—1 Nephi 14:1-2.
[^62] See the section in this chapter entitled; "The Predominance of Spiritual, Rather than Physical Relationships."
[^63] D&C 93:21.
[^64] JD, XXI, p. 369.
[^65] See the section in chapter seven entitled "The Patriarch to the Church."
[^66] Patriarchs of this tradition included such men as Seth, Enos, Cainan, Enoch, Abraham, etc. They were presiding figures over the divine family in their respective generations.
[^67] A revelation states that when the divine patriarchal order is established in the last days, the ten tribes of Israel will "be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim"—the birthright tribe of Israel. See D&C 133:32. This is not to say that those of other tribes cannot administer in some of the rites of the temple. But apparently the birthright family has the right to preside in administering the rites by which the system is perfected in its organization and endowed with glory.
[^68] HC, V, p. 556. Brigham Young said: "Jesus Christ, first-begotten of the Father, of all the rest of the children, and of all they possess, alone is the lawful heir."—JD, VI, p. 307.
[^69] JD, VI, pp. 306-307. See also ibid., I, pp. 222, 256ff.
[^70] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "Christ's Heirship the Basis of His Fatherhood."
[^71] HC, V, p. 554.
[^72] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "More Sure Word of Prophecy Based on Doctrine of Election in the Flesh."
[^73] HC, IV, p. 360.
[^74] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "Expressions of Christ's Fatherhood."
[^75] D&C 76:59. See also John 17:6.
[^76] 1 Chronicles 5:1.
[^77] I. R., Genesis 48:5. Having made it clear that Ephraim and Manasseh "were called Israel," the record of Jacob's statement then quotes him as adding: "And thy issue which thou begettest after them, shall be thine."—I. R., Genesis 48:5-6.
[^78] Joseph's exact position in this arrangement is not clear, but it was one of authority over the other tribes of Israel. Jacob continued:
[^79] See 2 Samuel 7:11-16; Psalms 89:20-37.
[^80] HC, VI, p. 253.
[^81] See Moses 5:2-3 in light of Moses 6:1-3.
[^82] See, for example, Moses 6:13, 17, 19, 20, 21, 25; 8:5, 8-9.
[^83] See Genesis 16; 21:1-3.
[^84] Genesis 25:21-23; 27.
[^85] 1 Chronicles 5:1-2.
[^86] Genesis 48:13-20.
[^87] JD, XVI, p. 187.
[^88] 1 Nephi 1:1.
[^89] D&C 29:47-48.
[^90] D&C 68:25-28.
[^91] D&C 93:36-37, 40.
[^92] JD, IV, p. 155. For another statement by Elder Snow, see ibid., p. 243.
[^93] JD, XI, p. 209.
[^94] Lucy Mack Smith. History of Joseph Smith. p. 154.
[^95] Ibid., p. 154.
[^96] Diary of William Holmes Walker, Brigham Young University Library, p. 7.
[^97] Letter of Joseph Smith to Emma Smith, written at Liberty Jail, Liberty, Missouri, April 4, 1839. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. A photo copy of this letter is also found in the Bancroft Library, Berkeley, California, a copy of which was given to the writer by Buddy Youngreen.
[^98] This responsibility centered in the office of Teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood, but that did not mean that it was an exclusive duty of that office. See chapter seven, the section entitled "Officers in the Aaronic Priesthood."
[^99] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 72.
[^100] "Elder John Bush," Autumn Leaves, IV, p. 22.
[^101] D&C 20:53.
[^102] The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (August 1, 1892), pp. 492-493.
[^103] See D&C 104:22, 24, 25, 32, 33, 37, 40, 41, 42.
[^104] D&C 70:8.
[^105] D&C 51:19; 78:22.
[^106] Moses 6:23.
[^107] Abraham 1:19.
[^108] Abraham 2:11. See also Genesis 12:3; 18:18; 22:18; 26:4.
[^109] D&C 27:10; 86:8-10; 97:7. The angel Moroni also stressed that "the promises made to the fathers" would be planted "in the hearts of the children" in the last days. This included the promise that through them the restored gospel would be given to the world. See D&C 2:1-3.
[^110] D&C 124:58. See also D&C 110:12.
[^111] D&C 88:81.
[^112] See HC, VI, p. 184.
[^113] See, for example, Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 168-178.
[^114] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eighteen entitled "Perfecting The Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^115] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eighteen entitled "Gathering of All Things Together in Christ."
[^116] MS, XXXVII (February 2, 1875), p. 66.
[^117] HC, VI, p. 319.
[^118] Ibid., p. 252.
[^119] D&C 107:53. See also HC, III, p. 388.
[^120] D&C 107:56.
[^121] Genesis 48, 49.
[^122] 2 Nephi 4:2; I. R., Genesis 50:24-38.
[^123] 2 Nephi 4:3-12.
[^124] See the statements in D&C 132:29-33, in light of the revelation.
[^125] Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 96.
[^126] TS, VI (June 1, 1845), p. 921.
[^127] Ibid.
[^128] See the section in chapter seven entitled "The Patriarch to the Church," and the section entitled "Stake Patriarchs."
[^129] TS, VI (June 1, 1845), p. 922.
[^130] Ibid., p. 921.
[^131] Ibid., p. 922. On this subject, Eliza R. Snow said: "Inasmuch as many fathers have died without having conferred those blessings, God, in the order of his kingdom, has made provisions to supply the deficiency, by choosing men to officiate as patriarchs, whose province it is to bless the fatherless."—Tullidge, op. cit.
[^132] Moses 6:5-6.
[^133] Moses 6:46.
[^134] Abraham 1:31.
[^135] See Moses 6:43ff, in light of verses 46 and 50-51.
[^136] Abraham 1:28, 31.
[^137] Abraham 1:31.
[^138] See, for example, Genesis 11; 1 Chronicles 5, 6, 7, 8; Ezra 2, 8; Nehemiah 7; Matthew 1; Luke 3:23-38.
[^139] See 1 Chronicles 9:1; 2 Chronicles 12:15.
[^140] 1 Chronicles 9:1.
[^141] 1 Nephi 5:16.
[^142] 1 Nephi 3:1-4.
[^143] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter three entitled "Jacob's Prophetic Blessing."
[^144] 1 Nephi 3:3. See also 1 Nephi 3:12; 5:14, 16.
[^145] See 1 Nephi 5:10-13.
[^146] See 2 Nephi 3.
[^147] 3 Nephi 10:16. It is possible that because the prophets Zenos, Zenock and Neum were descendants of Joseph, and their inspired writings were recorded in the family history of the patriarch Joseph, they are not mentioned in the general Jewish history, the Bible.
[^148] Journal of Benjamin F. Johnson, p. 94.
[^149] Edward Stanwood, A History of the Presidency (Boston and New York, 1898), p. 10.
[^150] JD, XX, p. 204.
[^151] Where social and economic matters are not made the concern of government, there is less reason for the diverging interests and desires of the people to be brought into conflict.
[^152] Pratt, The Seer, II (May, 1854), pp. 266-267.
[^153] Juvenile Instructor, XXXI (February 1, 1896), p. 140; HC, VII, p. 382.
[^154] JD, XXVI, p. 12. For another statement by Elder Cannon, see Ibid., XX. pp. 203-204.
[^155] Ibid., VI, p. 345. For other statements by Brigham Young, see Ibid., II, pp. 309-310, 315-317; VI, pp. 342-343, 345-346; XII, pp. 113-114; XVII, pp. 156-157.
[^156] Ibid., XI, p. 275.
[^157] MS, X (March 15, 1848), p. 87.
[^158] Juvenile Instructor, XXXI (February 1, 1896), p. 140; HC, VII, p. 382.
[^159] MS, XXVI (May 21, 1864), pp. 328-329. John D. Lee stated that "a man by the name of Jackson belonged to it, though he did not belong to the Church."—Lee, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 173. When two ill-informed associates of the Prophet wanted to "call together" the General Council after his death and set the Church in order, they were told that that body "was not a church organization, but was composed of members irrespective of their religious faith."—MS, XXV (February 28, 1863), p. 136.
[^160] Deseret News, V (August 1, 1855), p. 162.
[^161] Revelation to John Taylor, June 27, 1882.
[^162] This is also true in the spiritual realm of life. Only in truth can man be free. But spiritual matters were held to be issues between man and God, or His Church, alone. They were issues in which the state was not involved.
[^163] HC, VI, pp. 56-57.
