Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

12

Zion's Perfect Order

I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them; . . . and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.—JOHN THE APOSTLE.

Joseph Smith taught that Zion's perfect order was patriarchal in structure and was sometimes called the patriarchal order of the priesthood. This divine order centered in Jesus Christ, the Father of eternal life to all who are born of water and of the Spirit into His celestial family. When fully developed, it would rest upon the sacred covenants of the priesthood administered in the temple, [^1] and it would include in its program the economic, social, and political systems discussed in this volume. In encouraging the Saints to finish the temple at Nauvoo, the Prophet promised: "You will then receive more knowledge concerning this [patriarchal] priesthood." [^2]

The Nature of The Divine Patriarchal Order

The Perfect Order of Zion

By the spring of 1836, Joseph Smith had set forth the full organization of the Church, except for the auxiliary organizations which were added later. As he finished conducting the solemn assembly in the Kirtland Temple, on March 30th of that year, he said: "I . . . observed to the quorums, that I had now completed the organization of the Church, and we had passed through all the necessary ceremonies, that I had given them all the instruction they needed, and that they were now at liberty, after obtaining their licenses, to go forth and build up the Kingdom of God." [^3] Yet the Prophet wrote of the Saints in 1839: "It has been the plan of the devil to hamper and distress me from the beginning, to keep me from explaining myself to them, and I never have had opportunity to give them the plan that God has revealed to me." [^4]

The ultimate plan the Prophet wanted to reveal to the Saints was not the mere organizational plan of the Church, but the divine patriarchal order. As he prepared to develop that family order among the Saints, he said, in March, 1842: "The Lord was going to make the Church of Jesus Christ a kingdom of priests, a holy order, a chosen generation, as in Enoch's day." [^5] Because the divine order of priests and kings would be built by means of the temple, he stated that the Church could not be "fully organized, in its proper order," until the Nauvoo Temple was built, where places would "be provided for the administration of the priesthood" to establish the perfected family order. [^6]

To establish the true order of the kingdom, man had first to receive the gospel by baptism, which was the basic covenant of salvation. He then had to be given the Melchizedek Priesthood and its sacred covenants, including the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, which were the covenants of exaltation. On these covenants Zion was to be established as a divine patriarchal order with new social and economic principles which had their roots in the gospel of Christ.

The perfected system built up and sealed by the power of the priesthood was the Church of the Firstborn. Joseph Smith stated that through the sacred rites of the temple the faithful could receive the blessings which had "been prepared for the Church of the First Born." [^7] That Church was the divine patriarchal order in its eternal form. [^8] This meant that the work of building the divine family order was primarily a preparation for eternity, as well as for the Second Coming of Christ when "the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and . . . have place until the end come." [^9]

Parley P. Pratt also made it clear that the eternal system was patriarchal in its form. "The order of God's government, both in time and in eternity, is patriarchal: that is, it is a fatherly government," he said. "Each father who is raised from the dead and made a partaker of celestial glory in its fulness, will hold lawful jurisdiction over his own children, and over all the families which spring of them to all generations, for ever and ever." [^10] The divine order was patterned after a prior system in heaven. It was "the order observed among celestial beings, in the celestial world," Orson Spencer explained. "When God sets up any portion of his kingdom upon the earth, it is patterned after his own order in the heavens." [^11]

The design of the eternal family was to give every worthy man a fulness of the priesthood. [^12] As stated earlier, this was "the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood," by which the faithful could "secure the fullness of those blessings . . . prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim [the Gods] in the eternal worlds." [^13] Of the fulness of the priesthood, an acquaintance of Joseph Smith said:

The Lord informed the Prophet that the temples were the places to receive "the fullness of the priesthood." . . .

These additional powers included all of the keys that belong to the holy priesthood on the earth, or were ever revealed to man in any dispensation, and which admit men and women within the veil. They enable them to pass by the angels and the gods, until they get into the presence of the Father and the Son. They make of them kings and priests, queens and priestesses to God, to rule and reign as such over their posterity and those who may be given to them by adoption. . . . It gives them the right to the tree of life, and the "seal of the living God in their foreheads," spoken of by John the revelator. No marvel, then, that the Lord requires sacred places for such great and glorious things—"the fullness of the holy priesthood" to be restored. [^14]

As early as 1832, a revelation to Joseph Smith said of those who were exalted in celestial society: "They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory." [^15] Speaking of this divine priesthood order, Orson Pratt said:

The Kingly authority is not separate and distinct from the Priesthood, but merely a branch or portion of the same. The Priestly authority is universal, having power over all things; the Kingly authority until perfected is limited to the kingdoms placed under its jurisdiction: the former appoints and ordains the latter; but the latter never appoints and ordains the former: the first controls the laws of nature, and exercises jurisdiction over the elements, as well as over men; the last controls men only, and administers just and righteous laws for their government. Where the two are combined and the individual perfected, he has almighty power both as a King and as a Priest; both offices are then merged in one. The distinctions then, will be merely in the name and not in the authority; either as a King or a Priest he will then have power and dominion over all things, and reign over all. Both titles, combined, will then not give him any more power than either one singly. It is evident that the distinctions of title are only expressive of the condition of things prior to the glorification and perfection of the persons who hold the Priesthood; for when they are perfected, they will have power to act in every branch of authority by virtue of the great, and almighty, and eternal Priesthood which they hold; they can then sway their sceptres as Kings, rule as Princes, minister as Apostles, officiate as Teachers, or act in the humblest or most exalted capacity. There is no branch of the Priesthood so low that they cannot condescend to officiate therein; none so high that they cannot reach forth the arm of power and control the same. [^16]

The Concepts of Patriarchal Order

Joseph Smith referred to the divine patriarchal order as "the kingdom of an endless life." He then observed: "The sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering up of Isaac. shows that if a man would attain to the keys of the kingdom of an endless life, he must sacrifice all things." [^17] This kingdom in which each worthy man could receive the keys referred to by the Prophet, and a fulness of the priesthood, was based on several concepts: First, it is God's work and the means by which He continually increases in glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. [^18]

Second, to realize his full potential as an exalted being in this eternal family, man must be organized as a personage of spirit, tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones, and endowed with the full glory and power of the Man of Holiness, including the power to beget children in the resurrection and develop glory in them through the same divine plan.

Third, before the Saints could become like the exalted Man of Holiness in every way, they had to be organized into an eternal family order under the Father and His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ. This eternal family was a continuous, on-going priesthood organization called the divine patriarchal order. It had its origin in eternity before the earth was formed, and it came down by generation from God through Adam to the great patriarchs of this earth. [^19] Each ordinance by which the eternal order was established was a dynamic, life-giving function by which man could acquire divine attributes and powers of life through the Holy Spirit. The symbolic elements of gospel ordinances represented significant phases of earth life or some prominent feature of the program by which the plan of eternal life was given to men, such as the experiences of birth, death, the atonement, and the resurrection.

Fourth, the Saints were expected to develop Zion's economic and social programs and, eventually, to establish the government of God in their midst as features of the law of the divine patriarchal order.

Fifth, by applying the principles and laws of the gospel in their lives, the Saints could make sure their calling and election to the sacred family relationships of the patriarchal order in eternity. [^20] Only by doing this and being sealed in the marriage and family relationship could they become priests and kings (and priestesses and queens) in the celestial order in eternity. The power to seal was held by the living prophet and president of the Church. [^21]

Finally, when the Saints applied celestial law and were united as heirs with the greater eternal family in the presence of God, they would receive a fulness of the priesthood and be made recipients of the glory that those exalted beings possess, to the degree the Saints were able to receive and apply it to their good. [^22]

Brigham Young expressed the basic idea of the eternal family in the following statement:

When the Holy Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, is upon the earth, and its organizations, ordinances, gospel, powers, authorities and blessings, are enjoyed by the children of men; then by means of sealing powers and keys, and an everlasting covenant, the sons of men become the sons of God by regeneration, and are entitled, every man in his order, to the privileges, exaltations, principalities and powers, kingdoms and thrones, which are held and enjoyed, by the Great Father of our race: and all these are obtained through the law of natural increase, and the saving of that which the Father puts in our power. [^23]

Adam was an example:

The Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: "I have set thee to be at the head—a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever." So, in like manner, every faithful son of God, becomes, as it were, Adam to the race that springs from his loins, when they are embraced in the covenants and blessings of the Holy Priesthood; and in the lapse of eternity, and in the progress of eternal lives, every true son of God becomes a king of kings, and a lord of lords. [^24]

But the final order and all its objectives were not to be fully realized by the Saints in mortality. Heber C. Kimball reported a vision given to Joseph Smith in which "he saw Adam open the gate of the celestial city and admit the people one by one. He then saw Father Adam conduct them to the throne one by one, when they were crowned Kings and Priests of God." [^25] Brigham Young concurred:

We have not yet received our kingdoms, neither will we, until we have finished our work on the earth, passed through the ordeals, are brought up by the power of the resurrection, and are crowned with glory and eternal lives. Then he that has overcome and is found worthy, will be made a king of kings, and lord of lords over his own posterity, or in other words: A father of fathers. This latter rendering, is more strictly in accordance with the original text. [^26]

The Three Basic Roles of Fatherhood

Before man can be exalted in the divine patriarchal order in eternity, he must be born into each of the basic stages of the divine plan of life, spirit life, physical life, and eternal life. [^27] He must also acquire the power of fatherhood in each of these stages of life by giving or developing the respective endowments of life in others. Only those who attain the right and power to be fathers in all of these basic stages of life in the resurrection will be exalted within the divine patriarchal order. They will receive a fulness of priesthood and of glory and will be made in every essential way beings like the exalted Man of Holiness.

Man a Father Physically. Becoming a father in physical life is an important function in the over-all plan of life and salvation, and the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth is reaffirmed in modern scripture. [^28] But mortality is a probationary state where man is proved in the use he makes of the attributes and powers of life given on earth. Those who fill the measure of their creation here will have this power restored to them in the resurrection. [^29]

Man a Father Spiritually, in Eternal Life. Man must also become a father to his children spiritually, by developing in them the living powers and attributes of the Holy Spirit. His greatest role of fatherhood in the divine patriarchal order, in fact, was to develop in his children the divine attributes and powers which led to celestial glory, or eternal life, so they could receive them in their fulness in the resurrection. Glorification, not merely the giving of physical bodies and resurrection, is the grand object of the divine plan of life and salvation. [^30]

Joseph Smith held that man as a mere physical being in mortality is not a whole creature. By the transgression in Eden, Adam lost the divine powers and attributes of life he possessed in the presence of God. Being cut off from the Spirit, or glory of God, he suffered a literal spiritual death. In order for man again to obtain these divine powers and attributes of life, he must be born into the eternal family of Christ. [^31] He must then mature in the new endowments of life and become a father spiritually by developing these in his children in the flesh.

A father who developed these powers of eternal life in his children, after receiving the sacred rites of the eternal family order in the temple by which he could become a priest and a king over his posterity, was a true patriarch or evangelist. Joseph Smith stated that "an evangelist is a patriarch." [^32] Of early patriarchs in this order, a revelation said: "They were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men." [^33]

Exalted Man a Father of Spirits. The Prophet taught that those who receive all the powers and attributes of the divine plan of life and salvation in the resurrection will be given power to beget spirit children—to go to the realm of that pure fine substance called spirit, with its inherent properties of life or intelligence, and, by a process of conception and birth, to organize spirit beings, as man was organized by the Man of Holiness and His exalted companion in the pre-earth state of existence. [^34] This is the first stage of life in which man becomes a son, and it will be the last in which he will become a father. Thus he fulfils the eternal design that the first shall be last. [^35] Exalted man, endowed with a fulness of glory in the resurrection, will then have power to beget spirit children and take them through a first estate, open up the way for them to obtain physical bodies in a probationary state, and, by means of an only begotten son in that fallen state, give remission of sins and the powers and attributes of eternal life to all who will comply with the eternal plan of life and salvation. This is the eternal program of life as it is carried out within the patriarchal order in eternity.

The Role of Woman in the Patriarchal Order

Joseph Smith made a point of the fact that faithful women, as well as men, could enjoy the spiritual gifts and powers of the gospel, and exercise spiritual gifts to bless and benefit others. In speaking to the Female Relief Society at Nauvoo, he noted that some foolish things were being circulated "against some sisters not doing right by laying hands on the sick." He countered by citing the promise of Jesus, in Mark 16:16-18, that signs and gifts were to follow those who believed, then observed: "No matter who believeth, these signs, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, &c., should follow all that believed, whether male or female." [^36]

The Prophet taught further that through the rites of the temple, faithful women would achieve exaltation within the eternal family order, as priestesses and as queens to their husbands and over their posterity for endless ages of time. This meant that within the home, women shared priesthood rights with their husbands. A priestess is a female priest—one who exercises priestly rights and powers by virtue of the priesthood. In this context, a queen is a woman with a political stature and power in the home, within the patriarchal order of the priesthood. Looking to the fruition of the divine program in eternity, Brigham Young promised: "The man that honors his priesthood, and the woman that honors her Priesthood, will receive an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom of God." [^37]

The priesthood rights of women pertained to the home; they did not extend in a general way to the Church. But within the divine patriarchal order, a woman's ministry in the home was derived from the priesthood, and the functions of teaching, guiding, and directing her family were priestly acts. Charles W. Penrose explained the basis of the priesthood rights of women: "When a woman is sealed to a man holding the Priesthood, she becomes one with him. . . . The glory and power and dominion that he will exercise when he has the fulness of the Priesthood and becomes a 'king and a priest unto God,' she will share with him." [^38] This did not mean that a woman merely became a recipient of the blessings of the priesthood which her husband held, but that being one with him in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage she held priesthood rights in their family in connection with him. In his address to the Relief Society, Joseph Smith thus "spoke of delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church [through the sacred rites and appointments made in the temple], and said that the faithful members of the Relief Society should receive them in connection with their husbands, that the Saints whose integrity has been tried and proved faithful, might know how to ask the Lord [through the keys of divine communication given in the temple] and receive an answer." Having disclosed this glorious fact, the Prophet said of faithful women: "The keys of the kingdom are about to be given to them, that they may be able to detect everything false; as well as to all the Elders who shall prove their integrity in due season." [^39]

The Political Features of the Divine Patriarchal Order

In the perfected program of the kingdom, the political law of the government of God was designed to center in the divine patriarchal order. Through the eternal family, Christ would reign as King of kings [^40]—over those who were kings in the patriarchal system. "Every family is a kingdom, a nation, a government, within itself, to a certain extent," a Latter-day Saint writer pointed out; "and the head of the family is the legislator, the judge, the governor. This is what constitutes the patriarchal office, and was originally the sole government for all the inhabitants of the earth." [^41]

When the divine patriarchal order was instituted in the early ages of the world, it included the political program. John Taylor wrote:

Adam was the natural father of his posterity, who were his family and over whom he presided as patriarch, prophet, priest, and king. Both Abraham and Jacob stood in the same relationship to their families. [^42]

Abraham referred to the political aspects of the divine patriarchal order in the early ages of the world when he wrote of "the first government of Egypt" after the flood. That system, he explained, was patterned "after the government of Ham [the son of Noah], which was patriarchal." Continuing, he said: "Pharoah, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that [political] order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also of Noah." [^43]

As patriarchs, both Adam and Noah were kings as well as prophets and priests in the order of society which they had received from God. The divine patriarchal order was the basis of their "patriarchal reign." [^44] Apparently the eternal family order was designed to be a standard of truth and righteousness in all aspects of life, and many who were not directly identified with the patriarchal order spiritually were united with it politically, so that they could benefit from its righteous standard and be governed in political affairs by its law of justice and equity.

This was the divine system which Joseph Smith sought to establish in preparation for the Second Coming of Christ. In a masterful letter on the nature of the kingdom, he asked: "If the Saints are not to reign, for what purpose are they crowned?" He then cited the revelation of John the Apostle to the effect that the Saints would be made "kings and priests unto God," and that "they should reign on the earth." [^45] Of the fact that the divine system was to be built by means of the temple, the Prophet said:

As soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings and anointings, and attend to those last and more impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for that purpose, . . . that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the Most High God, having nothing to do with temporal things, but their whole time will be taken up with things pertaining to the house of God. [^46]

This program was designed to center political power and responsibility in the home, and to make all organizations of government auxiliary to the home. In explaining what it meant for a righteous man to be made a king and a priest in the divine patriarchal order, Brigham Young said:

We understand that we are to be made kings and priests unto God; now if I be made the king and lawgiver to my family, and if I have many sons, I shall become the father of many fathers, for they will have sons, and their sons will have sons, and so on, from generation to generation, and, in this way, I may become the father of many fathers, or the king of many kings. This will constitute every man a prince, king, lord, or whatever the Father sees fit to confer upon us.

In this way we can become King of kings, and Lord of lords, or Father of fathers, or Prince of princes, and this is the only course, for another man is not going to raise up a kingdom for you. [^47]

This did not mean that each family was autonomous, or that every father personally directed all of the political affairs of the family. In the patriarchal order of ancient Israel there was a chief ruler, which office descended by lineage in a given family, who administered the central political program of the whole house of Israel, representing the will and interests of the several tribes and families. [^48] The right of the chosen family to produce the chief ruler apparently included the right of one of its members to be the immediate king over Israel, with the promise that the Messiah—the King of kings—would come through that lineage. [^49]

This order is reflected in the Book of Mormon, where political authority in the major Nephite systems of government descended by lineage. [^50] When King Benjamin announced that he would confer the government upon his son Mosiah, the people came together in a meeting which was structured to reflect its patriarchal nature. The record states:

When they came up to the temple, they pitched their tents round about, every man according to his family, consisting of his wife, and his sons, and his daughters, and their sons, and their daughters, from the eldest down to the youngest, every family being separate one from another.

And they pitched their tents round about the temple, every man having his tent with the door thereof towards the temple, that thereby they might remain in their tents and hear the words which king Benjamin should speak unto them. [^51]

The Chosen Lineage

The Presiding Family

Through Joseph Smith, the Lord revealed that in the early ages of the world God appointed a specific family to be the center of the divine patriarchal order and to receive authority over it on earth. He also gave that family the responsibility of building the eternal order; and He extended all of their appointments to their children and descendants in the flesh. Abraham wrote that the divine patriarchal order "came down from the fathers, . . . even the right of the firstborn." He therefore referred to "the appointments of God unto the fathers concerning the seed." [^52] In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord explained that "this order of this [patriarchal] priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made." [^53]

The rights, privileges, blessings, and promises which were given to the chosen family of the divine patriarchal order are the following: first, the promise of a numerous posterity which would continue in the world and out of the world (in the resurrection) without end; second, the right to receive the articles of adoption by which the faithful could become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in eternal life; third, the right to bear the priesthood of God, to administer its ordinances, and to perform the services of God; fourth, the right to receive the covenants and sealing powers which pertain to the divine patriarchal order, by which that eternal system could be established upon the earth and perpetuated in eternity; and, fifth, the right, by building the eternal family order, to be endowed as heirs with the glory and power of God. [^54]

Two major responsibilities were given to the chosen family: first, they were to build the divine patriarchal order to be an ensign and a standard to the world; and second, they were to teach the gospel to all other families of the earth, so that repentant souls could become the sons and daughters of Christ and receive the blessings of the eternal family. This meant that those in the chosen lineage were given responsibilities commensurate with their privileges. And as they fulfilled those responsibilities, the faithful from other families were, by adoption, made their children under Christ in the eternal order.

The Doctrine of Election and the Patriarchal Order

God's appointment of rights, promises, and blessings to the presiding family of the divine patriarchal order began in the Grand Organizational Council before Adam was placed upon the earth. There, initially, the appointment, or election, of a chosen lineage was made. [^55] In its broadest meaning, the doctrine of election includes all of the appointments the Lord made in the Grand Organizational Council pertaining to all the families and nations of men on earth. The Apostle Paul wrote: "God . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." [^56]

In a more restricted sense, the doctrine of election in the flesh dealt with the appointments God gave to those who would be born on earth as heirs to rights, promises, and blessings within the divine patriarchal order. Moses taught ancient Israel that the spirits who were born in the lineage of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob, existed as a distinct group in man's pre-earth life. [^57] The Lord's call to Abraham, therefore, was that he would stand as a father in the flesh to that pre-earth spirit group, and that through him the divine patriarchal order would be built upon the earth after his day. [^58]

The scriptures also refer to an election, or divine appointment, given to some who are not born into the elect family of the divine patriarchal order. They are given the right to enter the divine family by subscribing to the articles of adoption. As sons and daughters of Christ, they are then given membership in the chosen family, or in one of its major branches. [^59] The Apostle Paul wrote that the saints at Ephesus, many of whom were gentiles, had been chosen in God "before the foundation of the world" to become children of Christ. [^60] The Book of Mormon places the gentiles on the Western hemisphere in this category. They are promised that by obedience to the gospel they can "come into the covenant and be numbered among . . . the remnant of Jacob"—the descendants of the patriarch Jacob through Joseph—to whom God gave this land for an everlasting inheritance. [^61]

The Birthright

Within the divine patriarchal order the firstborn son of the presiding family was the natural heir to the birthright and its responsibilities, if he was worthy and able to fulfil its divine requirements. [^62] A similar order existed in each family within the system. This was a heavenly order, patterned after the family of the Man of Holiness where Jesus was the Firstborn. [^63] Of the antiquity of the birthright, Erastus Snow said: "This seems to have been an order existing in the heavens even before Adam, for it is written of Jesus, the Lamb of God, that he was the firstborn of many brethren." [^64]

The birthright which was given to the presiding family and its descendants included the right to organize and preside over the divine patriarchal order. Specifically, three things should be mentioned.

First, a presiding patriarch in each successive generation held the keys of the priesthood over the total family. This office belonged by right to a member of the family which had the birthright, and it continued from father to son in the presiding line of that family. It was not the same office as the Patriarch to the Church, whose right was to bestow patriarchal blessings and designate officially the tribe or major family in the total system through which a person received the blessings of the order. [^65] The presiding patriarch was a priest and a king, with power to direct the functions of the eternal family in a given generation. [^66] As a priest, the presiding patriarch held the highest spiritual authority among the people of God in his generation, with the right to direct all the spiritual activities of the kingdom of God. As a king, he had the right to administer the program of the government of God which had its center in the eternal family order.

Second, the birthright family had a right to hold the keys of bestowing patriarchal blessings upon the children of God. This meant that the office of Patriarch to the Church belonged by divine appointment to the birthright family.

Third, worthy members of the birthright family had the right, when properly appointed, to administer the sacred ordinances and covenants of the temple to all other families of the righteous, to organize the divine patriarchal order, and to place the seals of the priesthood upon separate family units preparatory to their endowment with glory. [^67]

The birthright also included the right to be the heir of a father's kingdom. Of the vast domain of the Man of Holiness, Joseph Smith said: "Jesus Christ is the heir of this kingdom." [^68] The same principle applied to the birthright son of the presiding patriarch over the divine patriarchal order, and to all birthright sons of families within the eternal system. Each inherited that which belonged to his father, with the opportunity to occupy the same position in his generation that his father held in the generation above him. Brigham Young said: "Pertaining to the kingdom of God, to this earth, to the organization of it, to the bringing forth of the children of men upon it, to the preparatory Gospel or law to fit and prepare them, after receiving their tabernacles, to enter again into the presence of their Father and God, this heirship, this right did belong, still belongs, and for ever will belong to the first-born son in every family of Adam's race." [^69]

As the heir, the son with the birthright was required to administer faithfully the law of his father in the government of the family. Accordingly, Christ speaks and acts as the Father in administering the will of that primary being to the other children of the Man of Holiness. [^70] The birthright son was also required to promote the well-being of others in the family. Jesus made the atonement to provide for the salvation and eternal happiness of others of the Father's family. In the same manner the birthright son in every generation and family within the patriarchal order was to give himself in service and sacrifice to provide for the well-being of his brothers and sisters.

A provision was made that all other faithful sons in a family could become joint-heirs to their father's kingdom through the birthright son. In this way they, too, could inherit all that their father had. Joseph Smith said, for example, that in the kingdom of God a righteous man could become "a joint-heir of the heirship of the Son." [^71] In Zion, the law of consecration and stewardship was to be adapted to this divine order. The Saints were to consecrate to Christ all that they possessed in order to become heirs through Him in the Father's kingdom; and the divine economic program was to function within the framework of the family order.

The Contingent Nature of Man's Election

The appointments pertaining to the divine patriarchal order which were made in man's pre-earth state, were contingent in nature. Having been called of God by prophecy in his pre-earth state to receive a given responsibility on earth, man must therefore receive the more sure word of prophecy before he has a guarantee that the place and responsibility will be his in eternity. In the same way, man's pre-mortal election to family blessings and appointments in mortality must be followed by his making his calling and election sure to them before he has a final claim upon them in the resurrection. [^72] Joseph Smith taught that "unconditional election of individuals to eternal life" within the divine patriarchal order was not taught by ancient prophets and apostles. Of the Lord's policy pertaining to those in select lineages in the flesh, he said: "He passes over no man's sins, but visits them with correction, and if His children will not repent of their sins He will discard them." [^73]

The Predominance of Spiritual, Rather than Physical, Relationships

Though both physical and divine powers and attributes compose the total life of an exalted being, those divine powers and attributes of life which constitute celestial glory are greater and more significant than the physical endowments man receives by virtue of his body of flesh and bone. It may be for this reason that the line through which divine powers and attributes of life are administered takes precedence over the physical line in a given family and the rights associated with physical lineage. In organizing the divine patriarchal order and setting its final mold for eternity, the lines of faithful men, through which spiritual powers and attributes of eternal life are given to others, have preeminence over the family lines through which men receive physical bodies on earth. Only when a physical lineage conforms to the established line in the eternal life are given, and is in harmony with that line, is the physical line honored and given a permanent place within the eternal order. For example, if a father of children physically fails to become their father by developing in them the divine powers and attributes which lead to eternal life, he will have no claim upon them as children in eternity.

The predominance of the spiritual over the physical is illustrated in several ways. Jesus was born on earth in the flesh in the meridian of time, but, because He was the Son of God and had acted from the beginning to develop the divine powers and attributes of eternal life in the faithful, He is the Father, under the Man of Holiness, to all people on earth who obtain a place in the divine patriarchal order. [^74] Of those who are exalted in the great family order of the celestial kingdom, the Lord revealed to the Prophet: "They are Christ's, and Christ is God's." [^75]

In ancient times the right of authority in the divine patriarchal order followed the physical line of descent only when those who had claim upon it in the flesh were righteous and qualified by faith to receive it. When Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob, transgressed the early chronicler said: "His birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the [original] birthright." [^76]

Joseph Smith, in his Inspired Revision of the Bible, gave another illustration from the family of Jacob that shows the predominance of the spiritual over the physical in the divine patriarchal order. The patriarch Joseph, the favored son of Jacob, had two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. When Joseph took these sons to his father, Jacob said of them: "Behold, they are mine, and the God of my fathers shall bless them; even as Reuben and Simeon they shall be blessed, for they are mine; wherefore they shall be called after my name." [^77] Having taken Manasseh and Ephraim to be his own sons, Jacob then appointed Ephraim, the younger of the two, to be the firstborn under himself and Joseph, over the other patriarchs of Israel. [^78] By virtue of spiritual prerogatives, a nephew in the flesh became the elder brother of his uncles in the divine patriarchal order.

An example in the political sphere of the patriarchal order also illustrates this point. By a sacred anointing, David, the son of Jesse, became king of Israel after Saul, and received the promise that this office would extend to his descendants in the flesh. [^79] But David did not remain faithful and did not make sure his appointment to be a king in the glorified house of Israel (the divine patriarchal order) in the resurrection. Nor was there a king in Israel after David who qualified to receive the eternal blessing David would have received had he not transgressed. Joseph Smith explained that the eternal appointment David received will "be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." [^80] In eternity the latter-day David will apparently take the place in the divine family order that his illustrious, but wayward, ancestor would otherwise have had. By divine anointing, the power and office of the latter-day David will extend back in mortal time, and his rule in eternity will be over those who lived on earth before his day.

The fact that the promises of the divine patriarchal order were contingent in nature and that a man who could minister spiritual powers of life had a claim above one who held the general rights which pertained to the flesh meant that the firstborn physically did not always become the heir. Seth, the next presiding patriarch after Adam in the divine family order of this earth, had several older brothers. [^81] Yet he became the heir in Adam's family. It is possible, also, that others who became patriarchs in the antediluvian period were not the firstborn in their respective families, for they were born after their fathers had lived to a great age. [^82] After the flood, departures from the law of primogeniture were made from time to time as occasion required. Isaac was not Abraham's firstborn son. [^83] Jacob obtained the birthright instead of Esau. [^84] The fact has been noted that the rights of the firstborn within Jacob's family were transferred from Reuben to Joseph, [^85] and then to Ephraim instead of Manasseh. [^86] Finally, in the family of King David, Solomon was not the firstborn.

A similar departure was made in modern times in the family of Joseph Smith, Sr. Brigham Young said:

The Lord makes his selections according to his own mind and will with regard to his ministers. Brother Joseph Smith, instead of being the first born, was the third son of his father's family who came to maturity, yet he is actually the heir of the family; he is the heir of his father's house. It seems to us that the oldest son would be the natural heir; but we see that the Lord makes his own selection. [^87]

The Program Of The Divine Patriarchal Order

The Family Education Program

With the home as the basic unit of the divine patriarchal order, all programs of the Church were designed, first, to aid family members apply the law of Christ in their lives and, second, to assist family patriarchs and their wives to fulfil their responsibilities within their respective families. This was particularly true of the educational program in Zion, which was to center, ultimately, in the house of the Lord. That program was designed to help develop the individual and, in a supporting role, sustain the home as the basic institution in Zion. The family patriarch, not society, had the primary responsibility of instructing children in the divine plan of life and salvation. Nephi expressed the guiding principle underlying a true patriarchal system when he wrote: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father." [^88]

Revelations to the Prophet stressed the need for parents to teach their children the regenerating truths of the gospel. The Lord stated that "great things" were required of parents, [^89] and that unless parents in Zion and her stakes taught their children the doctrines of the gospel "when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." [^90] Having explained in another revelation that "the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth," the Lord then said: "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." [^91] Thus parents were given the primary responsibility of aiding in the spiritual regeneration and ultimate glorification of their children. Lorenzo Snow declared:

Men . . . ought to be, when in the presence of their families, filled with the Holy Ghost, to administer the word of life to them as it is administered in this stand from sabbath to sabbath. When they kneel down in the presence of their wives and children they ought to be inspired by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, that the husband may be such a man as a good wife will honor, and that the gift and power of God may be upon them continually. They ought to be one in their families, that the Holy Ghost might descend upon them, and they ought to live so that the wife through prayer may become sanctified, that she may see the necessity of sanctifying herself in the presence of her husband, and in the presence of her children, that they may be one together, in order that the man and the wife may be pure element, suitable to occupy a place in the establishment and formation of the kingdom of God, that they may breathe a pure spirit and impart pure instruction to their children, and their children's children. [^92]

Heber C. Kimball spoke specifically of the transforming power of this divine program and its effects upon children. "Truth is the sanctifier of those who love it and are guided by it," he explained. When the Spirit of truth abides significantly in parents, they transmit its sanctifying effects to their offspring. "Jesus Christ proceeded from his Father," Elder Kimball explained as a case in point, "and inherited germs of his Father's perfections and the attributes of his Father's nature, so that he sinned not." The same principle can apply, to a degree, to man. "If the attributes of our nature become refined and regenerated by the truth," Elder Kimball continued, "our offspring must inherit those perfections, more or less." He therefore admonished:

Then, how essential it is that parents should, by living their religion, improve themselves for the improvement of their race. We, too, are the children of God, but we are the offspring in the flesh of fallen and degenerate parents, and we are prone to sin as the sparks fly upward: but by observing the truth, and by following the direction of the Holy Priesthood which has been restored in our day, we may overcome the evil that is within us and that is in the world, begin to improve and perfect the attributes of our nature, which are like the attributes of the nature of God, and lay the foundation of goodness and truth in our offspring. [^93]

In Zion, men were to be taught the truths of the gospel in the temple, at least the higher gospel doctrines, then instruct their families within the sacred environs of their homes. The family of Joseph Smith, Sr. had a place set aside in their yard where they "were in the habit of offering up their secret devotions to God." [^94] Their "usual services" at home in the morning consisted of "reading [from the scriptures], singing and praying." [^95] Of the Prophet's family services in the evening, an acquaintance said:

I arrived at his house about nine o'clock just as his family was singing, before the accustomed evening prayer. His wife Emma [was] leading in the singing. I thought I had never heard such sweet, heavenly music before. I was equally interested in the prayer offered by the Prophet. [^96]

While incarcerated in Liberty Jail, Joseph Smith wrote to his wife of her responsibility in their family:

My Dear Emma, I think of you and the children continually . . . . Tell them father loves them with a perfect love. . . . Do teach them all you can, that they may have good minds. Be tender and kind to them. Don't be fractious to them, but listen to their wants. Tell them father says they must be good children, and mind their mother. . . . There is great responsibility resting upon you. in preserving yourself in honor, and sobriety before them, and teaching them right things, to form their young and tender minds, that they begin in right paths, and not get contaminated when young by seeing ungodly examples. [^97]

Family patriarchs were assisted in teaching the gospel to their children by the brethren of the priesthood who visited them in the role of home teachers. [^98] Parley P. Pratt noted the benefits of this program among the Saints as they sought to build Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. Having arrived in Missouri late in the summer of 1831, many families had little time to establish adequate living quarters. Several of them were crowded into an uncompleted cabin or lean-to with the frozen ground for a floor, while they subsisted on scanty rations. Yet Elder Pratt reported: "There was a spirit of peace and union, and love and good will manifested in this little Church in the wilderness, the memory of which will be ever dear to my heart." [^99] Another member of that hearty band corroborated this statement, suggesting that the peace and union which they felt were due largely to the officers of the Church who visited the Saints often. The priests were busy "enlightening and counseling the families; the teachers rooting out, smoothing away, and helping to settle the very beginnings of difficulties among the members; the deacons attending to the wants of the needy, assisting them to obtain that wherein they lacked." [^100]

Home teachers were more than instructors to the people. They were to "watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them," [^101] as guardians of the faith and as aides and counselors to their assigned families. As priesthood officers, they had the task of evaluating the spiritual state and progress of their families. An interesting example of this comes from a report of William F. Cahoon, who was assigned to visit the home of Joseph Smith in Nauvoo. Elder Cahoon later wrote:

I was called and ordained to act as a teacher to visit the families of the Saints. I got along very well till I found that I was obliged to call and pay a visit to the Prophet. Being young, only about seventeen years of age, I felt my weakness in visiting the Prophet and his family in the capacity of a teacher. I almost felt like shrinking from duty. Finally I went to his door and knocked, and in a minute the Prophet came to the door. I stood there trembling, and said to him:

"Brother Joseph, I have come to visit you in the capacity of a teacher, if it is convenient for you."

He said, "Brother William, come right in, I am glad to see you; sit down in that chair there and I will go and call my family in."

They soon came in and took seats. He then said, "Brother William, I submit myself and family into your hands," and then took his seat. "Now Brother William," said he, "ask all the questions you feel like."

By this time all my fears and tremblings had ceased, and I said, "Brother Joseph, are you trying to live your religion?"

He answered, "Yes."

I then said, "Do you pray in your family?"

He said, "Yes."

"Do you teach your family the principles of the gospel?"

He replied, "Yes, I am trying to do it."

"Do you ask a blessing on your food?"

He answered, "Yes."

"Are you trying to live in peace and harmony with all your family?"

He said that he was.

I then turned to Sister Emma, his wife, and said, "Sister Emma, are you trying to live your religion? Do you teach your children to obey their parents? Do you try to teach them to pray?"

To all these questions she answered, "Yes, I am trying to do so."

I then turned to Joseph and said, "I am now through with my questions as a teacher; and now if you have any instructions to give, I shall be happy to receive them."

He said, "God bless you, Brother William; and if you are humble and faithful, you shall have power to settle all difficulties that may come before you in the capacity of a teacher."

I then left my parting blessing upon him and his family, as a teacher, and took my departure. [^102]

The Family Economic Program

As the economic program of the divine patriarchal order, the law of consecration and stewardship centered in the family in Zion. As a true son of Christ, every man was to be an heir, which gave him the right to be a steward over sufficient income-producing property or responsibility to sustain his family on an equal standard with other families in the system. As an heir, he also had equal access to the storehouse with all of its blessings and opportunities. These rights were to be extended to "his seed after him," [^103] as they became "heirs according to the laws of the kingdom." [^104]

Emphasis was upon helping every man become "a faithful, a just, and a wise steward"; [^105] and the priesthood order and program in Zion facilitated the achievement of this objective. A steward could get from his priesthood quorum counsel and help in his stewardship. If he was having some difficulty in his stewardship, capable men could be assigned as his home teachers to counsel and advise him in his work. If for some reason a family had need of economic assistance, the home teachers could report the need to the bishop in confidence. In these and other ways the Church was designed to help each family become economically independent.

The Family Missionary Program

The doctrine of the divine patriarchal order which was renewed through Joseph Smith made it clear that members of the regenerated family had the responsibility to teach the gospel to the world. A revelation stated that the antediluvian patriarchs "called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men." [^106] Having promised that through Abraham's ministry His name would "be known in the earth forever," [^107] the Lord said to the great patriarch: "I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of eternal life." [^108]

Revelations to Joseph Smith also affirmed that, in modern times, "the promises remain" which God made to Abraham. [^109] To the Prophet, in particular, a revelation declared: "In thee and in thy seed shall the kindreds of the earth be blessed." [^110]

In one way or another, every recipient of the restored gospel was to help proclaim the glorious message throughout the world. "Behold, I send you out to testify and warn the people," a revelation admonished the early converts, "and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor." [^111] Joseph Smith spoke of the particular responsibility of the Saints to teach the gospel to "their living relatives . . . and . . . friends." [^112] His parents were an example of those who made every effort to acquaint their relatives with the divine message. [^113]

Families were not given the direct responsibility of proselyting, but they were to become the basis of the program of spreading the gospel abroad. Though the Prophet did not specify all the details of that relationship, the following statements are compatible with the concept he set forth: First, the youth of Zion could be prepared in the home, and by priesthood and auxiliary organizations, to go into the mission fields of the world. Second, families could give financial assistance to the missionary program. Third, family members could arrange for missionaries to visit their non-member friends. And finally, as individuals and as families, the Saints could fellowship those who were investigating the restored gospel.

As home teachers visited the several families of the Church, they could encourage the Saints to fulfil their missionary obligations and could recommend worthy members as prospective missionaries.

The Family Genealogy Program

In addition to establishing the divine patriarchal order among the Saints, the ordinances of that eternal system had to be administered vicariously in behalf of the dead, to extend the patriarchal order to past generations and to organize the obedient of all ages under Adam into one great family with Christ as its eternal Head. [^114] Perfecting the divine family order among the living and the dead was the major work of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. [^115]

This would not be an easy task, but it was necessary in order to bring about the full redemption and exaltation of the living and the dead, and to unite the divine patriarchal order of this earth with the celestial family which had been organized on previously glorified spheres in the presence of God. The Prophet's associates recognized that this was "the beginning of an immense work, and that to administer all the ordinances of the Gospel to the hosts of the dead was no light task." The Twelve therefore "asked Joseph if there could not be some shorter method of administering for so many." He replied:

The laws of the Lord are immutable, we must act in perfect compliance with what is revealed to us. We need not expect to do this vast work for the dead in a short time. I expect it will take at least a thousand years. [^116]

Joseph Smith placed on each family the primary responsibility to redeem and organize its ancestors according to the plan of the patriarchal order. "The Lord has an established law in relation to the matter": the temple is the place where "men who want to save their dead can come and bring their families, do their work by being baptized and attending to the other ordinances for their dead." [^117] Again, he emphasized: "I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection." [^118]

Here again the Church was to act as an organization through which the Saints could better accomplish their responsibilities in this phase of building the divine patriarchal order. And here, too, priesthood programs and home teachers could give encouragement to individual members and families.

Patriarchal Blessings

Not only was it the privilege and duty of a family patriarch to teach the gospel to his children, but also to bless them by the spirit of revelation, to help guide them in the true pathway of life. Adam set the precedent. Three years before his death he gathered the righteous of his posterity together and "bestowed upon them his last blessing." [^119] The fact that this was his "last blessing" implies that he had blessed them on previous occasions. "Notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, [he] predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." [^120]

Other patriarchs also blessed their children and prophesied what would befall their descendants in later generations. These included Jacob, [^121] his son Joseph, [^122] and Lehi. [^123] This privilege and its responsibilities was given to every man who embraced the sacred rites and ordinances of the divine patriarchal order. They received the same general rights, promises, powers, and blessings which were committed to Abraham and the patriarchs before and after his time. [^124] This included the right to pronounce patriarchal blessings upon their children.

Three things governed a father's right to give such blessings officially to his children. First, he had to be married in the temple, for it was in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage that he was made a patriarch over his children within the divine patriarchal order. Second, he had to have received an official declaration of his own lineage by one holding the office of a patriarch in the Church, for the right to make such designations was centralized in that office. Third, he was to conform to the program for the giving of patriarchal blessings, set by the living prophet who held the keys of the kingdom of God on earth.

Eliza R. Snow reflected the understanding of the Saints on the subject of patriarchal blessings:

With the restoration of the fulness of the gospel came also the ancient order of patriarchal blessings. Each father, holding the priesthood, stands as a patriarch, at the head of his family, with invested right and power to bless his household, and to predict concerning the future, on the heads of his children, as did Jacob of old. [^125]

John Taylor gave a more detailed explanation. In setting forth "the true doctrine of the church" in relation to these matters, he said: "Every father, after he has received his patriarchal blessing, is a Patriarch to his own family; and has the right to confer patriarchal blessings upon his family; which blessings will be just as legal as those conferred by any Patriarch of the church." [^126] This, Elder Taylor stressed, was a faithful man's "right," and in blessing the children of such a man, a patriarch in the Church could "only bless as his mouth-piece." [^127]

As stated previously, the Patriarch to the Church and other patriarchs within the Church were to play a significant role in giving the Saints their patriarchal blessings. [^128] Their responsibility was twofold. First, by virtue of their ordination, they had the primary right to declare the lineage of the Saints, or assign the Saints to their respective tribes of Israel. John Taylor stated that church patriarchs were ordained "to hold the keys of this priesthood, and unlock the door, that had long been closed upon the human family: that blessings might again be conferred according to the ancient order." [^129] Second, Elder Taylor explained that church patriarchs were appointed to bless those who were orphans, or those who had "no father in the church to bless them." [^130] In doing so, a church patriarch was to "act as proxy for their fathers." [^131] Here again the Church was to act as an instrument to help build up the patriarchal order.

The Book of Remembrance

The record kept of the divine patriarchal order in the early ages of the world was known as the Book of Remembrance. Of it a revelation said: "A book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration; and by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled." [^132] Enoch said of this record: "For a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language." [^133]

As a record of the divine patriarchal order in ancient times, the Book of Remembrance preserved important information concerning that system. Abraham noted that the "records of the fathers, even the patriarchs," gave an account of "the right of Priesthood" within the eternal family order. [^134] It also contained a record of God's revelations of gospel truth to Adam and the patriarchs after him. In a great gospel discourse, Enoch quoted the word of the Lord to Adam as it was recorded in the Book of Remembrance. [^135] The ancient record also preserved other important information. Abraham stated that that early record, which had been passed down to him, gave "a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers." [^136]

The Book of Remembrance apparently set the pattern for later family records which became works of scripture among the people of God. Abraham explained that he wrote his own history, giving an account of the revelations of God which he had received, "for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me." [^137] He was obviously keeping a family record, and, as a prominent figure within the divine patriarchal order, he recorded the revelations and promises he received from God.

The Israelites continued the practice of keeping family records in later generations. The Bible contains many genealogies, [^138] and the Israelites kept other sacred records, not found in the Bible, which contained genealogical records. [^139] Having listed some major genealogical lines among the Israelites, the ancient chronicler wrote: "So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah." [^140]

The personal and family record of the patriarch Joseph was written on plates of brass which were handed down from generation to generation. Before the colony of Lehi obtained this record, it was in the possession of a descendant of Joseph named Laban. "Wherefore," Nephi explained, "he and his fathers had kept the records." [^141] It was this record, not merely a copy of the current scriptures, which God instructed Lehi to obtain and take with him to the Western hemisphere, [^142] the land the Lord gave to the patriarch Joseph and his descendants after him. [^143] Being a descendant of the patriarch Joseph, Lehi explained to his son Nephi that the plates of brass contained "a genealogy of thy forefathers." [^144]

The plates of brass contained a copy of the five books of Moses, the history of Israel down to the beginning of the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah, and the writings of prophets down to and including some of the teachings of Jeremiah. [^145] It also contained information concerning the family of Joseph, including the revelations and prophecies of that great Israelite patriarch [^146] and of prophets who descended from him. Speaking of the coming of Christ, Mormon therefore observed: "The prophet Zenos did testify of these things, and also Zenock spake concerning these things, because they testified particularly concerning us, who are the remnant of their seed." [^147]

Information in the scriptural records brought forth by Joseph Smith made it clear that each family of the Saints was to keep a book of remembrance containing the revelations of God to members of the family, genealogical data concerning the family members, and personal histories. If given the same respect and purpose as ancient family records, the book of remembrance in each home would rank next to the scriptures as the most valuable volume in their possession.

Summary

The perfect order of Zion, or of the Church of the Firstborn, was patriarchal in structure, and the economic, social, and political systems of the kingdom of God were to become parts of that eternal family. As an heir within it, every worthy man was to receive a fulness of the priesthood and be made a priest and a king over his descendants within the order. In this way, he could finally become like the exalted Man of Holiness in eternity. Each righteous woman could receive these blessings with her husband, as a priestess and a queen over her posterity.

To build the divine patriarchal order on earth, the Lord appointed a specific family to be the center of the system and to exercise its primary powers, which included those of the birthright over the whole family. But earthly appointments were made contingent upon one's demonstrated worthiness and ability, and one who could administer spiritual powers and attributes of life had preeminence over one who was merely a father in a physical sense. The major purpose of the Church in Zion was to assist families to establish themselves fully upon the program of the eternal family order and to fulfil their obligations in the system, to the living and to their ancestors who died without hearing the gospel. Fathers were to be true patriarchs over their families, with the right to bless and guide them in the path to eternal life. Finally, a book of remembrance was to be kept by each family as a record of its history, blessings, and appointments.

Footnotes

The Prophet did not say that woman had the same right as the elders to administer to the sick publicly, or as official representatives of the Church. Nor did he say that they could use the official forms or order of the priesthood in doing so. But within their homes, or in the absence of the elders, women could lay on hands for the healing of the sick.

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance [in the allocations which were made in the pre-mortal world], when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.—Deuteronomy 32:7-9.

The God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house;

For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever;

For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin.—I. R., Genesis 48:9-11.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 49:15; 131:1-4; 132.
[^2] See D&C 132.
[^3] D&C 49:16.
[^4] The nature and needs of children are such that only in the home where true love and respect abound can they find all the elements that best enable them to realize their eternal potentials and purposes in life.
[^5] Moses 2:27. See also Genesis 1:26-27.
[^6] JD, III, p. 360.
[^7] D&C 132:7.
[^8] HC, VI, p. 46.
[^9] JD, XXV, p. 227.
[^10] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "Justification by the Holy Spirit."
[^11] D&C 132:26. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "Sealing Family Units Together."
[^12] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "Conditions Governing Those Who Make Their Calling and Election Sure."
[^13] JD, XXV, p. 227.
[^14] See D&C 42:22-23; 63:16. Concerning lustful thoughts, Jesus said to the Nephites: "Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart."—3 Nephi 12:29.
[^15] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 165.
[^16] Improvement Era, XX (June, 1917), p. 739.
[^17] JD, XIII, p. 195.
[^18] Pratt, The Seer (October, 1853), p. 155.
[^19] Ibid., (February, 1853), p. 29.
[^20] Alma 39:5.
[^21] Jacob 2:28.
[^22] 3 Nephi 12:28-29.
[^23] D&C 42:22-23. For other statements, see D&C 59:6; 63:16, 41; 66:10; 76:103.
[^24] Alma 39:5.
[^25] See Abraham 5:17-18; Moses 3:23-24; Genesis 1:23-24; Matthew 19:5-6; D&C 49:16; 1 Corinthians 6:16.
[^26] HC, V, p. 391.
[^27] See JD, XV, p. 137. See also Volume II of this study, p. 327.
[^28] Blake, A Short History of American Life, pp. 283-284.
[^29] D&C 25:7-14.
[^30] HC, II, p. 264, citing Ephesians 5:23.
[^31] See D&C 121:41-43.
[^32] HC, II, p. 264. See Ephesians 5:22-31.
[^33] HC, IV, pp. 604, 607.
[^34] JD, XVI, pp. 166-167.
[^35] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage Instituted."
[^36] The doctrine of plural marriage was probably revealed while Joseph Smith was working on his Inspired Revision of the Bible. The opening verses of the official revelation which set forth that doctrine indicated that he had some question on how God justified Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and Solomon in having plural wives. See D&C 132:1-2. Joseph B. Noble, who performed the marriage ceremony when his wife's sister was given to Joseph Smith as a plural wife in 1841, stated "that the Prophet told him that the doctrine of celestial marriage was revealed to him while he was engaged on the work of translation of the scriptures."—MS, VL (July 16, 1883), p. 454. Joseph Smith spoke of his labor on his Inspired Revision of the Bible as a "work of translation."—D&C 45:60; 76:15.
[^37] Letter of William W. Phelps to Brigham Young, August 12, 1861, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^38] MS, XL (December 16, 1878), p. 788; Andrew Jenson, Historical Record, VI (Salt Lake City, Utah 1887), p. 230. For another statement by Elder Pratt, see JD, XIII, p. 193. For a statement by Brigham Young, see Journal History, August 26, 1857. Benjamin F. Johnson also stated that the revelation was given when Joseph Smith was living in Kirtland. Johnson to Gibbs, p. 12.
[^39] Deseret Evening News, February 18, 1882.
[^40] Johnson, My Life's Review, p. 94.
[^41] Ibid., p. 390. These two women were later sealed to the Prophet by proxy after his death. See ibid., p. 94.
[^42] Letter of Johnson to Gibbs, p. 13. Speaking of Fanny Alger, Johnson said: "Her brother John, who resided and died in southern Utah [after the Saints moved west], to my knowledge, was by President [Heber C.] Kimball in the temple at St. George introduced as the 'brother of the Prophet Joseph's first plural wife.'"—Ibid., p. 14. Andrew Jenson wrote: "Fanny Alger [was] one of the first plural wives sealed to the Prophet Joseph."—Jenson, Historical Record, VI, p. 233.
[^43] Benjamin F. Johnson implied that it was sometime after 1835. Letter of Johnson to Gibbs, p. 11.
[^44] Speaking of the origins of plural marriage, Mosiah Hancock later wrote: "My father [Levi Hancock] made some things known to me concerning those days, and the part he took with the Prophet in trying to assist him to start the principle with a few chosen friends in those days."—Deseret News, XVII (February 21, 1884), p. 4. Mosiah added: "My father had required of me to bear testimony of these things at a proper time."—Ibid. What Levi Hancock specifically did to assist the Prophet is not known. His journal and memoirs make it clear that Fanny Alger was the daughter of his older sister Clarrisa and her husband Samuel Alger, and that Fanny was born sometime before 1815, which made her at least twenty-one years of age in 1836. With this close family relationship, Levi may have been the person through whom the Prophet approached Fanny on the subject. See '"The Life of Levi Ward Hancock," copied from his personal journal and memoirs, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 6, 9.
[^45] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter three entitled "The Local Excitement."
[^46] Affidavit by Joseph B. Noble, June 26, 1869, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; report of Noble's address at the Davis Stake Conference, Centerville, Davis Co., Utah, MS, VL (July 16, 1883), p. 454; Jenson, op. cit., p. 233. Elder Noble testified that in the fall of 1840, Joseph Smith taught him "the principle of celestial or plural marriage . . . and . . . declared that he had received a revelation from God on the subject, and that the angel of the Lord had commanded him to move forward in the said order."—Jenson, op. cit., p. 221.
[^47] Later in this chapter reference is made to some who then embraced the principle of plural marriage. For additional references, see Jenson, op. cit., pp. 225, 229, 232; Johnson, My Life's Review, pp. 97-99; Roberts, The Life of John Taylor, pp. 101, 465; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 84-85; JD, XXIV, pp. 165, 230-231; Diary of Aroet Lucious Hale, 1828-1849, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, pp. 8-9; Autobiography of Bathsheba W. Smith; Journal of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, pp. 43-44; Experiences in the Life of Rhoda Ann Fullmer, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, p. 8; Minutes of the Peoa Ward, October 26, 1879, Summit Historical Record, 1877-1890, pp. 158-159.
[^48] For a list of some of the women Joseph Smith married as plural wives during his lifetime, see Jenson, op cit., pp. 233-234. See also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, 1888), pp. 430-431. In the various collections of historical materials that currently exist, there are well over one hundred sworn statements and affidavits attesting to the Prophet's practice of plural marriage.
[^49] For testimonies of some of the Prophet's plural wives to this fact, see Jenson, op cit., pp. 223-225; Woman's Exponent, XIV (August 1, 1885), p. 38; Lyman O. Littlefield, Reminiscences of the Latter-day Saints (Logan, Utah, 1888), pp. 48-49; Helen Mar Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph (Salt Lake City, 1882), pp. 14-15; Deseret Weekly News, October 22, 1879.
[^50] Ibid., p. 226. William Law, a counselor to Joseph Smith in the First Presidency of the Church, opposed the revelation and later became a chief publisher of the Nauvoo Expositor, an opposition organ which figured largely in bringing about the Prophet's death. In the one and only issue of that paper, Law testified:
[^51] Jenson, op. cit., p. 227. See also the minutes of the Davis Stake Conference, MS, VL (July 16, 1883), p. 454, for a report of this affidavit.
[^52] See Jenson, op. cit., p. 226; The Contributor VI (January, 1885), p. 131; Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, p. 26.
[^53] See the affidavits of William Clayton and Joseph F. Smith in Jenson, op. cit., pp. 219, 223, 226.
[^54] Affidavit of William Clayton, in ibid., p. 226.
[^55] Ibid., pp. 225, 226.
[^56] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo, "Woman's Exponent, X (November 1, 1881), p. 83.
[^57] JD, V, p. 290.
[^58] Ibid., XX, p. 352.
[^59] Ibid., XI, p. 210.
[^60] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage Instituted."
[^61] Jacob 2:27-28, 30.
[^62] HC, VI, p. 46. (Italics in the original changed to those above.)
[^63] Ibid. See also D&C 132:7.
[^64] JD, I, p. 64.
[^65] D&C 132:8, 10.
[^66] JD, I, pp. 63-64.
[^67] Ibid., XIII, pp. 201-202.
[^68] D&C 132:5-24.
[^69] D&C 132:34-39.
[^70] D&C 132:58-59, 61-62.
[^71] Letter of William W. Phelps to Brigham Young, August 12, 1861. (Italics in the original.)
[^72] HC, VI, p. 46. (Italics in the original.)
[^73] Ibid.
[^74] HC, V, p. 2.
[^75] D&C 132:29.
[^76] D&C 132:34.
[^77] D&C 132:38.
[^78] Jacob 2:30.
[^79] Pratt, The Seer, I (February, 1853), p. 30. Elder Pratt stressed that "without such a command, they were strictly limited to the one wife doctrine: 'otherwise' says the Lord, 'they shall hearken unto these things;' that is, without an express command, they should hearken to the law limiting them to one wife."—Ibid., pp. 30-31. (Italics in the original.)
[^80] Ibid., p. 31.
[^81] Ibid., p. 31. Continuing, he explained:
[^82] See, for example, HC, VI, p. 46.
[^83] D&C 132:36.
[^84] D&C 132:37. An associate of the Prophet wrote: "One excellency of Abraham was, that he would never venture to take a wife, unless he obtained permission and revelation from the Lord to do so."—Orson Spencer, Patriarchal Order Or Plurality of Wives (Liverpool, England, 1853), p. 9.
[^85] HC, V, pp. 135-136. For the fact that this letter was written to Nancy Rigdon, see the handwritten copy in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^86] See D&C 132:1, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 49, 50, 51, 57, 65.
[^87] See D&C 132:65, in light of verse 34.
[^88] D&C 132:28, 58, 61, 64.
[^89] D&C 132:34.
[^90] D&C 132:65.
[^91] D&C 132:64-65.
[^92] Pratt, The Seer, I (March, 1853), p. 41.
[^93] See D&C 132:38, in light of verse 7.
[^94] Jacob 2:28. Jacob was not condemning the true practice of plural marriage, but the unlawful practice of it. His statement in Jacob 2:30 makes this fact clear.
[^95] HC, VI, p. 46.
[^96] TS, V (February 1, 1844), p. 423.
[^97] Ibid., (March 15, 1844), p. 474. (Italics in the original.)
[^98] Pratt, The Seer, I (February, 1853), p. 31.
[^99] Ibid.
[^100] JD, XIII, p. 193.
[^101] Helen Mar Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 21.
[^102] Journal History, August 26, 1857. When the practice of plural marriage caused difficulties, the High Council met to consider them. It was reported: "Joseph Smith, Jr., testified that Oliver Cowdery had been his bosom friend, therefore he intrusted him with many things."—"Far West Record," p. 117.
[^103] Diary of Charles L. Walker, July 26, 1872. President Young added: "Anne Lyman is still alive, a witness to these things."—Ibid.
[^104] Juvenile Instructor, XX (December 1, 1885), p. 360.
[^105] Ibid., XVI (September 15, 1881), p. 206.
[^106] JD, IV, p. 255.
[^107] Ibid., V, p. 29.
[^108] Ibid., XXV, p. 227.
[^109] Ibid., I, pp. 119-120. (Italics in the original.) Orson Pratt explained that God does not desire to propagate wickedness; therefore, He does not desire the wicked to propagate. He said:
[^110] JD, XVI, p. 166. See also ibid., XII, p. 263.
[^111] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, X (November 1, 1881), p. 83. Brigham Young also said: "When that revelation was first read to me by Joseph Smith, I plainly saw the great trials and the abuse of it that would be made by many of the Elders, and the trouble and the persecution that it would bring upon the whole people."—JD, XI, p. 268.
[^112] Address of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner at Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, April 14, 1905, N. L. Lundwall Collection, containing a copy of the address signed by "Mary E. R. Lightner," with the following note signed by Mary R. Rollins and Elsie E. Barrett: "We her daughter and granddaughter have heard her tell this and much more ever since we can remember." A microfilm copy of this collection is in the Brigham Young University Library. In taking note of this address, the Deseret News said:
[^113] Journal of Joseph Lee Robinson, pp. 13-14. When the Prophet still hesitated, the heavenly messenger finally appeared with a drawn sword and threatened his destruction if he did not institute the practice. Lightner, op. cit. Several testimonies support the fact that Joseph Smith said he received these ministrations. Hyrum Smith told Benjamin F. Johnson: "I know that Joseph was commanded to take more wives, and he waited until an angel with drawn sword stood before him and declared that if he longer delayed fulfilling that command that he would slay him."—Johnson to Gibbs, p. 13. Elder Johnson also signed an affidavit stating that Joseph Smith taught his (Johnson's) mother in his hearing "the doctrine of celestial marriage, declaring that an angel appeared unto him with a drawn sword, threatening to slay him if he did not proceed to fulfill the law that had been given to him."—Jenson, op. cit., p. 222. Helen Mar Whitney stated: "Joseph's own testimony was, that an angel was sent to command him to teach and to enter into this order. This angel, he states, stood over him with a drawn sword prepared to inflict the penalty of death if he should be disobedient."—Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, p. 13. See also, Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, p. 63.
[^114] JD, XI, p. 221.
[^115] Ibid., III, p. 266. See also ibid., XXII, p. 180.
[^116] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo, Woman's Exponent, X (October 1, 1881), p. 66. Others had similar feelings about the matter. See, for example, JD, XXII, p. 180. In speaking of Joseph Smith's proposal that she become one of his plural wives, Eliza Maria Partridge, said: "This was truly a great trial for me, but I had the most implicit confidence in him as a Prophet of the Lord, . . . and as a matter of course accept[ed] of the privilege of being sealed to him as a wife for time and all eternity."—Autobiography and diary of Eliza Maria Partridge (Smith) Lyman, 1820-1885, typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, p. 7.
[^117] See Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, pp. 56-58, Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 325-326.
[^118] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, XI (July 15, 1882), p. 26. Under date of October 16, 1842, Vilate wrote to her husband, and on the same sheet Sarah Noon added a note. Having quoted the two letters, Helen, the daughter of Heber and Vilate, said: "It will be seen by the few lines written in connection with my mother's letter that Sarah Peeke Noon, who the Lord commanded through his Prophet Joseph, that my father should take to wife, was sealed to him, by the Prophet, as early as 1842."—Ibid. (June 1, 1882), pp. 1-2. A son was born to Heber and Sarah, about January, 1843, but died shortly after birth. In all, three children were born to this union. See ibid. (July 15, 1882), p. 26; Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, p. 61; Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 418. In a letter to her husband where she mentioned some current developments in plural marriage at Nauvoo, Vilate wrote, in June, 1843: "Sarah Noon is here and sends her love to you. My daily prayer is that you may finish your mission with honor, and be returned to our embraces."—Ibid. (September 15, 1882), p. 58.
[^119] Ibid.
[^120] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 69-70. See also Jenson, Historical Record, VI, p. 222, for another statement by Lorenzo Snow.
[^121] JD, XXIV, p. 231.
[^122] Handwritten memoirs of Eliza R. Snow, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^123] Whitney, Woman's Exponent, (November 1, 1881), p. 83. (Italics in the original.)
[^124] Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, p. 27.
[^125] Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, pp. 23-24. Speaking of women who entered the practice of plural marriage, George Q. Cannon said: "They have had their trials; but these have had the effect of purifying them."—JD, XXV, p. 3.
[^126] Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, p. 25.
[^127] JD, XXIII, pp. 278-279.
[^128] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter seven entitled "Birth to See the Kingdom of God."
[^129] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 13.
[^130] Letter dated June 27, 1843, in Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, (September 15, 1882), p. 58. She added:
[^131] Women's Exponent, VII (December 15, 1878), p. 105; XI (March 1, 1883), p. 146. Orson F. Whitney, a grandson of Newel K. Whitney, stated that there was a "revelation commanding and consecrating this union," and that it was still in existence when he made his statement.—Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia (Salt Lake City, 1901), p. 226. This revelation, which is still extant, gave the words which Bishop Whitney used in the ceremony, stipulating that the marriage partners were to reserve themselves "for each and from all others and also throughout eternity, reserving only those rights which have been given to my servant Joseph by revelation and commandment and by legal authority in times passed." Apparently the Prophet did not receive the full blessings of that union as they pertained to the resurrection, in the ceremony performed July 27, 1842. On August 18, 1842, he wrote to the Whitneys requesting the Bishop and his wife to bring Sarah Ann to see him, explaining: "One thing I want to see you for is to get [the] fulness of my blessings sealed upon our heads, &c."—Revelation and letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. This may explain the following footnote which was added at the end of the revelation to the Prophet concerning his marriage to Sarah Ann: "Received the blessings of the resurrection as they pertain to the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage. August 21, 1842."
[^132] Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and John Taylor returned to Nauvoo July 1, 1841, followed shortly thereafter by Orson Pratt and George A. Smith. See HC, IV, pp. 381, 383, 389.
[^133] Apparently the Prophet felt an urgency to introduce these principles to these brethren. Of the return of the Twelve, Helen Mar Whitney, daughter of Heber C. Kimball, later said: "My mother felt the presence of others at such a time almost an intrusion, but Brother Joseph seemed unwilling to part with my father; and from that time kept the Twelve in Council early and late, and she sometimes felt nearly jealous of him, but never dreamed that he was during those times revealing to them the principle of Celestial Marriage and that her trials and sacrifices which she had flattered herself were nearly over, had scarcely begun.,,—Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, X (August 15, 1881), p. 42.
[^134] JD, XVIII, p. 241.
[^135] Signed statement dated February 8, 1902.
[^136] Lightner's Address at Brigham Young University.
[^137] Rodney W. Walker and Noel S. Stevenson, Ancestry and Descendants of John Walker (1794-1869) of Vermont and Utah, Descendant of Robert Walker, an Emigrant of 1632 from England to Boston, Mass. (Kaysville, Utah, 1953), p. 31; Littlefield, Reminiscences of the Latter-Day Saints, pp. 46-49. For two sworn statements by Lucy Walker, see Jenson, Historical Record, VI, pp. 229-230; signed statement before a notary public, December 17, 1902, in Journal History, May 1, 1843.
[^138] Ibid. Of the testimony she received, she said in another statement, after describing the darkness and turmoil she felt: "I at once became calm and composed; a feeling of happiness took possession of me, and at the same time I received a powerful and irresistible testimony of the truth of plural marriage, which testimony has abided with me ever since."—Jenson, op. cit., p. 230. In another sworn statement she said of the Prophet: "He counseled me to pray to the Lord, which I did, and thereupon I received from Him a powerful and irresistible testimony of the truthfulness and divinity of plural marriage, which testimony has abided with me ever since."—Statement December 17, 1902, op. cit.
[^139] Johnson, My Life's Review, pp. 94-95; Johnson to Gibbs, pp. 12-13. For a statement by Elder Johnson's sister, Susan E. J. Martineau, see Young Woman's Journal, XVII (December, 1906), p. 542.
[^140] JD, XXV, p. 228.
[^141] Ibid., III, p. 265.
[^142] Ibid., XXIII, p. 64.
[^143] Ibid., p. 65. In reporting a conversation with President Rutherford B. Hayes, John Taylor said: "I told him that . . . we had received the doctrine of plural marriage as a part of the Gospel, and that it was only for pure men and pure women, that class, and that class only, could receive it and practice it, and make it honorable; it was . . . for those who feared God and worked righteousness, who were true to themselves and true to the female sex, and who would stand by and sustain them and preserve them in purity and honor."—Ibid., XXVI, p. 95.
[^144] Jenson, Historical Record, VI, p. 226.
[^145] Jacob 2:30. See Volume II of this study, chapter seven entitled "Becoming Sons And Daughters Of Christ."
[^146] Pratt, The Seer, I (July, 1853), p. 105. Continuing, Elder Pratt reasoned:
[^147] JD, XI, p. 210.
