Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

13

The Divine Patriarchal Order of Marriage

Those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory.—JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith taught the Saints that the rights, promises, blessings, and responsibilities of the divine patriarchal order centered in and and were derived from the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and the sealing power of the priesthood by which the eternal family order could be extended in time and eternity. This order of marriage had many unique features. The most distinct were the spiritual aspects of the eternal covenant and the view that thereby man in the resurrection could become in every essential way a being of organization, glory, and power like the exalted Man of Holiness. It also contained the provision that under restricted circumstances a righteous man could have plural wives.

The Nature Of Marriage

The Place of Marriage

In the Latter-day Saint concept of marriage, man could realize a fulness of potential and power only within the divine patriarchal order and through the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. This implied that eternal marriage was a dynamic and expanding relationship. Joseph Smith had no sympathy with the view that marriage should be shunned, or that it was a relationship to be tolerated only in mortality as something incident to man's fallen nature and state. Revelations given through the Prophet taught that marriage was "ordained of God unto man"; [^1] and under the law of God that relationship was to extend into eternity without end. [^2]

He also taught that man in his fulness is a union of two. By nature (physically, emotionally, and spiritually), a man and his wife are designed to be together—to be one flesh in the sight of God, [^3] both in time and in eternity. Neither is a whole being without the other, and neither alone can fulfil all life's immediate or eternal purposes and realize the full joy and blessings that come from doing so. [^4]

This concept finds support in the view that in one respect God is a union of two—male and female. A divine declaration states: "I, God, created man in mine own image, . . . male and female created I them." [^5] God is not merely a divine mind and a great organizer; He is literally, not figuratively, man's Father in Heaven. As such, He has an eternal companion, and they together, as exalted beings, are one flesh within the divine patriarchal order in eternity.

The Place of Christ in Marriage

The Saints were taught that man should place his affections first on Christ and then upon his companion in marriage. The same was true of a woman's affections. Their primary covenants within the divine patriarchal order—those of baptism and of the temple—were with Christ. No other covenant obligations superseded them; all were subordinate to them. Having asked how much a righteous man ought to love a woman, Brigham Young said: "Only so far as she adorns the doctrine you profess. Elders, never love your wives one hair's breadth further than they adorn the Gospel." [^6] It was also true that no woman was obligated to follow her husband in unrighteousness. Marriage was to be an eternal triangle with Christ represented by the upper angle.

The Keys of Eternal Marriage

Joseph Smith taught that the covenant of eternal marriage, like all other sacred covenants that prepare the faithful for exaltation in the kingdom of God, could be administered only under the direction of God's prophet who held the keys of the Holy Priesthood on the earth. In a revelation, the Lord announced that there was "never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred." [^7] That man was the Prophet and President of the Church of Jesus Christ. "According to the law," Joseph Smith observed, "I hold the keys to this power in the last days." [^8]

God's right alone to unite couples in eternal marriage, through a living prophet, derived from lawful claims. First, as John Taylor said, "The women of the Church are the daughters of God, and God has some right as to their disposition." [^9] They were daughters both in pre-earth life and, through Christ, in eternal life. Second, the marital program of the divine patriarchal order was an eternal relationship, with eternal rights, promises, and blessings. All things within the divine system, therefore, were to be directed by the eternal law and inspiration of God through a living prophet.

The Holy Spirit of Promise in Marriage

Like all other gospel ordinances, that of eternal marriage must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise before it is accepted of God. [^10] Generally, the ratifying action of the Holy Ghost must operate twice in relation to a given couple. First, He may ratify their marriage covenant when they initially enter into that contract, and thus express divine approval of their action. But because the covenant they then make contains contingency clauses—statements that it is made according to their faithfulness—the ratifying action conforms to those stipulations in the contract. As long as the partners remain true to the covenant, its promises are in force, but departure from their commitments breaks the covenant.

The second time the Holy Ghost acts as a Spirit of promise is when the couple make sure their calling and election to an eternal union and have the promise, or guarantee, sealed by the Holy Spirit, that they will come forth in the resurrection to a place of exaltation in the divine patriarchal order of eternity. This is the seal of which the Lord spoke when He said in a revelation to Joseph Smith: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to my word, and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, according to mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression of the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of blasphemies, and if they commit no murder wherein they shed innocent blood, yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection, and enter into their exaltation; but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God." [^11] According to this statement, the only thing that can break this seal is for a person to become perdition. But should he commit wilful sin after being sealed, he himself must pay the debt of divine justice before he comes forth to his exaltation in the resurrection. [^12]

The Sanctity of Marriage Relations

Joseph Smith held that the physical relationships of a man and his wife within the new and everlasting covenant of marriage were lawful, and that they could be fulfilling and exalting in their effects if pure love and mutual consideration for each other were the basis of the conjugal union. Marriage was a holy estate. "We do not believe it is right for men to give way to their animal passions," John Taylor declared. "We do not believe it is right to do so either in plural or single marriage or outside of it." [^13]

The Latter-day Saint position regarding physical relations was based upon four fundamental points. First, sex was a sacred physical endowment designed to enhance man's life and provide a foundation for wholesome marriage relationship in this life and an exalted union in the presence of God in eternity.

Second, sexual activities, both in thought and in practice, were consigned strictly by the law of God to the marriage covenant. [^14] Anything that enticed man to express the emotions and drives related to sexual intercourse outside the marriage covenant was a perversion of the sacred physical endowment.

Third, within the marriage covenant, sexual relations could be engaged in consistent with the spirit and law of the gospel. The sex drive in man being constant meant that physical relations within the marriage covenant were to be constant and not for the purpose of procreation only. Parley P. Pratt wrote that in addition to begetting children, "the object of the union of the sexes" was for "mutual affection, and the cultivation of those eternal principles of never-ending charity and benevolence, which are inspired by the Eternal Spirit." [^15] Joseph F. Smith said: "The lawful association of the sexes is ordained of God, not only as the sole means of race perpetuation, but for the development of the higher faculties and nobler traits of human nature, which the love-inspired companionship of man and woman alone can insure." [^16] Orson Pratt agreed. "God has implanted, for a wise purpose, certain feelings in the breasts of females as well as males, the gratification of which is necessary to health and happiness, and which can only be accomplished legitimately in the married state." [^17] But he explained:

Sexual love, without the accompanying virtues, is not to be indulged, as it leads to evil. God has ordained that pure and virtuous love should be incorporated with sexual love; that, by the combination of the two, permanent unions in the marriage covenant may be formed, and the species be multiplied in righteousness. [^18]

Fourth, to conform fully with the eternal design of God, the marital relationship had to be based firmly upon precedent covenant obligations. In baptism, the marriage partners first committed their lives to Christ, and by other sacred covenants made in the house of the Lord they promised to sacrifice personal interests for truth, to apply the law of the gospel in their lives, to be pure in heart and mind, to restrict sexual interests to their marriage partners, and to consecrate their lives to God in establishing Zion on earth. These precedent covenants were the foundation of human relationships within the divine patriarchal order. Only as the Saints fulfilled their obligations to these sacred covenants could the marriage relationship become completely fruitful and productive in achieving its intended immediate and eternal blessings.

Marriage relations within the divine patriarchal order were governed by the highest principles of virtue and purity, in both thought and action. Orson Pratt explained: "The Latter-day Saints are under greater obligations than any other people on the whole earth, to keep themselves pure and virtuous before the Lord—to refrain from adulteries, fornications, licentiousness, all unlawful connections, all uncleanness, all fleshly lusts, all unvirtuous and unholy desires, and from all lustful thoughts, and carnal affections." [^19] Speaking of illicit sexual relations, Alma said: "Know ye not . . . that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost." [^20]

The Book of Mormon denounced in the strongest terms all perverse sexual actions. "I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women," God declared through Jacob, a Nephite prophet. "And whoredoms are an abomination before me." [^21] Speaking of lustful thoughts, Jesus said to the Nephites: "Whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart." The Master then added: "Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart." [^22]

Through Joseph Smith, the Lord revealed the same teachings to the Saints: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." He then added: "And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out." [^23]

Latter-day Saints held that illicit sexual relations were grievously sinful because of the sacred nature and purpose of this great endowment. First, the sex act is closely identified with the fountain of life—the means by which life, the most sacred of all gifts, is brought into being in a given stage of existence. To desecrate and prostitute the fountain of life is a sin in gravity next to the unlawful taking of life. [^24]

Second, man and woman are organized with the divine intent of becoming one flesh—one in desires, needs, emotions, and purpose. [^25] In sexual intercourse man expresses deep and dynamic physical emotions. The mutual participation of the marriage partners in this act on a sanctified plane, when pure love governs their actions, can do much to make them one in heart, soul, and body, and can give them both spiritual and physical fulfilment. Illicit sexual relations critically disrupt this sacred union and undermine the most sacred of all human relationships.

Within the divine patriarchal order, the above points are set in the broader picture of man as an eternal being destined to live beyond the grave. Joseph Smith taught that by means of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, righteous partners can "continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory," after the resurrection. [^26] This includes the power to beget spirit children and to begin physical life on newly created worlds in eternity. [^27] In view of these great possibilities, man's desecration of the body and disruption of the marital union make the illicit sexual act more grievous in the sight of God.

The Place of Woman in Marriage

Women of Joseph Smith's day had few, if any, legal rights. In Blackstone's succinct summary, "The husband and wife are one, and that one is the husband." [^28] Joseph Smith offered a unique, but intelligent, approach to the problem of granting and sustaining the rights of women under Zion's law. Some philosophies not only would make man and woman equal as individuals, but alike, giving to both the same duties and functions in order to grant to both the same rights. But to amalgamate the sexes indiscriminately without regard for their different natures forces unlike things to be alike, and may thereby pervert and degrade both. By contrast, the Prophet's concept of the divine patriarchal order suggested that men ought to be true men and women true women, and that each person, in the sphere marked out by nature and the divine plan of life and salvation, ought to be accorded the rights and dignity of a child of God.

A revelation given through Joseph Smith to his wife, Emma, expressed the new philosophy. Besides being appointed "to make a selection of sacred hymns" for the Church, she was to be set apart by the laying on of hands "to expound scriptures and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit." She was also to give her time "to writing, and to learning much." Nevertheless, the revelation instructed: "Let thy soul delight in thy husband, and the glory which shall come unto him." [^29]

Joseph Smith commended the words of the Apostle Paul to the Saints, that "the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church." [^30] But in that position, man had no arbitrary rights, and a woman had no obligation to follow her husband in an unrighteous exercise of authority. She covenanted to obey his law only as he fulfilled his covenant obligations to God, and her covenant was in force only as long as he fulfilled those obligations. He was under the law of the priesthood, which required him to exercise authority in the home only by persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, kindness, and love unfeigned. He was also expected to acquire "pure knowledge" of the principles of priesthood leadership and to act "without hypocrisy and without guile." If he had to reprove a member of his family with sharpness, it was to be only when he was truly moved upon to do so by the Holy Ghost; and then he was to show forth afterward an increase of love to the one reproved. [^31] Using the admonition of Paul as a basis of his statement, the Prophet wrote:

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church and gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that He might present it to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, so ought men to love their own wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife, loveth himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church, for we are members of His body, of His flesh, and His bones. [^32]

A woman's obligation, on the other hand, was to give herself to her husband in mind and heart and body, to be a helpmate unto him—to sustain and support him as her head and as the head of their family. In that sacred relationship, they were to be one flesh under the law of God. This required them to establish their lives on a spiritual plane which would sanctify the home and bring the blessings of the Holy Spirit into the lives of all the family members. A report of the Prophet's address to the Relief Society states: "He exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and prayers for, and place confidence in their husbands, whom God has appointed for them to honor." Again: "When you go home, never give a cross or unkind word to your husbands, but let kindness, charity and love crown your works henceforward." [^33]

Zion's system of plural marriage, in particular, was designed to establish the spiritual as well as the social rights of women and children. Joseph Smith implied that the right to spiritual blessings and powers was as vital and important as the right to civil, social, or economic justice and well-being, and that no woman, due to the unbelief of men or their rebellion against God, should be denied the full right to marry a man who would stand as a true spiritual head in their home and aid her and her children to attain the divine truth and power which lead to eternal life in the presence of God.

This was a vital issue. "The world of men, not of women, is full of iniquity," Brigham Young charged. "They are destroying every truth they can; they are destroying all innocence that they can." But under Zion's law, the influence of some men would not prevent women from acquiring the spiritual blessings which lead to exaltation in the presence of God, if they desired it. "The women are entitled to the kingdom," President Young continued; "they are entitled to the glory, they are entitled to exaltation if they are obedient to the Priesthood, and they will be crowned with those who are crowned." Every woman could be sealed to a man who would be "exalted" and in this way receive spiritual blessings which might otherwise be denied her. [^34]

The program of the divine patriarchal order was designed to give to each woman the following rights in regard to marriage and the home:

First, the right to marry.

Second, the right to choose as her husband a man filled with the divine powers and attributes of the Holy Ghost.

Third, the right to have children within the marriage union and thereby fulfil the measure of her creation.

Fourth, the right to have her home and family relationship built upon the gospel of Jesus Christ with its enlightening blessings, gifts, and powers.

Fifth, the right to a husband who would give the kind of spiritual leadership in the home that would sanctify her and her children and lead them to receive a fulness of glory in the presence of God.

Sixth, the right to hold the priesthood of God in connection with her husband and to stand as a priestess and a queen in her home.

Finally, the right to establish her marriage relationship upon a divine law that would extend that relationship into eternity, after the resurrection, and exalt her to a position of eternal increase and power for ages without end. These were the rights of a woman under Zion's law, and they revealed the place she was to occupy in the eternal covenant of marriage.

The Doctrine Of Plural Marriage

The Doctrine of Plural Marriage Revealed

The revelation which Joseph Smith dictated July 12, 1843, on the new and everlasting covenant of marriage [^35] contained more than the basic law of eternal marriage. It also set forth the law of God governing the taking of plural wives within the divine patriarchal order. But this was merely the date of the writing of the revelation. The Prophet understood the principle of plural marriage as early as 1831. [^36] William W. Phelps stated that on Sunday morning, July 17, 1831, he and others were with Joseph Smith over the border west of Jackson County, Missouri, when the latter-day Seer received a revelation, the substance of which said in part: "Verily I say unto you, that the wisdom of man in his fallen state knoweth not the purposes and the privileges of my Holy Priesthood, but ye shall know when ye receive a fulness." According to Elder Phelps, the revelation then indicated that in due time the brethren would be required to take plural wives. [^37]

Others also testified that Joseph Smith knew the doctrine of plural marriage as early as 1831. Orson Pratt, who traveled about that time as a missionary companion to Lyman Johnson, son of John Johnson, in whose home the Prophet then lived, said: "Lyman Johnson . . . told me himself that Joseph had made known to him as early as 1831, that plural marriage was a correct principle, . . . that God had revealed it to him, but that the time had not [then] come to teach or practice it in the church, but that the time would come." [^38]

Joseph F. Smith gave some indication of the nature of the initial revelation on plural marriage. He stated at the funeral services of Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who gave her daughter Sarah Ann to Joseph Smith as a plural wife, that when the Prophet "received the revelation in relation to the eternity of the marriage covenant, which includes plural marriage, in 1831, the Lord showed him those women who were to engage with him in the establishment of that principle in the Church, and at that time some of these women were named and given to him, to become his wives when the time should come that this principle should be established." [^39]

The beginning of the practice of plural marriage by Joseph Smith is somewhat obscured by a lack of detailed evidence, but he apparently started while he lived in the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio. He later told Mrs. Julia H. Johnson "that when the Lord required him to move in plural marriage, . . . his first thought was to come and ask her for some of her daughters." According to her son, Benjamin F. Johnson, this was at Kirtland, "where she had three unmarried daughters at home, two of whom died there." [^40] Susan Ellen died March 16, 1836, at the age of 21, followed by Nancy Mariah, on October 30, 1836, at the age of 33. [^41] Evidently the Prophet was seriously considering the practice of plural marriage before that time.

Though Joseph Smith may have had other women in mind to be plural wives at an earlier time, evidence can only be found to support the claim that Fanny Alger was the first woman with whom he had a plural connection. Benjamin F. Johnson said: "Without doubt in my mind, Fanny Alger was, at Kirtland, the Prophet's first plural wife, in which, by right of his calling, he was justified of the Lord." [^42] The Prophet probably entered into this relationship sometime during the latter part of 1836, or early in 1837, [^43] and in doing so he sought the aid of some trusted men. [^44]

Joseph Smith's first plural wife at Nauvoo was Louisa Beamon, daughter of the Alvah Beamon who, in 1827, had helped the Prophet preserve the Gold Plates from mob elements before they were translated. [^45] Joseph B. Noble, whose wife was a sister to Louisa, testified that the latter was "a woman of irreproachable morality, who entered into the plural marriage relation on a deep-seated conviction that the doctrine was from God." Her marriage to the Prophet took place April 5, 1841, with Elder Noble officiating. "The Prophet gave the form of the ceremony," and Elder Noble repeated "the words after him." [^46]

Though several men other than the Prophet married plural wives at Nauvoo, [^47] it is not known specifically how widespread the practice was or how many plural wives Joseph Smith married before his death in June, 1844. [^48] By July of 1843, the Prophet had disclosed the doctrine to several people. His first wife, Emma, had also given her consent for him to marry other women. [^49] But her feelings on plural marriage fluctuated from humble acceptance of the principle to bitter opposition to it.

After the Prophet dictated the revelation setting forth the law of eternal and plural marriage, July 12, 1843, William Clayton stated that it "was read to several of the authorities [of the Church] during the day." [^50] About that time it was also read to the High Council at Nauvoo. Being a member of that body, Thomas Grover later said:

The High Council of Nauvoo was called together by the Prophet Joseph Smith, to know whether they would accept the revelation on celestial marriage or not. . . .

Brother Hyrum was called upon to read the revelation. He did so, and after the reading said, '"Now, you that believe this revelation and go forth and obey the same shall be saved, and you that reject it shall be damned."

Of the Presidency of the Stake, Wm. Marks and Father [Austin] Cowles rejected the revelation; of the [High] Council that were present, Leonard Soby rejected it. [^51]

Though the men named above rejected the revelation, Charles C. Rich, the other counselor in the Stake Presidency sustained it, as did the remaining eleven councilors in the High Council.

Technically, the revelation on eternal and plural marriage which was later published was not the one Joseph Smith dictated, but an exact copy of it. Towards evening on July 12, 1843, "Bishop Newel K. Whitney asked Joseph if he had any objections to his taking a copy of the revelation." When the Prophet consented, it "was carefully copied the following day by Joseph C. Kingsbury," who later testified that he made an exact copy which was carefully checked against the original. Shortly thereafter Emma Smith destroyed the original copy of the revelation. But the authenticated copy was carefully preserved by Bishop Whitney, who later gave it to President Brigham Young. This copy became the source of the published revelation on eternal and plural marriage. [^52]

The written copy was but "a portion of the revelation" which Joseph Smith had received. [^53] Having dictated it, he "remarked that there was much more that he could write, on the subject, but what was written was sufficient for the present." [^54] In stating that the Prophet gave him "lengthy instructions and information concerning the doctrine of celestial or plural marriage" when he first disclosed that doctrine, William Clayton added:

After the revelation on celestial marriage was written Joseph continued his instructions, privately, on the doctrine, to myself and others, and during the last year of his life we were scarcely ever together, alone, but he was talking on the subject, and explaining that doctrine and principles connected with it. He appeared to enjoy great liberty and freedom in his teachings, and also to find great relief in having a few to whom he could unbosom his feelings on that great and glorious subject. [^55]

The Importance of the Spiritual and Ideological Setting

No feature of the society of Zion needs to be seen more in its proper spiritual and ideological setting than does the practice of taking plural wives. In explaining the reason Latter-day Saints accepted this practice, Helen Mar Whitney, one of the Prophet's plural wives, wrote: "How little the world . . . know of the impelling motive which induced them to accept and carry out the principle taught by Joseph Smith, the great prophet of the latter days." [^56] Others made similar statements. "They cannot understand it," Erastus Snow said of many outside the system, "because they are governed by their passions, and not by principles; and it is the hardest thing in the world for them to be convinced that this people are governed by principle." [^57]

But those who viewed and practiced the doctrine of plural marriage in its proper spiritual and ideological setting saw it in a different light. John Taylor held that eternal, including plural, marriage was "one of the greatest principles that God ever developed to the human family, whether men believe it or not." [^58] Heber C. Kimball also expressed the opinion of the Saints when he declared that the revelation on taking plural wives was "as sacred a revelation as was ever given to any people, and fraught with greater blessings to us than we can possibly conceive of, if we do not abuse our privileges and commit sin." [^59]

Monogamy, the Basic Law of Marriage

The basic law of eternal marriage was that of monogamy. [^60] "There shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none," the Nephite prophet Jacob commanded his people. Speaking as the Lord's mouthpiece to the people, he then explained: "For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things." [^61] Joseph Smith stressed the same law and doctrine: "I have constantly said no man shall have but one wife at a time, unless the Lord directs otherwise." [^62] These statements make it evident that there has been no change in the law of God governing marriage down through the ages or in this dispensation. A man can legally have but one living wife at a time unless the Lord directs him otherwise through the constituted channels of His Holy Priesthood.

The Keys of Plural Marriage

Besides holding the keys to administer the basic covenant of eternal marriage, the living prophet and president of the Church controlled the practice of giving plural wives. "There is never but one on earth at a time on whom the power and its keys are conferred," Joseph Smith declared. [^63] In the first public discourse on the subject of plural marriage, Orson Pratt reaffirmed this fact. "The Lord has set bounds and restrictions to these things," he declared; "He has told us . . . that only one man can hold these keys upon the earth at the same time; and they belong to that man who stands at the head to preside over all the affairs of the Church and kingdom of God in the last days." [^64]

The practice of taking plural wives was strictly regulated. "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord, and not a house of confusion," the revelation on plural marriage stated. "Will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?" [^65] Orson Pratt said:

How are these things to be conducted? Are they to be left at random? Is every servant of God at liberty to run here and there, seeking out the daughters of men as wives unto themselves without any restrictions, law, or condition? No. We find these things were restricted in ancient times. Do you not recollect the circumstances of the Prophet Nathan's coming to David? He came to reprove him for certain disobedience, and told him about the wives he had lost through it; that the Lord would give them to another; and he told him, if he had been faithful, that the Lord would have given him still more, if he had only asked for them. Nathan the Prophet, in relation to David, was the man that held the keys concerning this matter in ancient days; and it was governed by the strictest laws.

So in these last days . . . there is but one man in all the world, at the same time, who can hold the keys of this matter, but one man has power to turn the key to enquire of the Lord, and to say whether I, or these my brethren, or any of the rest of this congregation, or the Saints upon the face of the whole earth, may have this blessing of Abraham conferred upon them; he holds the keys of these matters now, the same as Nathan, in his day. [^66]

There was a moral reason for placing restrictions on the taking of plural wives. George Q. Cannon explained that this was "a principle which, if not practiced in the greatest holiness and purity, might lead men into great sin." For this reason he argued that the priesthood was "necessary to guide and control men" in the practice of taking plural wives. [^67]

The Law of Plural Marriage

Consistent with the fact that monogamy was the basic law of marriage within the kingdom of God, a revelation first set forth the doctrine of eternal marriage as it relates to "a man" and "a wife," [^68] then explained that when God commands, a man could marry more than one living wife. Such was the case with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and Solomon—except when David unlawfully took the wife of Uriah to be his own. [^69] In explaining how this practice was justified, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith:

Now, as touching the law of the priesthood, there are many things pertaining thereunto.

Verily, if a man be called of my Father, as was Aaron, by mine own voice, and by the voice of him that sent me, and I have endowed him with the keys of the power of this priesthood, if he do anything in my name, and according to my law and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will justify him. . . .

And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood—if any man espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her consent, and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have vowed to no other man, then is he justified; he cannot commit adultery for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery with that that belongeth unto him and to no one else.

And if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him; therefore is he justified. [^70]

The Taking of Plural Wives

Joseph Smith held that the act of taking more than one wife was to be governed strictly by revelation from God through the Prophet and President of the Church. About the year 1834, William W. Phelps asked the Prophet how a man could take wives in addition to his first one. The reply was instantaneous: "In the same manner that Abraham took Hagar and Kuturah; and Jacob took Rachel, Bilhah and Zilpah, by revelation: the Saints of the Lord are always directed by revelation." [^71] On a later occasion the latter-day Seer declared emphatically that no man should "have but one wife at a time, unless the Lord directs otherwise." [^72] The Prophet further stated that he then held the keys of this power and that plural marriages were to be contracted only under his direction. [^73]

Joseph Smith repeatedly stressed this basic, underlying principle. Having started to introduce the ordinances of the temple by which the divine patriarchal order is organized, he admonished: "Let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things . . . are always governed by the principle of revelation." [^74] The revelation which disclosed the doctrine of eternal and plural marriage within the divine patriarchal order reaffirmed this cardinal principle. "Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and commandment, by my word." [^75] Then the Lord explained: "God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife." [^76] Moses, David, Solomon, and many others "from the beginning of creation" also took plural wives. "And in nothing did they sin," the revelation concluded, "save in those things which they received not of me." [^77]

This was the law God gave to the Nephites. "If I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people." [^78] Having quoted this statement, Orson Pratt observed: "Thus we see, that a man among the Nephites, by the law of God, had no right to take more than one wife, unless the Lord should command for the purpose of raising up seed unto Himself." [^79] Elder Pratt also explained: "The Book of Mormon does absolutely forbid a man to have more than one wife, unless God shall command otherwise." [^80]

The same law applied to the Saints in this dispensation. Elder Pratt continued:

So it is in this church of Latter Day Saints: every man is strictly limited to one wife, unless the Lord, through the President and Prophet of the Church, gives a revelation permitting him to take more. Without such a revelation it would be sinful, according to the Book of Mormon, which [the members of] this church are required to obey. . . . No man . . . who already has a wife, and who may desire to obtain another, has any right to make any propositions of marriage to a lady, until he has consulted the President over the whole church, and through him, obtains a revelation from God, as to whether it would be pleasing in His sight. If he is forbidden by revelation, that ends the matter. [^81]

The Law Governing the Taking of Plural Wives

Joseph Smith stressed in a clear and forceful way that there was a difference between the principle of plural marriage and the practice of taking plural wives. The correctness of the principle did not justify the practice, unless it was commanded of God through the living prophet and president of the Church. This was a vital point governing why, at a given time, some saints practiced the principle and some did not, and why at times the principle was practiced and at other times it was unlawful. On the basis of these points, there were those in the days of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young who were severed from the Church for taking plural wives, even when others were practicing the principle at the time. [^82]

The point is that the practice of plural marriage is a matter of law—the immediate law governing individuals and the law governing the people as a whole. As a specific illustration of this point, the Lord said in the revelation which disclosed the doctrine of eternal and plural marriage:

Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless, it was written: Thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. [^83]

In stressing again that the principle of law governed the taking of plural wives, the Lord said in the same revelation: "Abraham received concubines, and they bore him children; and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him, and he abode in my law; as Isaac also and Jacob did none other things than that which they were commanded; and because they did none other things than that which they were commanded, they have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones." [^84] Obedience, not the practice of the principle, was the primary reason for their exaltation.

In a letter to Nancy Rigdon on the subject of plural wives, Joseph Smith explained more fully the legal basis of the doctrine. His statement merits careful and thoughtful study. Within it are several important principles which govern the practice of plural marriage. The Prophet wrote:

That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another.

God said, "Thou shalt not kill;" at another time He said, "Thou shalt utterly destroy." This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire. If we seek first the kingdom of God, all good things will be added. So with Solomon: first he asked wisdom, and God gave it to him, and with it every desire of his heart, even things which might be considered abominable to all who understand the order of heaven only in part, but which in reality were right because God gave and sanctioned by special revelation.

A parent may whip a child, and justly, too, because he stole an apple; whereas if the child had asked for the apple, and the parent had given it, the child would have eaten it with a better appetite; there would have been no stripes; all the pleasure of the apple would have been secured, all the misery of stealing lost.

This principle will justly apply to all of God's dealings with His children. Everything that God gives us is lawful and right; and it is proper that we should enjoy His gifts and blessings whenever and wherever He is disposed to bestow; but if we should seize upon those same blessings and enjoyments without law, without revelation, without commandment, those blessings and enjoyments would prove cursings and vexations in the end, and we should have to lie down in sorrow and wailings of everlasting regret. But in obedience there is joy and peace unspotted, unalloyed. . . .

Our heavenly Father is more liberal in His views, and boundless in His mercies and blessings, than we are ready to believe or receive; and, at the same time, is more terrible to the workers of iniquity, more awful in the executions of His punishments, and more ready to detect every false way, than we are apt to suppose Him to be. He will be inquired of by His children. He says, "Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find;" but, if you will take that which is not your own, or which I have not given you, you shall be rewarded according to your deeds; but no good thing will I withhold from them who walk uprightly before me, and do my will in all thing—who will listen to my voice and to the voice of my servant whom I have sent; for I delight in those who seek diligently to know my precepts, and abide by the law of my kingdom; for all things shall be made known unto them in mine own due time, and in the end they shall have joy. [^85]

The Law of Abraham and Sarah

In the revelation to the Prophet on eternal and plural marriage, the Lord repeatedly made reference to the law as being the same that was given to Abraham in ancient times. [^86] He also spoke of the "law of Sarah." [^87] The law God gave to Abraham under the Holy Priesthood [^88] was the full law of the divine patriarchal order of marriage, including the law of plural wives. Under this law a righteous man was required to take additional wives when he was so commanded of the Lord. The law of Sarah governed the expected actions of a man's first wife when her husband was directed to take other wives.

"God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife," the Lord said of Sarah's actions. "And why did she do it? Because this was the law; and from Hagar sprang many people." [^89] The same obligation rested upon the first wife of every man who was commanded of God to practice plural marriage. She was expected to fulfil "the law of Sarah." [^90] The revelation setting forth that law said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man have a wife, who holds the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law of my priesthood, as pertaining to these things, then shall she believe and administer unto him, or she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord your God; for I will destroy her; for I will magnify my name upon all those who receive and abide in my law.

Therefore, it shall be lawful in me, if she receive not this law, for him to receive all things whatsoever I, the Lord his God, will give unto him, because she did not believe and administer unto him according to my word; and she then becomes the transgressor; and he is exempt from the law of Sarah, who administered unto Abraham according to the law when I commanded Abraham to take Hagar to wife. [^91]

The first wife's right to give or withhold consent was the right to be considered and consulted by her husband in taking a second wife. It was also the right to express her judgment about whether her husband had been faithful to his covenant with her, was a true father according to the standard required by the gospel, and conformed to the law of God in the way he was taking another wife. If he did not adequately meet these requirements, his first wife's refusal to give her consent could prevent him from taking another wife.

But a wife could not use this right to prevent her husband from taking a second wife if he was fulfilling his obligations to her and his family, and if he proceeded to take another companion according to the law of God. Her failure to give consent under these circumstances released him from the obligation to act with her approbation. Here was a delicate, but important, reconciliation of authority and consent in the affairs of the home. Orson Pratt explained:

When a man who has a wife, teaches her the law of God, as revealed to the ancient patriarchs, and as manifested by new revelation, and she refuses to give her consent for him to marry another according to that law, then it becomes necessary for her to state before the President the reasons why she withholds her consent: if her reasons are sufficient and justifiable, and the husband is found in the fault or in transgression, then he is not permitted to take any step in regard to obtaining another. But if the wife can show no good reason why she refuses to comply with the law which was given unto Sarah of old, then it is lawful for her husband, if permitted by revelation through the Prophet, to be married to others without her consent, and he will be justified, and she will be condemned, because she did not give them unto him, as Sarah gave Hagar unto Abraham, and as Rachel and Leah gave Billhah and Zilpah to their husband, Jacob. [^92]

Plural Marriage Outside of God's Law—a Serious Transgression

Joseph Smith made it clear that to practice plural marriage except in the way ordained by divine law was a serious transgression of such magnitude that it jeopardized the offender's eternal salvation. The revelation on eternal and plural marriage stressed that men who were not given plural wives properly through God's prophet committed sin. [^93] In delivering the word of the Lord to his people, the Nephite prophet Jacob classified unlawful practices of taking plural wives as "whoredoms" and declared that they were "an abomination" before God. [^94] Consistent with this view, Joseph Smith "gave instructions to try those persons who were preaching, teaching, or practicing the doctrine of plurality of wives," unless they were explicitly commanded of God to do so through him as the Prophet and President of the Church. [^95] Because they were perverting the marriage relationship and setting aside the Lord's constituted authority on earth, they were to be severed from the Church.

Joseph Smith followed this policy in dealing with those who taught or practiced the principle of plural marriage without authority from him to do so. Having been "credibly informed" of an Elder who was "preaching Polygamy," the Prophet and his brother Hyrum published the following notice in the Times and Seasons: "This is to notify him and the Church in general, that he has been cut off from the church, for his iniquity." [^96] When another Elder taught that "having a certain priesthood" entitled a man to have as many wives as he pleased, Hyrum Smith wrote:

I say unto you that that man teaches false doctrine, for there is no such doctrine taught here; neither is there any such thing practiced here. And any man that is found teaching privately or publicly any such doctrine, is culpable, and will stand a chance to be brought before the High Council, and lose his license and membership also; therefore he had better beware what he is about. [^97]

Those who received their instructions on the doctrine of plural marriage from Joseph Smith also strongly denounced the unlawful practice of that principle. Orson Pratt said that its improper practice was a serious transgression, and that without a revelation "through the President and Prophet of the Church" directing a man to take other wives "it would be sinful." [^98] Members of the Church, he declared, were restricted "by the severest penalties" to one wife, "unless in individual cases where the Lord shall, by revelation [through the prophet], direct otherwise." [^99] Were the Saints to vary from the basic law of monogamy, except by specific commandment through the prophet and president of the Church, they would "come under the curse and condemnation of God's holy law." [^100]

Plural relationships improperly formed were adulterous. Helen Mar Whitney, a daughter of Heber C. Kimball and a plural wife of Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, stated that "there was only one true course which the Lord has marked out [for the practice of plural marriage] and no other will be acceptable to Him. To live with more than one woman, except you are sealed by one holding the Priesthood and authority from the Great Master, is nothing less than adultery." [^101]

The transgression of Oliver Cowdery was a case in point. Brigham Young explained that soon after the Prophet received the initial revelation on plural marriage he made known the principle to Oliver Cowdery "under a solemn pledge that he would not reveal it, nor act upon it, until the Lord otherwise commanded." But Oliver "did not keep his pledge, but acted upon it in a secret manner, and that was the cause of his overthrow." [^102] President Young reportedly quoted Oliver as saying: "Br. Joseph, why don't we go into the order of polygamy, and practice it as the ancients did. We know it is true, then why delay?" The Prophet replied: "I know that we know it is true and from God, but the time has not yet come." When this did not satisfy Cowdery, Joseph Smith said: "Oliver, if you go into this thing it is not with my faith or consent." But disregarding the warning, Cowdery "took to wife Miss Anne Lyman, cousin to Geo. A. Smith [and] from that time he went into [spiritual] darkness and lost the Spirit." [^103]

George Q. Cannon and George A. Smith, as counselors in the First Presidency, expressed the view that Oliver Cowdery's adulterous relationship was the root cause of his excommunication from the Church. President Cannon said: "He transgressed the law of God; he committed adultery; the Spirit of God withdrew from him, and he . . . was excommunicated from the Church." [^104] In referring to this case as "a grievous sin" by which Oliver Cowdery was under "condemnation," President Smith concluded: "The Lord will be honored by His people, and if they desire his blessings, they must not run before they are sent." [^105]

The Spiritual Foundation of Plural Marriage

If the basic program of eternal marriage required that a man be a father spiritually as well as physically, the practice of taking plural wives made it even more mandatory. "It is upon the principle that you are a man of God—that you have the Holy Ghost and desire to raise up a holy seed to the name of the Most High—that your wives have been sealed to you," Daniel H. Wells explained; "they would not upon any other principle have come to you." [^106] Technically and consistent with the will and order of God, man had no right to even one wife, if his life did not exemplify true Christian principles of righteousness and love. "If I am not a good man," Heber C. Kimball declared, "I have no just right in this Church to a wife or wives, or to the power to propagate my species." He then added: "I am telling you solemn truths." [^107] On this assumption, Charles W. Penrose declared: "None but the good deserve the fair." [^108]

Brigham Young even more emphatically stressed the need for men to be spirtually regenerated, and to dedicate themselves to the principles of eternal truth before they were worthy of plural wives. He declared with great emphasis:

I tell you here, now, in the presence of the Almighty God, it is not the privilege of any Elder to have even ONE wife, before he has honored his Priesthood, before he has magnified his calling. If you obtain one, it is by mere permission, to see what you will do, how you will act, whether you will conduct yourself in righteousness in that holy estate.. . .

Whose privilege is it to have women sealed to him? It is his who has stood the test, whose integrity is unswerving, who loves righteousness because it is right, and the truth because there is no error therein, and virtue because it is a principle that dwells in the bosom of Him who sits enthroned in the highest heavens; for it is a principle which existed with God in all eternities, and is a co-operator, a co-worker betwixt man and his Maker, to exalt man, and bring him into His presence, and make him like unto Himself! It is such a man's privilege to have wives and children, and neighbors, and friends, who wish to be sealed to him. Who else? No one. I tell you nobody else. Do you HEAR IT? [^109]

It was only because men in general did not obey the gospel and become fathers in the living powers and attributes of the Holy Spirit that the practice of taking plural wives was considered to be a necessity. "We would believe this doctrine entirely different from what it is presented to us, if we could do so," Brigham Young said. "If we could make every man upon the earth get him a wife, live righteously and serve God, we would not be under the necessity, perhaps, of taking more than one wife." "But," he concluded, "they will not do this; the people of God, therefore, have been commanded to take more wives." [^110]

The Challenge of Plural Marriage

The nature of plural marriage, with the requirements which it imposed upon those who would engage in its successful practice, made it a great challenge: requiring purity of heart, true charity, and considerable wisdom and administrative ability, particularly for the men. One of Joseph Smith's plural wives reported that he "said that the practice of this principle would be the hardest trial the Saints would ever have to test their faith." [^111] The Prophet himself was extremely reluctant to begin the practice of plural marriage until commanded to by a heavenly messenger. Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, who joined the Church in 1830 and was a confidante of the Prophet in some of these matters, quoted him as saying that the angel came "three times between the years of [18]34 and [18]42." Joseph endeavored to reason with the heavenly being, stating that the Book of Mormon taught that to take plural wives was "an abomination in the eyes of the Lord, and they were to adhere to these things except the Lord speak." [^112] But the angel declared: "Thus saith the Lord, the time has now come that I will raise up seed unto me as I spoke by my servant Jacob, as is recorded in the Book of Mormon." [^113]

The Prophet's associates initially looked upon the doctrine of plural wives with a similar reaction. John Taylor recalled that "it was one of the greatest crosses that ever was taken up by any set of men since the world stood." [^114] "It was the first time in my life that I had desired the grave, and I could hardly get over it for a long time," Brigham Young declared. "When I saw a funeral, I felt to envy the corpse its situation, and to regret that I was not in the coffin." [^115] Likewise, when Heber C. Kimball heard the Prophet teach the doctrine of plural marriage, "he said the shock was similar to that of an earthquake." And when the latter-day Seer commanded Elder Kimball "to take another wife, if it had been his death sentence he could not have felt worse." [^116]

It was only after Elder Kimball was directed three times to practice plural marriage, then commanded in the name of the Lord, that he obeyed. [^117] Having married Sarah Noon, an English convert, he wrote to his wife, Vilate, October 23, 1842, while on a mission in the southern part of Illinois: "My heart aches for you, and sometimes I can hardly speak without weeping and that before my brethren; for I have a broken heart and my head is a fountain of tears." [^118] Two days later he again wrote:

My feelings are of that kind that it makes me sick at heart, so that I have no appetite to eat. My temptations are so severe it seems sometimes as though I should have to lay down and die, I feel as if I must sink beneath it. I go into the woods every chance I have, and pour out my soul before God that he would deliver me and bless you my dear wife, and the first I would know I would be in tears weeping like a child about you and the situation that I am in; but what can I do but go ahead? My dear Vilate do not let it cast you down for the Lord is on our side; this I know from what I see and realize and I marvel at it many times. You are tried and tempted and I am sorry for you, for I know how to pity you. I can say that I never suffered more in all my life than since these things came to pass; and as I have said, so say I again, I have felt as if I should sink and die. Oh my God! I ask thee in the name of Jesus to bless my dear Vilate and comfort her heart and deliver her from temptation, and from all sorrow and open her eyes and let her see things as they are. [^119]

The introduction of plural marriage was a severe test in four major ways: First, there was the challenge of overcoming the force of tradition. To Lorenzo Snow, the Prophet "described the repugnance of his feelings, the natural result of the force of education and social custom, relative to the introduction of plural marriage." [^120] The idea of proposing marriage to a woman when he already had a wife was to John Taylor "a thing calculated to stir up feelings from the inmost depth of the human soul." [^121] Eliza R. Snow said: "It seemed as though all the prejudice of my ancestors for generations past congregated around me." [^122]

Second, there was the challenge of engaging in the new practice with pure motives, on the basis of principle rather than passion. The Prophet reportedly declared that the new principle "would cause the damnation of all who entered into it with impure motives, and none who acted unrighteously could stand, the trial would be so great." [^123] It "would damn more than it would save, because it was a holy principle that could not be trifled with." [^124]

Third, there was the challenge of practicing the new marital order in the setting of the pure love of Christ. Only then could it be practiced with success and become a refining and maturing influence in the lives of those who engaged in it. Of an interview with an inquirer from the East, Helen Mar Whitney wrote:

I did not try to conceal the fact of its having been a trial, but confessed that it had been one of the severest of my life; but that it had also proven one of the greatest of blessings. I could truly say it had done the most towards making me a Saint and a free woman, in every sense of the word; and I knew many others who could say the same, and to whom it had proven one of the greatest boons—a "blessing in disguise." [^125]

Finally, the practice of plural marriage presented an administrative challenge, particularly for the men. "'Those who think that men have no trials in the plural order of marriage are greatly deceived," one who was involved in the practice all her mature life wrote. "The wives have far greater liberty than the husband, and they have the power to make him happy or very unhappy." Helen Mar Whitney observed:

For this cause, among others, there are not many men who are willing to take upon themselves these extra burdens and responsibilities, even for the sake of a higher glory hereafter. It certainly takes considerable religion and faith to stimulate a man who loves a quiet, easy-going life, to take up this cross, even with the hope of a future crown. [^126]

The Spirit of Obedience

Despite the challenges which confronted the Saints, those who were commanded by revelation to practice plural marriage were given the spirit of obedience through the promptings of the Holy Ghost. Not a spirit of lust, but of enlightenment prompted faithful individuals to obey the will of the Lord. Of his own experience, George Q. Cannon said:

When I had taken one wife, after I had returned from one of my missions, a spirit rested upon me that I could not resist; I felt that I should be damned if I refused or neglected to obey that law of God. It was not prompted by any improper feeling; it was not prompted by a feeling of lust, or a desire for women; but it was an overpowering anxiety to obey the commandments of God. . . . I have done that which I conscientiously believe to be the will of God; and I believe the majority of my brethren and sisters have done the same, have obeyed the principle in the same way. [^127]

The fact that a person had to be born of the Holy Spirit to see the kingdom of God [^128] was particularly true in order for him to see and accept the principle of plural marriage in its true light. Hyrum Smith confided to a friend that he fought that "principle until the Lord showed him it was true." [^129] Having reported that the Prophet taught Parley P. Pratt "the principle and told him his privilege," Vilate Kimball wrote to her husband, Heber, in a letter from Nauvoo, Illinois: "Sister Pratt told me that she had been railing against these things until a few days past; she said the Lord had shown her that it was all right, and wants Parley to go ahead." [^130]

Bishop Newel K. Whitney had a similar experience. He "was not a man that readily accepted of every doctrine, and would question the Prophet very closely upon principles if not made clear to his understanding." Like several others, he "was doubtful concerning the righteousness of this celestial order." So the Prophet "told him to go and inquire of the Lord concerning it, and he should receive a testimony for himself." Thereupon the Bishop and his wife "retired together and unitedly besought the Lord for a testimony whether or not this principle was from Him; and they ever after bore testimony that they received a manifestation and that it was so powerful they could not mistake it." "The Lord . . . revealed unto us His power and glory," Mrs. Whitney said. "We were seemingly wrapt in a heavenly vision, a halo of light encircled us." They never doubted thereafter. And they willingly gave Joseph Smith their daughter, Sarah Ann, as a plural wife, Bishop Whitney performing the ceremony, "which was the strongest proof that they could possibly give of their faith and confidence in him as a true Prophet of God." [^131]

When some leading members of the Twelve returned from a mission to England in the spring of 1841, [^132] Joseph Smith began immediately to instruct them in the order of celestial and plural marriage. [^133] Brigham Young later recalled that while he was in England, the Lord manifested to him "by visions and his Spirit" some things pertaining to the divine order of marriage. But he kept these things to himself until the Prophet talked with him and others upon his return home. "I saw that he was after something by his conversation," President Young explained, "leading my mind along, and others, to see how we could bear this." Finally, he continued, "I told Joseph what I understood, which was right in front of my house in the street, as he was shaking hands and leaving me." The Prophet turned and looked his trusted follower in the eyes and said, "Brother Brigham, are you speaking what you understand,—are you in earnest?" Elder Young replied, "I speak just as the Spirit manifests to me." Joseph then exclaimed: "God bless you, the Lord has opened your mind." [^134]

Other reports also reveal the spiritual witness which was given of the new law, when the Saints met the challenge to obey the Prophet's counsel. Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner related her introduction to the law of plural marriage to the appearance of the angel who directed Joseph Smith to begin its practice. In a signed statement, she reported that the angel promised him that she "should have a witness" of the divine nature and origin of plural marriage. She then said:

And an angel came to me, it went through me like lightning. I was afraid. Joseph said he came with more revelation and knowledge than Joseph ever dare[d] reveal. [^135]

In a more detailed explanation, she said of the Prophet:

I talked with him for a long time, and finally I told him I would never be sealed to him until I had a witness. . . .

"'Well," said he, "pray earnestly, for the angel said to me you should have a witness." . . .

I made it a subject of prayer, . . . and if ever a poor mortal prayed, I did.

A few nights after that an angel of the Lord came to me and if ever a thrill went through a mortal, it went through me. I gazed upon the clothes and figure, but the eyes were like lightning. They pierced me from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I was frightened almost to death for a moment. I tried to waken my aunt, but I could not. The angel leaned over me and the light was very great although it was night. When my aunt woke up, she said she had seen a figure in white robes pass from our bed to my mother's bed and pass out of the window.

Joseph came up the next Sabbath. He said, "Have you had a witness yet?"

"No."

"Well," said he, "the angel expressly told me you should have."

Said I, "I have not had a witness, but I have seen something I have never seen before. I saw an angel, and I was frightened almost to death. I did not speak."

He studied a while and put his elbows on his knees and his face in his hands. He looked up and said, "How could you have been such a coward?"

Said I, "I was weak."

"Did you think to say, 'Father, help me?'"

"No."

"Well, if you had just said that your mouth would have been opened, for that was an angel of the living God. He came to you with more knowledge, intelligence and light then I ever dared to reveal." [^136]

Having obtained an interview with Lucy Walker, Joseph Smith said: "I have been commanded of God to take another wife, and you are the woman." While she was still struggling with her feelings at the announcement, he explained: "If you pray sincerely for light and understanding . . . you shall receive a testimony of the correctness of this principle." [^137] This she finally received.

It was near dawn of another sleepless night when my room was lighted up by a heavenly influence. To me it was, in comparison, like the brilliant sun bursting through the darkest cloud. My soul was filled with a calm, sweet peace that "I never knew." Supreme happiness took possession of me, and I received a powerful and irresistible testimony of the truth of plural marriage, which has been like an anchor to the soul through all the trials of life. I felt that I must go out into the morning air and give vent to the joy and gratitude that filled my soul. As I descended the stairs, President Smith opened the door below, took me by the hand and said: "Thank God, you have the testimony. I too have prayed." He led me to the chair, placed his hands upon my head, and blessed me with every blessing my heart could possibly desire. [^138]

Finally, Benjamin F. Johnson gave a similar testimony. When Joseph Smith informed him that he was "required to take other wives" and desired him to ask his sister, Almira, to be one of them, Elder Johnson exclaimed, "But how can I teach my sister what I myself do not understand, or show her what I do not myself see?"

"When you open your mouth to talk to your sister," the Prophet promised, "light will come to you and your mouth will be full and your tongue loose."

The promise was abundantly fulfilled. "When with great hesitation and stammering I called my sister to a private audience, and stood before her shaking with fear," Elder Johnson testified; "'just as soon as I found power to open my mouth, it was filled, for the light of the Lord shone upon my understanding, and the subject that had seemed to [be] dark now appeared of all subjects pertaining to our gospel the most lucid and plain; and so my sister and myself were converted together." [^139]

The Limited Practice of Plural Marriage

The spiritual prerequisites of plural marriage placed obvious restrictions on the scope of its practice. As a feature of the marriage program of the divine patriarchal order, Charles W. Penrose stated that it was "confined to the priesthood." [^140] "This law was never given of the Lord for any but his faithful children," Brigham Young stressed; ". . . no man has a right to a wife, or wives, unless he honors his Priesthood and magnifies his calling before God." [^141] John Taylor thus explained that the practice could not be extended to the world in general, for it was a principle "connected with the Saints alone." [^142] And within the membership of the Church it was a limited practice. "None but the more pure, virtuous, honorable and upright" were to engage in the practice. [^143]

Reasons For Plural Marriage

Raising up Seed unto Christ

Joseph Smith taught that the practice of plural marriage was "a commandment of God for holy purposes." [^144] The Lord stated to the Nephite prophet Jacob that it was to "raise up seed" unto Himself. [^145] This required more than the mere begetting of physical children. The Lord only directed men to take plural wives who would develop in their children the divine powers and attributes by which they could become His sons and daughters in eternal life. This is what it meant to raise up seed unto Christ. Orson Pratt said:

The multiplication of human beings is not the only object of marriage, but connected with this is the righteous government of those beings. If increase alone were the design, then it could be accomplished through the wicked, as well as the righteous. [^146]

Heber C. Kimball referred to plural marriage as the means by which God designed "to raise up for himself a pure seed" who would keep "His laws and walk in His statutes." [^147] Those within the system would be "a royal Priesthood," Brigham Young declared, "a holy nation." [^148] Of the Lord's design concerning His people, Orson Pratt also said: "He intends to make them a kingdom of Kings and Priests, a kingdom unto Himself." [^149]

Fulfilling God's Promises to Abraham

The Saints believed that another purpose for plural marriage was to fulfil the promises which God made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Orson Pratt explained: "The promises were, Lift up your eyes, and behold the stars; so thy seed shall be, as numberless as the stars." Continuing he said: "Go to the sea-shore, and look at the ocean of sand, and behold the smallness of the particles thereof, and then realize that your seed shall be as numberless as the sands." These ancient patriarchs had "a foundation laid for this mighty kingdom" in their plural wives. [^150] Being descendants of Abraham, the Saints were to be recipients of the same blessings, through the covenants of the new marital order; [^151] and through them God was to continue fulfilling Abraham's promises. Elder Pratt reasoned that those who did "the works of Abraham" ought to "be blessed with the blessings of Abraham," through a "continuation of . . . posterity." [^152] The practice of taking plural wives was introduced, he said, that the Saints might "inherit the blessings and promises made to Abraham" and their posterity "become as numerous as the sand upon the seashore." [^153]

Providing Tabernacles for Noble Spirits

In many respects the doctrine of plural marriage had its basis in the Latter-day Saint view of man's pre-earth existence. Orson Pratt observed that when the foundations of the earth were laid the spirit children of God shouted for joy at the prospect of receiving physical bodies. [^154] But some among them "were more noble and great than others, having more intelligence." [^155] Among these was Abraham, [^156] and other great and noble spirits who were to come to earth through his lineage. Many of these were reserved "until the dispensation of the fulness of times," Elder Pratt explained, "to come forth upon the face of the earth, through a noble parentage that shall train their young and tender minds in the truths of eternity, that they may grow up in the Lord, and be clothed upon with His glory, be filled with exceeding great faith; that the visions of eternity may be opened to their minds; that they may be Prophets, Priests, and Kings to the Most High God." [^157] Brigham Young agreed: "There is a reason why the doctrine of plurality of wives was revealed, that the noble spirits which are waiting for tabernacles might be brought forth." [^158] He taught that under the divine law he and his brethren were "preparing tabernacles for those spirits which have been preserved to enter into bodies of honor, and be taught the pure principles of life and salvation." [^159] Heber C. Kimball added: "I tell you that some of the most noble spirits are waiting with the Father to this day to come forth through the right channels and the right kind of men and women." [^160]

Reforming Society Morally and Spiritually

Strange as it seemed to some, Joseph Smith expected plural marriage to be a powerful instrument to reform society morally and spiritually. He said to Brigham Young: "You will have to take more than one wife, and this order has to spread and increase until the inhabitants of the earth repent of their evils and men will do what is right towards the females." [^161] When a United States Senator was apprised of the system, he reportedly exclaimed: "Joseph Smith has introduced the best plan for restoring and establishing strength and long life among men, of any man on the earth." [^162]

The Prophet was deeply concerned with the degree of infidelity and sexual perversions that existed in the world, and he transmitted that concern to his associates. The most frequent argument they gave to justify plural marriage was that it would reform society and raise family life to a high spiritual and moral standard. George Q. Cannon stated that the law sanctioning plural wives had been "revealed for the salvation of women." [^163] "We are solving the problem that is before the world to-day, over which they are pretending to rack their brains," he said, "I mean the 'Social Problem.'" [^164] Brigham Young expressed a broader view of its benefits. "This principle," he explained, "will work out the moral salvation of the world." [^165] Heber C. Kimball and Daniel H. Wells, his counselors in the First Presidency, agreed. "This doctrine is a holy and pure principle," President Kimball stressed, "in which the power of God for the regeneration of mankind is made manifest." [^166] "In this way only may we rise from corruption, through the Holy Priesthood of God," President Wells asserted. Speaking of plural marriage in relation to women, he said: "By it they are redeeming themselves and their posterity from the corruptions of man, that have been in existence for many generations before us, and from which they have been brought out by the sound and proclamation of the Gospel." [^167]

Several features which promoted reform were built into the order of plural marriage. First, by maintaining its underlying spiritual program, the families of men within the system would be established upon a high spiritual and moral plane.

Second, the program of regenerated men taking plural wives to raise up seed unto Christ assured that this class of men would propagate more rapidly than others. The multiplication of such families would raise society to a higher spiritual and moral standard.

Third, the new order was designed to remove single women from the sphere where they could be preyed upon by perverse men. It would, as Charles W. Penrose explained, place them "in that position for which they were created—to give them the opportunity to become wives and mothers, so that there might be 'no margin left for lust to prey upon,' no field for the tricks of the seducer and the adulterer, the corrupt and the ungodly." [^168]

Finally, plural marriage introduced a competitive principle into the marital scene (not found in monogamy), designed to persuade men to upgrade their lives morally and spiritually. The fact that a righteous and capable man was married did not eliminate him from the field of possible husbands a woman could consider as she made the decision to marry. Women had no need to marry an inferior man, or a worldly one. If a man who would otherwise exploit women or be content to live a single life wanted a desirable companion, he had to repent and seriously consider a marriage in which he would be a true and faithful husband. No woman would have to settle for less. Having affirmed that the true practice of plural marriage would "work out the moral salvation of the world," Brigham Young further explained:

If the women, not only in this congregation, Territory and government, but the world, would rise up in the spirit and might of the holy gospel and . . . show them [men] that they will be under the necessity of marrying a wife or else not have a woman at all, they would soon come to the mark. . . .If this course be pursued, and we make this the rule of practice, it will force all men to take a wife. [^169]

Even after marriage a woman was not obliged to follow her husband in unrighteousness. By taking such a course, a man might lose his wife and family, and she could then select another mate. [^170] For each man the choice was continually between growth and development, or that which would bring destruction. He could never get out of the reach of divine justice and equity—where he could treat with disrespect the rights and interests of his wife and family and not be brought to account for his actions. In that way also, the plural marriage system had an uplifting influence upon men and society. [^171]

Suspension Of The Law Of Plural Marriage

Prevailing conditions governed man's responsibility to practice plural marriage. In 1878, Joseph F. Smith expressed the basic dictum underlying that practice when he said: "It is a law of the Gospel pertaining to the celestial kingdom, applicable to all gospel dispensations, when commanded and not otherwise, and neither acceptable to God or binding on man unless given by commandment." [^172] Nor was the principle of plural marriage to be practiced when circumstances prevented the Prophet and President of the Church from administering that law. This point became significant when the federal government of the United States placed such pressure upon the Church that it was necessary for President Wilford Woodruff to issue a manifesto in 1890, suspending the practice of plural marriage among the Saints. The basic principle which applied in this action was stated in a revelation to Joseph Smith in 1841: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and . . . their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings." [^173]

Though an eternal principle could not be altered or changed, it could be suspended. "God has a right to suspend His law," Lorenzo Snow stated, "as He has done in the inspiration under which Pres. Woodruff wrote the manifesto." To illustrate, he explained: "The very important law concerning baptism is at times suspended as in the case of married women whose husbands are opposed to the gospel, or minors whose parents object to the baptism of their children." [^174]

The suspension of the law of plural marriage, when the Saints were not responsible for that action, left worthy individuals without the challenge and blessing of that law, but uncondemned and with a claim upon it in the Lord's due time. Speaking of the manifesto, President Woodruff gave reassurance: "If you are curtailed in any of your privileges you may know that God will hold responsible those who cause the curtailment." [^175] Lorenzo Snow explained in greater detail. "The Lord will not permit any faithful Saint to lose blessings through the acts of the wicked, or because of circumstances over which the individual has no control." He then gave an example of a missionary who died without being married. "Now, though he died without any wife he will not be the loser thereby, for the Lord will supply all that is necessary to give him the salvation he merits. So also will it be with those who are prevented by no act of their own from fulfilling all the requirements of the gospel." [^176]

The action of Wilford Woodruff was consistent and reasonable, since it was the Lord who authorized the suspension of the principle of plural marriage. That this suspension, like the original initiation of the principle, was done as a result of a revelation, was made clear by President Woodruff in an address he gave on November 1, 1890, shortly after the manifesto was issued:

The Lord is with . . . this people. He has told me exactly what to do, and what the result would be if we did not do it. . . . The God of heaven commanded me to do what I did do; and when the hour came that I was commanded to do that, it was all clear to me. I went before the Lord, and I wrote what the Lord told me to write. [^177]

Summary

Marriage in the divine patriarchal order had its basis in the gospel of Jesus Christ. It was ordained of God, with the design that the union should continue in Christ throughout eternity. Because illicit sexual relations contaminated the fountain of life and disrupted divine intent, they were grievously sinful, next to murder and the sin against the Holy Ghost. Under Zion's law, each faithful woman had a right to all the blessings associated with the eternal covenant of marriage, in time and in eternity.

The revelation setting forth the law of eternal marriage also contained the law which governed the taking of plural wives. This feature of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, in particular, had to be seen in the spiritual and ideological setting of the divine patriarchal order. Monogamy was the basic law of the system, and the Prophet and President of the Church held the keys to perform plural marriages. Such marriages were to be contracted only when directed by the Lord through His living prophet. When a man was so commanded, his wife was expected to fulfil the law of Sarah, that is, to participate in the additions that were made to her husband's family. To practice the principle of plural marriage except by commandment in the right way was adultery. But when done in righteousness, the faithful were given the spirit of obedience from God.

Plural marriage was designed to raise up children to Christ within the divine patriarchal order, and to fulfil the promise of God to Abraham that his posterity would be innumerable. It was also designed to be a powerful instrument of social reform. But because of outside pressure, the practice of plural marriage among the Saints was officially suspended.

Footnotes

Brigham Young is said to have stated that the doctrine of plural marriage was revealed when Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery "were translating the Book of Mormon."—Report of an address by President Young given in the Fourteenth Ward Meeting House, Salt Lake City, Utah, July 16, 1872, in the diary of Charles L. Walker, 1855-1905, under date. This report, however, is questionable. In another statement, Brigham Young said that Joseph Smith received the revelation on plural marriage "as early as in the year 1831."—Journal History, August 26, 1857. The Prophet translated the Book of Mormon in 1829, and he was working on his Inspired Revision of the Bible in 1831.

Erastus Snow, an early convert who was made a member of the Twelve in 1849, married another sister of Louisa. Of his return to Nauvoo in the spring of 1843, after a mission in the East, Elder Snow said:

The Prophet told me that the Lord had revealed . . . marriage for eternity, and required his chosen and proved servants to take unto themselves wives, and introduced several of those who had been sealed to himself and others of the first Elders of the Church. Foremost among the former was my wife's sister Louisa, whose integrity, devotions and purity of soul was known to all her acquaintances.—Autobiography of Erastus Snow, dictated to his son Franklin R. Snow in 1875, p. 8, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

For evidence that the practice of plural marriage existed among the Saints as they began to move west from Nauvoo, see Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City, 1964), pp. 258-259.

I hereby certify that Hyrum Smith did (in his office), read to me a certain written document, which he said was a revelation from God, he said that he was with Joseph when it was received. He afterwards gave me the document to read, and I took it to my house, and read it, and showed it to my wife, and returned it the next day. The revelation (so called) authorized certain men to have more wives than one at a time, in this world and in the world to come. It said this was the law, and commanded Joseph to enter into the law.—And also that he should administer to others. Several other items were in the revelation, supporting the above doctrines.—Nauvoo Expositor, Nauvoo, Illinois, I (June 7, 1844), p. 2. (Italics in the original.)

In the same issue, William Law's wife, Jane, also gave a statement in support of her husband's testimony, in which she mentioned some of the details of the revelation.—Ibid. Hyrum Smith also read the revelation to Howard Coray and his wife. See the unpublished autobiography of Howard Coray, p. 16.

There are several testimonies to support the above statement. In an affidavit published before the Prophet's death, Austin Cowles said:

In the latter part of the summer, 1843, the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, did in the High Council, of which I was a member, introduce what he said was a revelation given through the Prophet; that the said Hyrum Smith did essay to read the said revelation in the said Council, that according to his reading there was contained the following doctrines: 1st, the sealing up of persons to eternal life, against all sins, save that of shedding innocent blood or of consenting thereto; 2nd, the doctrine of a plurality of wives.—Nauvoo Expositor, I (June 7, 1844), p. 2.

For other testimonies that Hyrum Smith read the revelation to the Stake Presidency and High Council at Nauvoo, see Jenson, op. cit., pp. 227-229; MS, XLV (September, 1883), pp. 565-566; Autobiography of James Leithead.

In the early rise of the church, the Lord gave no command unto any of His servants authorizing them to take more than one wife, but on the contrary, said unto them that they should give heed to that which was written in the Book of Mormon [See D&C 33:16; 42:12; 84:57]; therefore, they were under the strictest obligations to confine themselves to one wife, until a commandment came to the contrary, which the Lord did not see proper to give unto any of them, until about thirteen years after the first organization of the church. The Church, therefore, are still restricted, by the severest penalties, to one wife, according to the Book of Mormon, unless in individual cases where the Lord shall, by revelation, direct otherwise.—Ibid.

This statement is supported by George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith. Elder Cannon declared that Oliver Cowdery, "in utter disregard" of Joseph's warning, took "a second wife, which caused him to lose the Spirit and be cut off from the church."—Juvenile Instructor, XX (December 1, 1885), p. 360. See also ibid., XVI (September 15, 1881), p. 206. Joseph F. Smith stated that Cowdery "abused the confidence imposed in him, and brought reproach upon himself, and thereby upon the church by 'running before he was sent,' and 'taking liberties without license.'"—JD, XX, p. 29.

God is not pleased with the increase of the wicked: the cause of this displeasure arises from the unrighteous government exercised in their families.

. . . If parents will not repent of their sins, and call upon the Lord, and be baptized into the Church of Christ, and receive the Holy Ghost, and be diligent in obeying every requirement of Heaven, the children will be very likely to harden their hearts also. . . . Therefore no individuals or nations are divinely authorized to marry, and multiply their species, unless they are qualified to govern them according to the law of God, and to teach them both by example and precept the way that leads to eternal life and happiness.—Pratt, The Seer, I, (July 1853), p. 105.

The missionary class had the privilege of listening to a very interesting talk by Mrs. Lightner on the 14th of this month. Mrs. Lightner is now 87 years of age. She joined the church shortly after its organization, bore all the hardships of its early days, and has gone through many interesting experiences. She was sealed to the prophet Joseph Smith many years ago. The burden of the lady's talk was the early history of the church.—Deseret News, April 29, 1905, p. 27.

Others who testified that the Prophet made such statements included Lorenzo Snow, Joseph B. Noble, and Joseph F. Smith. See Jenson, op cit., pp. 221, 222; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 69-70; MS, VL (July 16, 1883), p. 454; JD, XX, p. 29.

They ask[ed] me many questions on principle. I told them I did not know much, I'd rather they would go to those that had authority to teach. Parley said he and Joseph were interrupted before he got what instruction he had wanted, and now he did not know when he should have an opportunity. . . . I told him that these were sacred things, and he had better not make a move until he got more instructions.—Ibid.

For a statement by Helen Mar Whitney, a close friend of Sarah Ann at Nauvoo, giving some details in the marriage of Sarah Ann to the Prophet, see Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, XI (March 1, 1883), p. 146.

If the head of a family be a righteous man, his influence is continually exercised in every department of his house; his wife or wives are continually instructed in every good and useful and upright principle; his children are taught in the law of God according to their age, experience, and capacities; his examples are imitated; his whole household love, revere, and obey him; he leads them unto God, and teaches them how to be happy here and hereafter; he obtains promises from the Almighty for them and their generations after them; he blessed them by the spirit of prophecy, according to the power and inspiration of the Holy Ghost that is in him; and in fine, he is a prophet, patriarch, prince, and savior to all that God has given him. Such a man is worthy of a family; he has a divine right to marry, and multiply his offspring; for he thus, in training up a family, glorifies God; he prepares them to associate with a higher order of beings in the Heavens; through his instrumentality they are made partakers of eternal life. Contrast such an order of family government with the unrighteousness and disorder in the families of the wicked; and then tell me, if such a man is not more worthy of a hundred wives and a thousand children, than the wicked are to be entrusted with one? Tell me if such a man would not glorify God more, in the salvation of a large and numerous family, than the wicked man who is the instrument of bringing damnation upon his family?—Ibid., pp. 105-106.

Thousands of delicate women are united to men who show them not the least consideration—she being his "property" he can take license and she thereby becomes the most wretched of slaves. But through this patriarchal order (deride it as they may) is to come the emancipation of womankind, which has been decreed, as well as the restoration of all the human family who have not sinned against all hope of their redemption.—Whitney, Why We Practice Plural Marriage, p. 55.

Following this address, President Woodruff addressed the Saints. Having stressed that he did not act "without earnest prayer before the Lord," he said:

The Lord has required at our hands many things . . . that we were prevented from doing. The Lord required us to build a Temple in Jackson County [Missouri]. We were prevented by violence from doing it. He required us to build a Temple in Far West [Missouri], which we have not been able to do. A great many things have been required of us, and we have not been able to do them, because of those that surrounded us in the world. . . .

The Jewish nation and other nations rose up and slew the Son of God and every Apostle but one that bore the Priesthood in that day and generation. They could not establish the kingdom; the world was against them. . . .

Brother George Q. Cannon has laid before you our position. The Lord has given us commandments concerning many things, and we have carried them out as far as we could; but when we cannot do it, we are justified. The Lord does not require at our hands things that we cannot do.—"President Woodruff's Manifesto," pamphlet giving the proceedings of the semiannual General Conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Monday, forenoon, October 6, 1890, pp. 3, 7-9.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 107:41.
[^2] HC, IV, p. 207. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Righteous Men Fathers in Eternal Life."
[^3] HC, IV, pp. 207-208.
[^4] Ibid., V, pp. 1-2.
[^5] Abraham, Facsimile 2, Figure 3. See also Figure 7 and 8.
[^6] HC, II, p. 309.
[^7] D&C 107:41-43.
[^8] For a statement of these promises and responsibilities, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Coming of Elias," and the section in chapter twelve entitled "The Presiding Family."
[^9] Moses 6:13.
[^10] D&C 107:44.
[^11] Moses 6:17.
[^12] Moses 6:17.
[^13] D&C 107:45.
[^14] Moses 6:19.
[^15] D&C 107:46.
[^16] Moses 6:20.
[^17] D&C 107:47.
[^18] Moses 6:21.
[^19] D&C 107:48-49. For the full account of Enoch's ministry, see Moses 6:26-68; 7:1-69; 8:1.
[^20] Moses 6:41-68; 7:1.
[^21] Moses 7:18.
[^22] Romans 9:4.
[^23] Moses 7:16, 17.
[^24] Moses 6:25.
[^25] D&C 107:50.
[^26] Moses 8:2.
[^27] Moses 8:3.
[^28] Moses 8:5.
[^29] D&C 107:51.
[^30] HC, IV, p. 210.
[^31] Moses 8:8.
[^32] D&C 107:52.
[^33] HC, IV, p. 210.
[^34] Moses 8:27.
[^35] HC, IV, p. 210.
[^36] Moses 8:19.
[^37] D&C 107:53.
[^38] D&C 107:54.
[^39] D&C 107:55.
[^40] HC, III, p. 388. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter fifteen entitled "Adam's Objectives in the Gospel."
[^41] HC, III, p. 389. The Prophet's reference to the Ancient of Days alluded to another great patriarchal council to be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman in the last days, with the same general objective—"to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man." Ibid., p. 386. By means of this great consummating council. Christ would usher in His millennial reign on earth. This council will be discussed in the next volume of this work.
[^42] The proceedings of the council were recorded in the book of Enoch. See D&C 107:57.
[^43] See Moses 7:16-19. Brigham Young stated that Enoch's people entered into a state of rest—returned to the presence of God by making their calling and election sure to celestial glory and being sealed to eternal life—before they acquired the power to be translated. See JD, III, p. 320.
[^44] D&C 107:56.
[^45] Abraham 1:25-26.
[^46] JD, XV, p. 67.
[^47] Ibid.
[^48] Moses 7:13.
[^49] Moses 8:18.
[^50] MS, X (October 15, 1848), p. 305.
[^51] JD, XV, pp. 67-68.
[^52] The revelation states that Elias was the heavenly messenger who visited Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, and promised him that he would have a son who would "be filled with the spirit of Elias."—D&C 27:6-7. Luke reports that that messenger introduced himself as Gabriel.—Luke 1:19. According to Joseph Smith, Gabriel is the same person as the man Noah. See HC, III, p. 386. It follows that Noah is Elias.
[^53] See I. R., John 1:28.
[^54] HC, III, pp. 388-389.
[^55] D&C 27:7.
[^56] Luke 1:17.
[^57] HC, VI, pp. 249-251.
[^58] D&C 27:6-7.
[^59] See D&C 86:8-10, for a statement that the restoration of all things consists, essentially, in the re-establishment of the divine patriarchal order upon the earth in the last days.
[^60] See HC, III, pp. 388-389.
[^61] I. R., Genesis 14:27.
[^62] HC, V, p. 555.
[^63] Manuscript statement of Joseph Smith, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 318.
[^64] Alma 13:18.
[^65] I. R., Genesis 14:34.
[^66] HC, V, pp. 554-555.
[^67] JD, I, p. 261.
[^68] Abraham 1:2-4.
[^69] Abraham 1:18-19.
[^70] Abraham 2:9.
[^71] D&C 132:30.
[^72] See D&C 132:29.
[^73] D&C 132:30.
[^74] Abraham 2:9, 11.
[^75] JD, I, p. 261.
[^76] I. R., Romans 9:4-5.
[^77] HC, IV, pp. 359-360. See again the rights and privileges which were given to Seth in the divine patriarchal order.
[^78] Abraham 2:11.
[^79] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Predominance of Spiritual, Rather Than Physical, Relationships."
[^80] Abraham 2:9-10.
[^81] HC, III, p. 380. For further comments on this subject, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter six entitled "Source of Regenerating Power."
[^82] D&C 84:33-34. This statement was directed to those who received the priesthood and magnified their callings, but it applied as a general principle to the faithful who embraced the gospel from non-Abrahamic families and received the blessings of the priesthood in the house of the Lord.
[^83] I. R., Romans 9:7.
[^84] Genesis 26:4.
[^85] Genesis 25:22-23; Romans 9:10-14.
[^86] Genesis 28:3-4.
[^87] Genesis 28:14.
[^88] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Contingent Nature of Man's Election."
[^89] Genesis 25:34.
[^90] Genesis 26:34-35.
[^91] JD, XXI, pp. 369-371.
[^92] Genesis 32:28; 35:10.
[^93] As an angel announced Jacob's change of name, he explained: ". . . for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed."—Genesis 32:28. See also Hosea 12:3-4.
[^94] Genesis 49:28; Exodus 3:16.
[^95] Exodus 19:5-6; Deuteronomy 14:2.
[^96] See Genesis 48 and 49.
[^97] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter three entitled "Jacob's Prophetic Blessing."
[^98] See ibid.
[^99] 3 Nephi 20:22.
[^100] Genesis 37:6-11.
[^101] 1 Chronicles 5:1-2.
[^102] JD, XXI, p. 371.
[^103] I. R., Genesis 48:7-11.
[^104] 2 Nephi 3:5.
[^105] 2 Nephi 4:2.
[^106] See the section in chapter twelve entitled "The Book of Remembrance."
[^107] See 2 Nephi 3:9-10, 16-17; I. R., Genesis 50:24, 29, 34-38. Having stated that the future deliverer would be called Moses, the Lord said to Joseph: "And by this name he shall know that he is of thy house [among the Egyptians]; for he shall be nursed by the king's daughter, and shall be called her son."—I. R., Genesis 50:29. To Joseph the Lord also said of Moses: "I will give power unto him in a rod."—2 Nephi 3:17. Again: "I will raise up Moses, and a rod shall be in his hand, and he shall gather together my people, and he shall lead them as a flock, and he shall smite the waters of the Red Sea with his rod."—I. R., Genesis 50:34. Still further:
[^108] I. R., Genesis 50:25.
[^109] 2 Nephi 3:4-5.
[^110] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter one entitled "Joseph Smith of the Lineage of Israel."
[^111] 2 Nephi 3:11-13, 19-21. For a similar statement, see I. R., Genesis 50:25-33. Other details of the prophetic vision of the descendants of the Patriarch Joseph have been treated earlier in this study. See Volume I, the section in chapter three entitled "Biblical Background Of The Book Of Mormon."
[^112] See, for example, D&C 68:20; 107:17.
[^113] Genesis 48:13-20. See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Birthright."
[^114] Jeremiah 31:9.
[^115] D&C 84:26-27. In ancient Israel under the law of Moses, this included the responsibility of administering the law of carnal commandments.
[^116] D&C 84:18.
[^117] D&C 107:13.
[^118] D&C 68:18. See also D&C 107:16. There is a legal way around this requirement in the event one of the chosen family is not available or worthy to serve. The revelation explained: "But, as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has the authority to officiate in all the lesser offices he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and ordained unto this power, under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood."—D&C 68:19.
[^119] D&C 68:20-21.
[^120] Exodus 30:30-31, cited in Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, pp. 318-319.
[^121] Exodus 40:13-15, cited in ibid. Moses therefore said of the priest of the tribe of Levi: "For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever."—Deuteronomy 18:5.
[^122] Manuscript report, op. cit. The Prophet explained: "The Lord promised Zacharias that he should have a son who was a descendant of Aaron, the Lord having promised that the priesthood should continue with Aaron and his seed throughout their generations."—HC, V, p. 257. George Q. Cannon therefore referred to John the Baptist as one "who was a literal descendant of Aaron, and by virtue of that descent entitled to the keys of that Priesthood."—JD, XXVI, p. 243.
[^123] See again Abraham 2:10.
[^124] D&C 84:33-34. Joseph Smith quoted the prophecy of Malachi concerning the sons of Levi being sanctified so that they could offer an acceptable sacrifice in the last days (See Malachi 3:1-3), then said to the Saints: "Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation."—D&C 128:24. This statement implies that the Saints were sons of Levi.
[^125] See again HC, V, pp. 554-555.
[^126] Genesis 17:2-7; 35:9-12.
[^127] HC, V, p. 64.
[^128] Deuteronomy 17:14-15.
[^129] 1 Samuel 13:13-14.
[^130] 1 Samuel 16:1-3.
[^131] 1 Chronicles 5:2.
[^132] Genesis 49:10.
[^133] Isaiah 9:6-7; 2 Nephi 19:6-7.
[^134] HC, VI, p. 253.
[^135] This was the order of the kingdom. Joseph Smith taught that "all the prophets" of ancient Israel held the Melchizedek Priesthood.—Manuscript statement, January 5, 1841, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, pp. 180-181. As a political figure, David was subordinate to Samuel, and later to Nathan.
[^136] 2 Samuel 7:8, 12-16.
[^137] Psalms 89:3-4, 19-20, 28-37. See also Psalms 132:11-12.
[^138] HC, VI, p. 253. See the statement on David in chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Predominance of Spiritual, Rather than Physical Relationships." There is no authoritative statement to indicate David's ultimate place in eternity, or the kingdom of glory he will receive.
[^139] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Israel The Chosen People."
[^140] Matthew 15:24.
[^141] Matthew 10:5-6.
[^142] When Jesus announced that He had other sheep which were not of the Jewish fold (John 10:16), His disciples supposed that He meant the gentiles. But, Jesus explained to the Nephites, "they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching." Continuing, He said: "And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost."—3 Nephi 15:22-23.
[^143] Matthew 21:33-43.
[^144] HC, V, p. 257.
[^145] Matthew 28:19-20. See also Mark 16:15.
[^146] Acts 1:6-7.
[^147] Acts 1:8.
[^148] 3 Nephi 20:27.
[^149] HC, I, p. 313. See also Jacob 5:1-18.
[^150] HC, I, pp. 313-314. See also Volume II of this study, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Universal Apostasy."
[^151] HC, I, p. 313. For the statement by David to which the Prophet alludes, see Psalm 110:1-3.
[^152] HC, I, p. 315. This subject will be treated in the next volume of this study.
[^153] Ibid., pp. 61, 62.
[^154] JD, I, p. 55, citing Job 38:4-7.
[^155] Ibid., p. 57.
[^156] Abraham 3:23.
[^157] JD, I, pp. 62-63.
[^158] Ibid., IV, p. 56. Speaking to the Saints he said: "I have told you many times that there are multitudes of pure and holy spirits waiting to take tabernacles, now what is our duty?—to prepare tabernacles for them; to take a course that will not tend to drive these spirits into the families of the wicked, where they will be trained in wickedness, debauchery, and every species of crime."—Ibid.
[^159] Ibid., III, p. 264.
[^160] Ibid., V, p. 92. For a statement by Orson Pratt, see The Seer, I (September, 1853), p. 138.
[^161] JD, XII, p. 262.
[^162] Ibid., VI, p. 281; MS, XV (September, 1853, p. 31.
[^163] JD, XXII, p. 181.
[^164] Ibid., XIV, p. 58.
[^165] Ibid., XII, pp. 261-262.
[^166] Ibid., XI, p. 210.
[^167] Ibid., IV, pp. 254, 255. When resistance in the East was raised against the Latter-day Saint system, John Taylor commented: "One would think that a great and magnanimous nation of fifty millions, could afford to allow a few thousand people to work out a social problem, without fear of contamination."—Ibid., XX, p. 353.
[^168] Ibid., XXV, p. 228. George Q. Cannon stated: "We desire to have no margin of unmarried women among us."—Ibid., XXII, p. 181.
[^169] Ibid., XII, pp. 261-262.
[^170] See, for example, D&C 132:43-44.
[^171] Pointing to the fact that many men failed to care properly for their wives and respect their mutual covenants, Helen Mar Whitney said:
[^172] JD, XX, p. 26.
[^173] D&C 124:49. See also verse 53. After the vote of a general conference was taken to sustain President Woodruff's manifesto against the further practice of plural marriage, President George Q. Cannon spoke to the Saints. He began by quoting D&C 124:49, then explained: "It is on this basis that President Woodruff has felt himself justified in issuing this manifesto."
[^174] Meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve, September 30, 1890, reported in the journal of Abraham H. Cannon, under date.
[^175] Deseret Evening News, October 6, 1890.
[^176] Minutes of the Quorum of the Twelve, op. cit.
[^177] MS, LIII (December 14, 1891), p. 796.
