Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

14

The Divine Patriarchal Order in Past Ages

The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH.

According to Joseph Smith, the divine patriarchal order which the Saints were required to build in the last days was instituted on earth in the days of Adam, the Ancient of Days, and came down to later generations by lineage through a chosen seed. Being an eternal order in which regenerated men were made priests and kings unto God, it functioned as a divine system of government among the people of God in the early ages of the world. After the flood, the same order centered in Abraham and continued through his family to the house of Israel among whom God again endeavored to establish the divine family order. But when Israel failed in her divine calling and crucified her king, the gentiles were grafted into the eternal family. However, they too departed from the gospel plan, and the purposes of God waited until the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, when all things would be gathered together in Christ—in the divine patriarchal order.

The Divine Patriarchal Order In Early Ages

Adam's Place in the Divine Patriarchal Order

Revelations to Joseph Smith made clear many vital points concerning the divine patriarchal order in ancient times. "This order," the Lord said, "was instituted in the days of Adam." [^1] In speaking of "the first man," whom Daniel referred to as "the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor," Joseph Smith explained that he is also called "Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by [physical] progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth." [^2] Since that noble progenitor was the great spiritual head of all men on earth under Christ, as well as the father of all in physical life, the latter-day Seer explained: "Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i. e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of all the dispensations that are to be revealed." [^3]

Temple Ordinances in Early Times

The Prophet made it clear that along with the basic ordinances of the gospel, many faithful men in the early ages of the world were given the higher rites and covenants of the gospel which are administered in the temple and by which the divine patriarchal order could be built. As he gave the rites of the temple to the Saints at Nauvoo, he remarked that he was then setting "forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days." This was "the ancient order of things." [^4] Essentially, it was the same plan that had been given to Adam. Joseph Smith also wrote that those sacred rites were administered to "Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed." [^5] Finally, he taught that "the order of the house of God has been, and ever will be, the same." [^6]

Early Patriarchs

Having declared that the divine patriarchal order was instituted in the days of Adam, the Lord stated in a revelation to Joseph Smith that it "came down by lineage in the following manner: from Adam to Seth, who was ordained [a presiding patriarch in this divine order] by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam's) death, and received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth; because he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age." [^7]

Seth's ordination was to a position of presidency within the divine patriarchal order, holding the fulness of the priesthood and birthright under Adam, over those on this earth who were born into the eternal family of Jesus Christ. The promises and responsibilities which were associated with the central family of the eternal order were given to Seth and his elect posterity. [^8]

After Adam and Seth, Enos was the next presiding patriarch in the divine family order. By revelation, Joseph Smith wrote: "Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begot Enos, and prophesied in all his days, and taught his son Enos in the ways of God; wherefore Enos prophesied also." [^9] Enos was ordained to his patriarchal calling "at the age of one hundred and thirty-four years and four months, by the hand of Adam." [^10]

Apparently the righteous in this early day gathered together to enjoy each other's society and to build up the kingdom of God. Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "And Enos and the residue of the people of God came out from the land, which was called Shulon, and dwelt in a land of promise, which he called after his own son, whom he named Cainan." [^11]

Cainan was the third presiding patriarch under Adam, in the tradition of Seth. He was born when his father, Enos, was ninety years old: [^12] "God called upon Cainan in the wilderness in the fortieth year of his age; and he met Adam in journeying to the place Shedolamak." Cainan was eight-seven years old when he was ordained a presiding patriarch. [^13]

The next great presiding patriarch under Adam was Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, who was born when his father was seventy years old. [^14] Of his ordination a revelation said: "Mahalaleel was four hundred and ninety-six years and seven days old when he was ordained by the hand of Adam, who also blessed him." [^15]

Jared was the fifth presiding patriarch in the divine family order under Adam, born when his father, Mahalaleel, was sixty-five years old. [^16] Of his patriarchal calling, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "Jared was two hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam, who also blessed him." [^17]

Jared was one hundred and sixty-two years old when Enoch, the sixth great patriarch under Adam, was born. "And Jared taught Enoch in all the ways of God." [^18] Of Enoch's ordination and ministry, another revelation said:

Enoch was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam: and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him.

And he saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face continually; and he walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years, making him four hundred and thirty years old when he was translated. [^19]

Having received the gospel and obtained the blessings of the Second Comforter, Enoch sought to establish others on the law of God and organize them according to the heavenly order. He taught them about God and testified of his own call to preach the gospel and build up the kingdom of God upon the earth. He explained the fall of Adam, the nature of mortal man, and the need for man to be born into the kingdom of heaven, that he might be sanctified from all sin, enjoy the words of eternal life in this life, and obtain eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. Enoch stressed that in this way the people could become the sons and daughters of God (Jesus Christ) in the divine powers and attributes of eternal life. [^20]

Enoch then introduced to the divine patriarchal order, including the economic law of that eternal family, those who were born into the family of God. By sanctifying themselves through obedience to the law of God, his people attained a condition in which "they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^21] They also realized many of the great spiritual objectives which can be obtained by establishing the eternal family order, including the right as heirs to partake of the glory and power of God. [^22] The record states that "the Lord came and dwelt with his people" and that "the fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people." [^23]

"Enoch lived sixty-five years, and begat Methuselah," [^24] the next presiding patriarch in the divine order. "Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam." [^25] When the city of Enoch was translated, Methuselah "was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to Enoch, for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins." [^26] Methuselah therefore "prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth," through Noah, and he "took glory unto himself." [^27]

The eighth presiding patriarch after Adam was Lamech. He was born when his father, Methuselah, was one hundred and eight-seven years old, [^28] and he "was thirty-two years old when he was ordained under the hand of Seth." [^29] Joseph Smith therefore referred to him as a "great, grand Patriarch who held the keys of the Priesthood." [^30]

Lamech's son, Noah, was born when his father was one hundred and eighty-two years old, [^31] and he was but ten years old when he was ordained a presiding patriarch by Methuselah. [^32] In this way, "the Priesthood continued from Lamech to Noah." [^33] "Noah was just a man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God." [^34] Joseph Smith explained that God talked with Noah "in a familiar and friendly manner, that He continued to him the keys, the covenants, the power and the glory, with which he blessed Adam at the beginning." [^35] By revelation the Prophet also wrote: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." [^36]

The Council of Adam-ondi-Ahman

Three years before his death, which occurred when he was 930 years old, Adam "called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, . . . with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing." [^37] This was a great meeting of the divine patriarchal order, with its presiding figures, in ancient times. "The Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel." [^38] As the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, He said: "I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever." [^39]

The fact that Adam was called Michael by the members of the council meant that they recognized him as their father both in physical life and in the divine powers and attributes which lead to eternal life. Through the sacred rites of the divine patriarchal order, he possessed the fulness of the priesthood and all the keys pertaining to the human family on earth. He was the priest and king of man. As such, in the latter role, he was a prince—a male monarch or sovereign, a person of nobility of the highest rank—over the eternal family order on this earth.

Having seen Adam by vision in the council of Adam-ondi-Ahman, Joseph Smith explained that the great patriarch's purpose in that assembly was to help bring his posterity back into the presence of God from whence he had fallen, and to this end Adam blessed them. [^40] But since the pattern of celestial society is patriarchal, the faithful cannot return to the presence of God as a people unless they establish their lives upon the law and program of the divine patriarchal order and are brought into union with those exalted beings who reside in the celestial kingdom. Joseph Smith therefore admonished the Saints to do all that was necessary to establish the divine patriarchal order, so they could return to the presence of God. "When these things are done," he announced, "the Son of Man will descend, the Ancient of Days sit; we may [then] come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instruction from them." [^41]

The requirement to organize the divine patriarchal order through gospel rites and ordinances in order to bring the faithful into the presence of God suggests that when Adam met with his children in council, he confirmed carefully that all the necessary ordinances had been performed and recorded in their behalf. This he would want to do as the presiding figure over the eternal family order, before leaving this mortal state. Since Enoch and his people were at the great patriarchal council, [^42] it is possible that in the actions of the priesthood significant things were done to prepare the way for the Lord to dwell in the Zion of Enoch and manifest His glory to that sanctified people for a period of time before they were taken from the earth. [^43]

In still another way Adam exercised his priestly rights. The scope of one's authority who has a fulness of the priesthood in the divine patriarchal order extends to the limitless future. So with Adam. He "stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." [^44] In that great utterance, he set the prophetic vision of the future for all ages of mortal time. Under the Spirit of revelation, later prophets have merely echoed the themes revealed by their noble progenitor and prophetic head.

The Government of God in Ancient Times

The government of God, which had its basis in the divine family order, was established in the days of Adam. As Patriarchs, both Adam and Noah were kings within the eternal family order in their day. [^45] Of that system in early times, Orson Pratt said:

Government began to be established in the days of our first parents. As they lived to be very aged—or almost a thousand years before they were taken from the earth, they saw their children multiplying around them in vast numbers, and governments began to be established. Among those governments, however, was maintained also the government of God—a patriarchal government, that continued with the righteous from the days of Adam down till the days of Enoch, and for a short period after his days. This government was patriarchal in its nature, or, in other words, directed and dictated by the Creator of man—the great Lawgiver. He directed and counseled his servants, and they obeyed his counsels. [^46]

It is not known how long the government of God existed on earth after being established by Adam. Elder Pratt explained that "at length, about the period of the death of Adam, or a little after, human governments rooted out of the earth the government of God." [^47] It can be assumed that the divine political order prevailed among the people of Enoch until they were translated. But even before that time, "their enemies came to battle against them." This indicates the lack of a just and equitable government with power sufficient to protect the innocent. Nevertheless, "so great was the faith of Enoch, that he led the people of God; . . . and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, . . . and all nations feared greatly." [^48]

Though Noah was the rightful heir to political power within the true order of government, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "In those days there were giants on the earth, and they sought Noah to take away his life; but the Lord was with Noah, and the power of the Lord was upon him." [^49] A Latter-day Saint writer expressed the view that the antediluvians were swept off the earth by the flood "because they rejected the government of the Almighty, and instituted their own governments in its stead. Noah and his family were the only loyal and obedient subjects to the legal power: they alone were saved." [^50]

Orson Pratt observed that after the flood the "divine government was [again] organized on the earth, Noah being the great Patriarch, Revelator, and Prophet, to whom was given laws and institutions for the government of his posterity." But, he added, "This order . . . continued only for a short period of time, and human governments again prevailed." [^51]

Noah's Place In The Divine Patriarchal Order

It was Noah's responsibility to proclaim the final testimony of the gospel to the antediluvian world and to renew the divine patriarchal order after the flood. In the latter capacity, he started a new era in the earth's history, and he became the presiding figure in all orders of the priesthood over all ages of men after his day. In many ways he was a second Adam, a father of all men on earth in the flesh, and a father spiritually of all who, since the flood, are born by the power of the gospel into the eternal family of Jesus Christ.

A revelation to Joseph Smith indicated that Noah was Elias. [^52] As it applied to Noah, this name appears to be a title given to a presiding figure over the divine patriarchal order who has the mission of preparing the faithful to enjoy their proper relationship to God within the celestial family. Jesus, for example, is identified as the great Elias. [^53] He presides as the Father of all who attain eternal life, and it is His mission to bring them to their proper relationship to God within the celestial family. Joseph Smith also referred to men as Eliases who, in the early ages of the world, sought to establish the divine patriarchal order and extend it among men as a means of renewing the earth to a state of paradisiacal glory. [^54]

There is a distinction between one who is called Elias in the sense that Noah and other presiding figures over the divine patriarchal order bear that title, and one who ministers in the "spirit of Elias" and for this reason is called Elias. John the Baptist bore this title in the latter sense of its meaning. When Noah, as Elias, appeared to Zacharias, he promised him that he would "have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias." [^55] John went forth teaching the preparatory gospel "in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people [by introducing them into the divine patriarchal order] prepared for the Lord." [^56]

If men like John ministered in the spirit of Elias, the question can be asked, To whom does that spirit belong? It belongs to Elias, the presiding figure over the divine patriarchal order, and it is the spirit of the gospel upon which that divine family rests. Those who minister the preparatory gospel in the spirit of Elias are commissioned to introduce believers into the celestial family of Christ and to prepare them for all the blessings of exaltation and eternal life in that divine order. Joseph Smith said of the spirit of Elias and its purposes:

The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world. [^57]

The revelation which identified Noah as Elias stated that he was given "the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days." [^58] The heart of the restoration is the establishment of the divine patriarchal order among the righteous, in preparation for the millennial reign of Christ and the renewal of the earth to a paradisiacal state of glory. [^59] This work of restoration is initiated by those who minister the preparatory gospel by the spirit of Elias. But the greater work of preparation must be done on a higher level. It consists of perfecting the divine family order until the system on earth is united with the patriarchal order of the celestial kingdom and the Saints, as heirs, partake of the glory of that higher order. Joseph Smith thus referred to the great patriarchs in the early ages of the world as Eliases who sought to renew the earth to the state of glory from which Adam fell. [^60]

The Patriarchal Order Of Melchizedek

Not much direct information is given concerning the system over which Melchizedek presided, but the evidence which does exist indicates that it was patriarchal in nature. Joseph Smith wrote by revelation that Melchizedek "was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch." [^61] Enoch's system was the patriarchal order. The Prophet also made it clear that Melchizedek held the fulness of the priesthood, which is given to men only within the divine patriarchal order. This means that the priesthood after the order of Melchizedek is the highest order or system of the priesthood, which is the patriarchal order. To the question, "What was the power of Melchizedek?" the Prophet replied:

Those holding the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood [as given in the patriarchal order] are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings. In fact, that priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam. [^62]

Joseph Smith declared in another statement that "the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek" included "Prophets, Priests and Kings." [^63] This also indicates that the perfected system of Melchizedek was the divine patriarchal order. Alma wrote that Melchizedek reigned "under his father." [^64] By building the eternal order and establishing the lives of his people upon its sanctifying program, the great high priest and king, with his people, "obtained heaven" [^65]—that is, they entered into the presence of God.

Finally, not only did Melchizedek hold the fulness of the priesthood, which enabled him to reign as a king and a priest within the divine patriarchal order, but he ministered to others the blessings and appointments pertaining to the eternal family order. When God selected Abraham to be the Father of the Faithful of future generations, Melchizedek gave that appointment to him officially. "The King of Shiloam (Salem) had power and authority over that of Abraham, holding the key and the power of endless life," Joseph Smith explained. "Abraham says to Melchizedek, I believe all that thou hast taught me concerning the priesthood and the coming of the Son of Man; so Melchizedek ordained Abraham and sent him away." [^66]

Abraham's Place In The Patriarchal Order

After Noah and Melchizedek, the Lord centered the rights, promises, and blessings of the divine patriarchal order in Abraham. In some respects, this was a new beginning. Parley P. Pratt referred to Melchizedek, who was contemporary with Abraham, as belonging to "an older branch of the chosen seed"; and he stated that there was a "transfer of the keys to Abraham and his seed." [^67]

The appointment which Abraham received pertained to the blessings and powers which are given in the house of the Lord. He was made a presiding patriarch over the eternal family of Christ after his day, not merely the Patriarch to the Church. He sought in righteousness for the rights and blessings of the divine family order, for he later wrote:

Finding there was greater happiness and peace and rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest [in relation to the patriarchal order], holding the right belonging to the fathers.

It was conferred upon me from the fathers, . . . even the right of the firstborn, on the first man, who is Adam, our first father, through the fathers unto me.

I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed. [^68]

In giving Abraham this appointment within the divine patriarchal order, the Lord said to him:

Behold, I will lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee.

As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee; but through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever, for I am thy God. [^69]

Three important points were made to Abraham in this statement: first, the Lord promised to give him the priesthood of his father—the priesthood in its patriarchal rights; second, like Noah, the rights and blessings of the divine patriarchal order would center in Abraham; third, through Abraham's ministry, with that of his elect posterity, the name of Jehovah would be known in the earth forever.

All of the rights, appointments, and blessings which were given to Abraham constitute the Abrahamic covenant, which had its basis in the promise of posterity within the eternal family order. In that promise the Lord said: "I will make of thee a great nation." [^70] To Joseph Smith the Lord explained the nature of this promise: "Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins, . . . which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them." [^71]

This was not merely a promise of posterity limited to a physical sense, but of posterity in and through the eternal family order. This promise derived from the new and everlasting covenant of marriage which Abraham received, [^72] as do all other rights and blessings which pertain to Abraham's elect descendants in the patriarchal order. Otherwise, Abraham would not have children "out of this world," that is, after the resurrection. [^73]

The promise that Abraham's elect posterity would be heirs in the flesh to the divine patriarchal order included the right to bear the priesthood, for that system was an eternal priesthood order. Of that right, the Lord said to Abraham:

I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; . . . and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. [^74]

Concerning this appointment, Parley P. Pratt said: "No Ishmaelite, no Edomite, no Gentile, has since then been privileged to hold the presiding keys of Priesthood, or of the ministry of salvation." Continuing, he explained:

In this peculiar lineage, and in no other, should all the nations be blessed. From the days of Abraham until now, if the people of any country, age, or nation, have been blessed with the blessings peculiar to the everlasting covenant of the Gospel, its sealing powers, Priesthood, and ordinances, it has been through the ministry of that lineage, and the keys of Priesthood held by the lawful heirs according to the flesh. Were the twelve Apostles which Christ ordained, Gentiles? Were any of them Ishmaelites, Edomites, Canaanites, Greeks, Egyptians, or Romans by descent? No, verily. One of the Twelve was called a "Canaanite," but this could not have alluded to his lineage, but rather to the locality of his nativity, for Christ was not commissioned to minister in person to the Gentiles, much less to ordain any of them to the Priesthood, which pertained to the children of Abraham. I would risk my soul upon the fact that Simon the Apostle was not a Canaanite by blood. He was perhaps a Canaanite upon the same principle that Jesus was a Nazarite, which is expressive of the locality of his birth or sojourn. But no man can hold the keys of Priesthood or of Apostleship, to bless or administer salvation to the nations, unless he is a literal descendant of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jesus Christ and his ancient Apostles of both hemispheres were of that lineage. [^75]

In addition to the two fundamental promises of posterity and priesthood, Abraham was given all of their related rights and responsibilities within the holy order. In his epistle to the Roman saints, the Apostle Paul listed many of these. By revelation, Joseph Smith corrected the passage of Paul's writings to read: "My kinsmen according to the flesh . . . are Israelites; of whom are the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises which are made unto the fathers; and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ was, who is God over all, blessed for ever." [^76]

The adoption to which the Israelites were heirs in the flesh consisted of the principles and ordinances by which they could become the children of Christ in eternal life. The covenants were those by which the holy order could be built—those by which wives could be sealed to their husbands, and children to their parents—and men be exalted as heirs through Christ of all things in the Father's kingdom. The report of a "very interesting discourse" by Joseph Smith on this subject states:

He then spoke on the subject of election and read the 9th chapter of Romans, from which it was evident that the election there spoken of was pertaining to the flesh, and had reference to the seed of Abraham, according to the promise God made to Abraham, saying, "In thee, and in thy seed, all the families of the earth shall be blessed." To them belonged the adoption and the covenants, &c. . . . The whole of the chapter had reference to the Priesthood and the house of Israel. [^77]

The giving of the law apparently referred to Israel's right to administer the law of the kingdom of God, which included the law of the gospel, the law of Zion, and the law to rule all nations when every knee bows and every tongue confesses Christ's right to reign. The service of God alluded to Israel's right to serve the true God as a people, in personal worship, in teaching the gospel to other families of the earth, and in building the divine patriarchal order upon the earth. The promises which were made to the fathers included all the appointments which pertained to the eternal family order—those pertaining to posterity, to priesthood, to lands, etc. To these Israel was a natural heir in the flesh. Finally, the fact that Israel was an heir to glory meant that by building the divine family order according to the heavenly pattern, she could be endowed with the glory and power of God and enter into His presence.

With these promises and blessings, Abraham's elect descendants were given the right and the obligation to teach the gospel to all other families of the earth and to build the divine order as a standard and an ensign to all people, so that the faithful among all families and nations could become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ and attain the blessings of exaltation and a fulness of glory in the resurrection. The Lord therefore promised Abraham: "In thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." [^78]

The discharge of these responsibilities would bring added blessings of posterity and glory to Abraham, for all those who received the gospel through that ministry would become his sons and daughters just as though they had been born among his posterity in the flesh. Within the eternal family order, spiritual relationships predominate over the physical ones, and the source from which men obtain the powers and attributes which lead to eternal life determines their family line in the divine patriarchal order in eternity. [^79] Having declared that Abraham's elect descendants would minister the gospel "unto all nations," the Lord said to the great patriarch: "And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." [^80]

Joseph Smith stressed the literal nature of the ultimate relationship which would exist. Referring to the transformation which takes place when man embraces the true gospel of Christ, he explained that "the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham." Continuing, he said: "That man that has none of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost." [^81] The Lord in a revelation to the Prophet implied that this transformation would also affect the flesh. He stated that faithful men could be "sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies," and that in this way they would become "the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God." [^82]

The Divine Patriarchal Order In Israel

Abraham's Elect Family

After Abraham, God's appointment of an elect seed in the flesh continued through Isaac, the chosen son of the Father of the Faithful. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible clarifies: "Neither, because they are all children of Abraham, are they the [elect] seed; but, in Isaac shall thy seed be called." [^83] He became a presiding patriarch in the eternal family order. To Isaac the Lord affirmed: "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." [^84]

The birthright and patriarchal promises continued in Jacob, whose election God made known to Rebekah before he and his older brother, Esau, were born. [^85] Isaac later confirmed these rights and promises upon his son, officially, saying: "God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and . . . give thee the blessings of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee." [^86] Jacob therefore became the next presiding patriarch under Abraham. Referring to the continuation of the blessings of Abraham through Jacob, the Lord said to the latter: "In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." [^87]

The conferral of the rights and promises of the divine patriarchal order upon Jacob is one example, among others, [^88] of a departure from the law of primogeniture as it applied to the divine family order. This action was justified. "Esau despised his birthright," [^89] and he disregarded God's election of a chosen seed by marrying outside the proper family lines. These actions, in particular, "were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah." [^90] Of the attitude of Esau and the transfer of his birthright to Jacob, Erastus Snow said:

Esau did not sense nor appreciate his condition and birthright; he did not respect it as he should have done, neither did he hearken to the counsels of his father and mother. On the contrary, he went his own way with a stubborn will, and followed his own passions and inclinations and took to wife one [two] of the daughters of the Canaanites whom the Lord had not blessed; and he therefore rendered himself unacceptable to God and to his father and mother. He gave himself to wild pursuits—to hunting, and to following the ways of the Canaanites, and displeased the Lord and his parents, and was not worthy of this right of seniority. The Lord therefore saw fit to take it from him, and the mother was moved upon to help the younger son to bring about the purpose of the Lord, in securing to himself the blessing through the legitimate channel of the Priesthood. [^91]

Because Jacob persevered in his quest for the blessings and promises of his fathers, and finally obtained them, his name was changed to Israel. [^92] The name means "contender with God," in the sense that he prevailed in his supplications before the Lord and became a soldier of God, or a prince within the divine patriarchal order. [^93] With his two wives and two concubines, Israel expanded the chosen seed into twelve tribes, known collectively as the house of Israel. [^94] Being heirs to the rights and blessings of the divine patriarchal order, they were to be a "peculiar treasure," or people, unto the Lord—a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." [^95]

In his patriarchal blessings upon his sons, Jacob foretold many things concerning his posterity in future generations. [^96] The Lord had promised Jacob land in addition to that which was promised to Abraham and Isaac. [^97] It consisted of the Western hemisphere, and it was given to Joseph, the son of Jacob. [^98] A a vital part of this promise, Jacob was assured that his latter-day descendants who lived upon the Western hemisphere would establish a branch of the millennial kingdom in preparation for Christ's reign on earth. As Jesus ministered to the descendants of Joseph on the promised land, He said of their latter-day descendants: "And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem." [^99]

The Place of the Patriarch Joseph

Though Joseph was a younger son of Jacob, by his faith and righteousness he was elevated to a position of authority next to his father within the house of Israel. While Joseph was still a youth, God made known to him some points concerning his future place, indicating by means of a dream that his brothers would bow in respect and obedience to him. In a second dream, he was shown that even his father and mother would pay him great respect. [^100]

Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob and Leah, should have received the birthright over the house of Israel. But by transgression he forfeited that appointment, and the "birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel." [^101] Thereafter, Erastus Snow observed, this right of "the priesthood was reckoned" after the lineage of the patriarch Joseph. [^102]

Joseph merited the position which he and his posterity were finally given within the house of Israel. His rise from slavery to the office of Prime Minister over Egypt was the result of personal faithfulness and ability, coupled with the inspiration of God which he lived worthy to receive. By those same qualities he also attained a conspicuous place in the elect family. When, after storing grain in Egypt for a period of seven years, Joseph was instrumental in saving the Egyptians and his father's house from famine, Jacob said to him:

When the God of my fathers appeared unto me in Luz, in the land of Canaan; he sware unto me, that he would give unto me, and unto my seed, the land for an everlasting possession.

Therefore, O my son, he hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death;

In delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore the God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house;

For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever;

For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin. [^103]

The Patriarch Joseph was a seer of great stature and power with God, and he apparently was given a clear vision of the work of God among his descendants. Lehi, who was a descendant of Joseph, said to one of his sons: "Joseph truly saw our day." [^104] Nephi added:

He truly prophesied concerning all his seed. And the prophecies which he wrote, there are not many greater. And he prophesied concerning us, and our future generations; and they are written upon the plates of brass. [^105]

These brass plates, as the family record of the Patriarch Joseph, [^106] contained the record of many promises of God to the ancient seer concerning Israel and his future descendants. God revealed to Joseph that a great prophet and seer by the name of Moses would be raised up, and that he would deliver Israel out of Egyptian bondage at a future date. Many of the details of the life and ministry of Moses were also made known to the Patriarch Joseph. [^107]

Joseph also foretold the eventual scattering of Israel after the chosen family had been established in the promised land. He was told that in their scattering a particular branch would be broken off and "carried into a far country." Nevertheless, it would "be remembered in the covenants of the Lord" with Israel. [^108] Lehi explained:

Great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph. Wherefore, . . . he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom. [^109]

Lehi and his colony who came to the Western hemisphere From Jerusalem about 600 B. C. Were the righteous branch of the Patriarch Joseph that was to be broken off from Israel. Their record came to light in modern times through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, a choice seer raised up out of the latter-day descendants of the Patriarch Joseph. [^110] The Lord told the Patriarch Joseph that a record of this righteous branch would be preserved and would be the means of bringing salvation to the scattered remnants of Israel in the last days. He also told him of the latter-day seer and his work in bringing forth the record of the righteous branch:

A seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them [in the Bible].

Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord. . . .

And the words which he shall write shall be the words which are expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy loins. And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust; for I know their faith.

And they shall cry from the dust; yea, even repentance unto their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them. And it shall come to pass that their cry shall go, even according to the simpleness of their words.

Because of their faith their words shall proceed forth out of my mouth unto their brethren who are the fruit of thy loins; and the weakness of their words will I make strong in their faith, unto the remembering of my covenant which I made unto thy fathers. [^111]

Outline of the Patriarchal Order in Israel

Specific priesthood rights and powers were given to some tribes and branches of Israel in order to establish the divine patriarchal order in the elect family. The presiding figure in each of these functions was to be subordinate to the central authority of the whole system, [^112] so that the divine family order could be perfected with all the priesthood powers and rights of the kingdom of God developed within it.

Under Jacob and Joseph, the birthright over the house of Israel was given by special appointment to Ephraim, [^113] the second son of Joseph whom Jacob took to be his own. For this reason Jehovah, the pre-earth Christ, later declared: "I am a father to Israel [in eternal life], and Ephraim is my firstborn." [^114] But because Israel rejected the higher law of the gospel at Mount Sinai, which included the "holy order" of the priesthood that had its center in the temple and by which the divine patriarchal order could be perfected, the rights and privileges of the birthright were never fully developed in ancient Israel.

Other priesthood rights were given by the Lord to the tribe of Levi, with Aaron and his sons at their head. This lesser order of priests had the right to preach the preparatory gospel and to administer the temporal law of the system. [^115] Concerning the presidency of this order of priesthood, a revelation to Joseph Smith explained: "The Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God." [^116] This lesser order was called "the Priesthood of Aaron, because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed." [^117] Concerning the right of presidency over this priesthood, a revelation said: "No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood, except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron." [^118] Of the responsibility of the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood to confer this office, the Lord said in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

A literal descendant of Aaron . . . must be designated by this Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their priesthood.

But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord under the hands of the above named Presidency. [^119]

The above revelations make clear the promises which God gave to Aaron and his descendants in ancient times. Joseph Smith also quoted the following statement of God to Moses from the book of Exodus:

Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. [^120]

As further evidence that this was to be an eternal right, the Prophet cited a later statement of the Lord to Moses, in Exodus:

Thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:

And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office; for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. [^121]

Having quoted these ancient declarations, Joseph Smith explained:

The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary—fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever, and was in active operation down to Zacharias the father of John [the Baptist]. Zacharias would have had no child had not God given him a son. He sent his angel to declare unto Zacharias that his wife Elizabeth should bear him a son, whose name was to be called John.

The keys of the Aaronic Priesthood were committed unto him, and he was as the voice of one crying in the wilderness, saying: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord and make his paths straight." [^122]

The divine appointment given to the tribe of Levi included significant related blessings, in addition to the right to bear the priesthood. Similar to the general promise given to Abraham that those who embraced the gospel outside of his descendants in the flesh would become his sons and daughters in eternal life, [^123] the Lord's appointment to Levi apparently stipulated that all those who received the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood, regardless of from what family in the flesh, would become his sons in the living attributes and powers of the priesthood. Having stated that faithful bearers of these priesthoods were the sons of Moses and Aaron, who were of the tribe of Levi, the Lord explained:

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies.

They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God. [^124]

Since the priesthood administers "the powers of endless lives" to the sons and daughters of Adam, [^125] those lines through which priesthood descends are honored and given a place within the divine patriarchal order. This implies that there are two kinds of sons of Levi: his sons in the flesh and his sons in the priesthood. His sons in the flesh have a legal right to certain priesthood powers; and by regeneration through the Holy Spirit, all who receive the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood are made his sons in the sacred order of priesthood life.

The divine patriarchal order was a system of kings, or political figures, as well as priests; and the same general system which prevailed among the people of God before the flood was to be established among the Israelites. Both Abraham and Jacob were told that kings would be among their descendants. [^126] When Israel was brought out of Egypt, political power was exercised directly by Moses and Aaron, [^127] and later through a system of judges. Nevertheless, Moses anticipated the establishment of kings over Israel and said:

When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;

Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother. [^128]

These instructions foreshadowed the political program of the divine patriarchal order in Israel. Beginning with Saul, God designed to center political power within a given family of Israel. When King Saul, pressed by circumstances, acted outside his commission of political power and exercised the priestly function of offering sacrifice, Samuel reproved him and declared: ". . . for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever. But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the Lord commandeth thee." [^129] The political rights of the divine family order were not to be continued in the lineage of Saul.

When Saul failed to obey God's commandments through Samuel the prophet, David was anointed in a sacred priesthood rite to be king over Israel, [^130] and by this anointing the right of political power within Israel devolved forever to the tribe of Judah. The ancient chronicler thus wrote that "Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler." [^131]

Judah's right to political power included the right to produce the chief reigning figures throughout the generations of Israel, and also the promise that the Messiah—the King of kings and Lord of Lords—would come from the house of David. Before his death, Jacob declared prophetically: "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh [the Messiah] come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be." [^132] Speaking of Christ, the ultimate Chief Ruler over the eternal family of kings and priests, Isaiah said: "The government shall be upon his shoulders." The Israelite prophet then added: "Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order, it and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even forever." [^133]

Though the anointing which David received was a sacred priesthood rite by which he was made a king within the divine patriarchal order, it was less than he would ultimately have obtained had he made sure his calling and election to be a king within that order in eternity. Joseph Smith explained: "Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood." [^134] These he would have received had he made sure his calling and election to that position within the patriarchal order in eternity. Nevertheless, political power within Israel centered in him and was promised to his descendants in the flesh in later generations.

After David had been crowned king of Israel, God sent the prophet Nathan to him to declare that the right of kingship (under the prophet who held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood [^135]) was to continue with his descendants within the divine patriarchal order throughout their generations, forever. This was the election of the house of David within the divine family order. To David, Nathan said:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel . . . .

And when thy days be fulfilled and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

He [the reigning monarch of David's sons] shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever.

I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men: but my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever. [^136]

Because of these promises concerning himself and his elect seed, the Psalmist later wrote of the word of the Lord to him:

I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant,

Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. . . .

Thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him. . . .

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him.

His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.

If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.

Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.

Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.

His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.

It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. [^137]

The rights and promises given to David and his elect descendants pertained to the divine patriarchal order both in time and in eternity. But because of David's transgression later in life, the right of kingship will not be his in the glorified family order. Joseph Smith explained that in eternity, "the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." [^138]

Israel Rejects Her Heritage

The Israelites failed to live up to their high calling to establish the divine patriarchal order in their midst and to perfect it so that they could be endowed with the glory and power of God. At Mount Sinai they rejected the divine law and program by which this could have been accomplished, [^139] and in later generations they receded further into spiritual darkness.

When Jesus Christ, the Father of all who are born into the divine order, came to earth, He was confronted with hypocrisy and unbelief. But true to the prerogatives which were given to Israel, He confined His ministry to those of the elect family. When a woman of Canaan sought a blessing at His hands, He explained: "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." [^140] When he sent forth the Twelve to teach His gospel, He said: "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." [^141]

Though Jesus honored the appointment of God to Israel—that the rights and blessings of the gospel were first to be given to them and, then, through them by the power of the Holy Ghost to others [^142]—He spoke of a time when Israel would be broken off because of her iniquity and scattered among the nations of the earth. This fact He expressed to the Jews in the form of a parable. A certain man (representing the Father) planted a vineyard (the kingdom of God, including the divine patriarchal order) and let it out to certain husbandmen (those who were given priesthood rights and responsibilities to build up the kingdom). But when the owner of the vineyard sent his servants (the earlier prophets) to receive the fruits of the kingdom, the husbandmen beat one, killed another, and stoned a third. When the owner sent other servants, they were treated in like manner. Finally, the owner sent his son (the Messiah or the Son of God), but when the husbandmen saw him, they said: "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance." This they did.

Having given the Jews this parable, Jesus asked: "When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?"

They replied: "He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season."

Jesus then said unto them: "Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes? Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof." [^143]

The Gentiles

Joseph Smith explained that "the Jews, as a nation, having departed from the law of God and the Gospel of the Lord, prepared the way for transferring it [the kingdom] to the Gentiles." [^144] When the Jews finally had their King crucified, Israel was broken off. Jesus then instructed the apostles to go "and teach all nations." [^145] When, just before His ascension, they inquired, "Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" He replied: "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power." [^146] The day of Israel's gathering and redemption, when the divine family order would be established upon the earth in all its splendor and glory, obviously was not then. "But," Jesus added, "ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." [^147]

This was not a new policy, rather an emphasis upon the second feature of the original policy: that through Israel all nations would be blessed. Jesus explained to the Nephites that after He had ministered to the faithful of Israel among the Jews and, as a resurrected being, to the Nephites on the Western hemisphere, the Father then designed to fulfil "the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed—unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me [Christ] upon the Gentiles." [^148]

Though Israel was broken off, the Lord did not appoint another chosen family to carry on the major functions of the patriarchal order. Instead, Joseph Smith explained that through the ministry of the apostles after the crucifixion of Christ "the Gentiles received the covenant, and were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off." [^149] Adoption into the eternal family of Christ, by faith and obedience to the gospel, gave them membership in the divine patriarchal order of Israel. There was, however, this difference: before the elect family was broken off, people outside of Israel were required to join the family and accept the law and custom of Israel in order to receive salvation. When there was no longer a true and tangible house of Israel with which believers could identify, this could not be done.

After the gentiles accepted the gospel, they did not retain the true plan and system of divine ordinances and doctrines. The Prophet explained: "The Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God, but have departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established (See Isaiah 24:5); and have become high-minded, and have not feared." [^150]

Joseph Smith made it clear that the unbelief of Israel in past ages did "not render the promise of God of none effect" regarding the original elect family in the last days. "No," he declared, "for there was another day limited in David, which was the day of His [God's] power; and then His people, Israel, should be a willing people;—and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more." [^151] In the great latter-day program, the Prophet explained that the Good Shepherd would "put forth His own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem." [^152] The latter-day gentiles would also have a full opportunity to accept the true gospel of Christ, and the patriarchal order would be built up and perfected on the earth in preparation for the coming of Christ to reign over all men as the great King of kings of the eternal family order.

Summary

The divine patriarchal order had its beginning on earth with Adam, who is called Michael because he is the father of mankind both in physical life and in the divine powers and attributes which lead to eternal life. From Adam, the office of presiding patriarch came down through Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah, who were priests and kings over the eternal family order. At a great council at Adam-ondi-Ahman, the Ancient of Days met with other presiding patriarchs and their posterity in the divine system, and Adam blessed them and foretold what would happen to his posterity to the end of time.

Noah was given the keys of priesthood over the divine patriarchal order after the flood and, as Elias, the responsibility of restoring that system on earth in the last days. From Melchizedek, another great patriarch, Abraham was given the blessings of the fathers, including the right of the first-born, and in this appointment he became the Father of the Faithful for all ages of time after his day. From Abraham, the presiding patriarchal office went to Isaac, then to Jacob. Through the family of Jacob, or Israel, the Lord sought to develop the divine system again upon the earth. Ephraim obtained the birthright; Levi the right to the Lesser Priesthood; and the political power of the family order centered in Judah, with David as the Chief Ruler in Israel. But by wickedness, Israel rejected her heritage and was broken off, and, for a time, the gentiles were grafted into the eternal family. But they, too, departed from the ways of the Lord, and the purposes of God waited till the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times when the eternal order would be restored and developed to become the millennial kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

I will give judgment unto him in writing. Yet I will not loose his tongue, that he shall speak much, for I will not make him mighty in speaking. But I will write unto him my law, by the finger of mine own hand; and I will make a spokesman for him.—2 Nephi 3:17.

Of the future spokesman, the Lord declared: "His name shall be called Aaron."—I. R., Genesis 50:35.

On the strength of the Lord's promise to him, the Patriarch Joseph declared to Israel: "I am sure of the promise of Moses."—2 Nephi 3:16. "God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land, unto the land which he sware unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and to Jacob." Joseph therefore placed the Israelites under a solemn oath to preserve his body and carry it with them out of Egypt. So they embalmed him, "and he was kept from burial by the children of Israel, that he might be carried up and laid in a sepulchre with his father."—I. R., Genesis 50:36-38. Compare Genesis 50:24-26; Exodus 13:19.

---
Notas:
[^1] Revelations to the Prophet indicated that the work would be offered first to the gentiles. But when the times of the gentiles were fulfilled, the day of Israel's redemption would fully arrive. This prophetic picture will be discussed in the next volume of this study.
[^2] For a statement which makes it clear that the restoration of all things was to be the establishment of the divine patriarchal order on earth, see D&C 86:8-11.
[^3] D&C 132:40.
[^4] D&C 132:45.
[^5] HC, IV, p. 599.
[^6] Ibid., p. 492.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 492-493.
[^8] MA, I (July, 1835), p. 157.
[^9] Ibid., II (October, 1835), p. 198. For a detailed report of Moroni's message concerning Israel in the last days, see ibid., I (April, 1835), pp. 109-112; HC, I, pp. 12-13.
[^10] Title page of the Book of Mormon. Moses committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north, Elias gave the rights and promises which God centered anciently in Abraham, and Elijah revealed "the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" within the elect family.—D&C 110:11-16; HC, V, pp. 530, 555. See also Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah."
[^11] HC, IV, p. 360. For a discussion of the subject of saviors on Mount Zion, see Volume II of this study, chapter eighteen.
[^12] D&C 27:10; 103:17; 132:30-31; 136:21-22.
[^13] D&C 52:2.
[^14] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, held January 8, 1845, The Utah Genealogical And Historical Magazine, XI (July, 1920), p. 112.
[^15] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 66, citing Isaiah 60:10, 12: 61:5-6. (Italics in the original.)
[^16] Isaiah 52:1.
[^17] D&C 113:7-8.
[^18] D&C 84:99.
[^19] D&C 86:8-11.
[^20] HC, I, p. 12.
[^21] Joseph Smith started to write his official history on April 27, 1838. See ibid., III, p. 25. He recorded the above statement in March, 1838.
[^22] The Prophet made clarifications on the first three of these figures only.
[^23] Isaiah 11:1.
[^24] D&C 113:1-2.
[^25] Isaiah 9:6.
[^26] Luke 1:32-33.
[^27] See Matthew 1:1-17; Luke 1:26-38; 2:4; 3:23-38. It was commonly understood by the Jews that the Messiah would be a descendant of David. They therefore answered Christ's query as to the paternity of the Messiah by saying he would be the son of David. But they were confounded when Jesus pressed the issue further by referring to David's messianic prophecy that Christ would come through David's lineage and also be David's Lord. "How then." Jesus asked, "doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?" "If David then call him Lord," Jesus further inquired, "how is he his son?"—Matthew 22:41-46. To these questions the Jews could not give an answer. They failed to comprehend the glorious truth that their promised Messiah would be both the son of David and the Son of God; and as the latter, He would be the God of Israel, David's Lord.
[^28] Isaiah 11:2-5.
[^29] Isaiah 11:6-9. See also 2 Nephi 30:8-18. This subject will be discussed in Volume IV of this study.
[^30] Isaiah 11:11-13.
[^31] Isaiah 11:1.
[^32] D&C 113:3-4.
[^33] Isaiah 11:10.
[^34] D&C 113:5-6.
[^35] See again D&C 132:40, 45.
[^36] D&C 132:30.
[^37] 2 Nephi 3:3, 11, 12, 14-17. Brigham Young said: "Joseph Smith, junior, was foreordained to come through the loins of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and so on down through the Prophets and Apostles; and thus he came forth in the last days to be a minister of salvation, and to hold the keys of the last dispensation of the fulness of times.—JD, VII, p. 290.
[^38] D&C 86:8-11. See also D&C 27:10.
[^39] 2 Nephi 3:7.
[^40] 2 Nephi 3:13, 15.
[^41] JD, II, p. 269.
[^42] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, op. cit., p. 107.
[^43] Ibid., p. 112.
[^44] Ibid., pp. 107-108.
[^45] HC, I, p. 12.
[^46] D&C 113:4, 6. Some students of the Prophet's thought conclude that both the rod and the root may represent Joseph Smith. This writer suggests, however, that these figures more appropriately represent two separate individuals in the latter days born of the same lineage, one being a descendant of the other. This would mean that the rod was made to represent Joseph Smith and the root a figure yet to come, raised up out of his descendants.
[^47] D&C 86:10.
[^48] See Joseph Smith's statement to this effect in HC, V, p. 64.
[^49] D&C 124:58.
[^50] Journal and memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, pp. 2-3; Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December, 1905), pp. 556-557. For a discussion of the points made in this paragraph, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Early Beginnings of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^51] From a signed affidavit by Mary E. Lightner, February 8, 1902, photostat copy of the original in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Several years later she was sealed to Joseph Smith as a plural wife, so this had no reference to a marriage sealing.
[^52] Journal History, April 9, 1837.
[^53] The report of this address is found in the journal of Samuel Holister Rogers, pp. 198-201, and the diary of William Bryan Pace, which contains a biography of his father, James Pace, pp. 3-6. Both documents may be found in the Brigham Young University Library. In light of this concept, the remarks of Brigham Young are of interest. Speaking at a meeting of the Richards and Young families, he said:
[^54] HC, II, pp. 379-380. See Volume II of this study, the section entitled "Early Beginnings of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^55] D&C 110:11-16.
[^56] D&C 27:6.
[^57] D&C 110:12. See also D&C 124:58; 132:30-31, 57.
[^58] D&C 124:95.
[^59] D&C 124:57-58.
[^60] The Prophet ordained his father to the office of Patriarch to the Church, December 18, 1833, some time before Elias committed the full office and blessing of Abraham to the Prophet, in April, 1836. It was this earlier office which was later conferred upon Hyrum Smith and has since that time been held as a general rule by one of his descendants.
[^61] JD, XXV, p. 367.
[^62] Letter of Joseph Smith III to John Henry Smith, written at Lamoni, Iowa, January 20, 1886, University of Utah Library, pp. 2-3.
[^63] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Contingent Nature of Man's Election."
[^64] The Complainant's Abstract of Pleading and Evidence, in the case commonly referred to as the "Independence Temple Lot Case," between the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and the Church of Christ, at Independence, Missouri (Lamoni, Iowa, 1893), p. 79. (Italics in the original.) See also p. 63.
[^65] Joseph Smith III to John Henry Smith, p. 3. See also p. 8. In support of this fact, see MS, VII (May 1, 1846), p. 134; Lee, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 155; Miller, A Mormon Bishop and His Son, p. 135; Correspondence of Bishop George Miller (no date or place of publication), p. 23.
[^66] See HC, IV, pp. 603-604.
[^67] See the section later in this chapter entitled "Commission of the Keys of the Kingdom to the Twelve."
[^68] See Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, pp. 24-25, where this fact is stressed.
[^69] Ibid., p. 23.
[^70] Joseph Smith gave the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young at their head, all the powers and keys to establish the presiding office of the divine patriarchal order, and in this sense the appointments which Moses, Elias, and Elijah gave the Prophet in the Kirtland Temple have remained in the Church. Under that authority, every faithful man who receives the full rites and ordinances of the temple is given all the general blessings, powers, and promises of Abraham, pertaining to his posterity. But the office of Presiding Patriarch has not yet been given to one of Joseph Smith's descendants.
[^71] HC, I, p. 313; Romans 11:25-27; Isaiah 59:20-21.
[^72] D&C 133:32.
[^73] D&C 27:10.
[^74] D&C 96:7. In 1838, Wandle Mace was ordained an Elder by Orson Pratt, in New York City. Elder Mace wrote: "Orson Pratt having arrived from the West, took charge of the mission: and very soon after his arrival he ordained me to the office of an Elder, and while his hands were upon my head he broke out in tongues—I had never heard a manifestation of the gift of tongues before,—after the tongue, he said: 'You are of the seed of Joseph, and of the tribe of Ephraim.'"—Journal of Wandle Mace, p. 21.
[^75] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, January 8, 1845, op. cit., pp. 107-108, 115. For other statements identifying the Saints as being primarily of the tribe of Ephraim, see HC, III, p. 52; IV, pp. 8, 13, 222; JD, XXII, p. 233.
[^76] D&C 64:36-37, 41-42.
[^77] Manuscript report by Oliver Cowdery, in his handwriting, December 18, 1833, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, I (Salt Lake City, 1953), pp. 473-474. Excerpts from these blessings are found in TS, VI (July 1, 1845), pp. 947-948; HC, I, pp. 465-467. See also the latter source, pp. 443-444.
[^78] Ibid.; found also in TPJS, p. 40; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 309.
[^79] D&C 124:91. See also HC, IV, p. 229.
[^80] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 319.
[^81] See D&C 68:17-18; 107:13-16.
[^82] HC, II, pp. 477-478.
[^83] D&C 68:19; 107:17.
[^84] D&C 109:63.
[^85] HC, VI, p. 253.
[^86] Revelation through the Prophet to Newel K. Whitney, Nauvoo, Illinois, July 27, 1842.
[^87] See Volume II of this study, chapters eleven and twelve.
[^88] Deseret News, May 20, 1886; Jenson, Historical Record, VI, p. 219.
[^89] HC, IV, pp. 608-610.
[^90] Ibid., VI, pp. 184-185.
[^91] Ibid., V, pp. 554-556.
[^92] Ibid., VI, pp. 319, 474, 478.
[^93] Ibid., V, pp. 424; VI, p. 306.
[^94] Ibid., IV, pp. 602-607.
[^95] Ibid., V, pp. 256-259. See also ibid., pp. 61-66.
[^96] Ibid., pp. 554-556.
[^97] Ibid., IV, pp. 358-360; manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, pp. 318-319.
[^98] HC, V, pp. 387-390, 401-403.
[^99] Ibid., pp. 529-531, 554-556; VI, pp. 183-185, 249-254.
[^100] Ibid., VI, pp. 302-317, 473-479.
[^101] See D&C 76.
[^102] HC, V, p. 402.
[^103] The minimal requirements to enter the celestial kingdom are set forth in D&C 76:51-53. But to become heirs as priests and kings in the Father's kingdom, as described in D&C 76:55-56, required men to embrace the full law of the divine patriarchal order. Obviously the Prophet had omitted giving the more detailed law and requirements when he dictated that revelation in 1832.
[^104] HC, V, p. 403.
[^105] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^106] Ibid., V, p. 530.
[^107] Ibid., p. 424.
[^108] Ibid., p. 529.
[^109] Ibid., p. 554.
[^110] Ibid.
[^111] Ibid., VI, p. 223. Again he said: "Any man may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and be happy in that belief, and yet not obey his commandments, and at last be cut down for disobedience to the Lord's righteous requirements."—Ibid., V, p. 426.
[^112] Ibid., V, p. 530.
[^113] Jenson, Historical Record, VII, p. 529: JD, II, p. 217.
[^114] HC, V, p. 510. With possible reference to this address, James W. Pippen said: "I heard him [Joseph Smith] speak on the marriage covenant for time and eternity, and on one occasion he remarked that Abraham and Jacob, prophets and men of God, were given the privilege of having more wives than one at the same time, and he said—'Would it be wrong for good men to have more than one wife at the same time in our day?'" Elder Pippen stated that "this occurred about the time the revelation was written on Celestial Marriage, or the Eternity of the Marriage Covenant."—Young Woman's Journal, XVII (December, 1906), p. 540.
[^115] HC, V, p. 510.
[^116] D&C 124:94-95.
[^117] See, for example, HC, I, pp. 39-41; D&C 110.
[^118] Manuscript History of the Church, Book A, 1, December 5, 1834, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also HC, II, p. 176. In giving this office to Oliver, the Prophet said: "Brother in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was crucified for the sins of the world, that we through the virtue of his blood might come to the Father, I lay my hands upon thy head and ordain thee a President of the High and Holy Priesthood, to assist in presiding over the Church, and bearing the keys of this kingdom."—Ibid.
[^119] HC, V, p. 510.
[^120] Idem.
[^121] See Manuscript History of the Church, op. cit.
[^122] HC, V, p. 510. That the Prophet was speaking of building the divine patriarchal order is apparent from his added comment, that in his address he "touched upon the subject of the everlasting covenant, showing that a man and his wife must enter into that covenant in the world, or he will have no claim on her in the next world."—Ibid. He also taught that those who had no opportunity to obey the law of God could be ministered to vicariously after death. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "Administering Of Higher Ordinances For Dead."
[^123] Ibid., p. 512.
[^124] Idem.
[^125] Ibid., pp. 517-518.
[^126] See, for example, ibid., pp. 516, 518.
[^127] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, found in TPJS, p. 318. In another report, the Prophet was said to have commented: "It is strange, brethren, that you have been in the Church so long, and not yet understood the Melchizedek Priesthood."—HC, V, p. 518.
[^128] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, quoting Revelation 1:6; 5:10.
[^129] Omni 12.
[^130] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Political Features of the Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^131] See Mosiah 2:4-6; 6:3.
[^132] 3 Nephi 5:12.
[^133] Mosiah 25:19; 26:8.
[^134] After the death of the Prophet, William Smith asserted that his relationship as a brother to Joseph Smith entitled him to preside over the Saints in all functions of the perfected kingdom which the latter-day Seer sought to establish. See, for example, HC, VII, p. 433. In setting forth this unjustified claim, he proposed that the kind of relationship be established which the Prophet alluded to in his address on Sunday, July 16, 1843. To the Twelve, William wrote:
[^135] Revelation to John Taylor, June 27, 1882. Less than two months after the Prophet's death, William Smith wrote to Brigham Young on the subject of lineal rights within the Smith family, stating:
[^136] Letter written by Miller at St. James, Michigan, June, 1855, in John Zahnd MSS, Manuscript Division, New York Public Library. The writer first came across this statement while studying at this library in August, 1963.
[^137] Zion's Harbinger and Baneemy's Organ, III (July, 1853), p. 52. Some who defected and others who opposed the Prophet misinterpreted his actions and used that which he did against him. See George T. M. Davis, An Authentic Account of the Massacre of Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, and Hyrum Smith, His Brother . . . (St. Louis, 1844), p. 7; Thomas Ford, History of Illinois (Chicago, 1854), pp. 321-322.
[^138] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843.
[^139] HC, III, p. 386.
[^140] Joseph Smith made the above statement in regard to Adam and Noah, both of whom held political power in the divine patriarchal order of their day. See Abraham 1:25-26. See also the Prophet's statement concerning David's loss of political rights under the priesthood in eternity, due to his trangression on earth.—HC, VI, p. 253.
[^141] These themes will be developed more fully in the next volume of this study. Joseph Smith's intentions and actions were distorted and used by his enemies to generate the opposition which resulted in his death. The publishers of the Nauvoo Expositor, a paper which sought to expose and oppose the Prophet, published the resolution: "We will not acknowledge any man as king or law-giver to the church; for Christ is our king and law-giver."—Nauvoo Expositor, I (June 7, 1844), p. 2. Wilson Law, a publisher of that organ, sought to get a warrant for treason issued, charging that when Joseph Smith was preaching from Daniel 2:44, he "said that the kingdom referred to was already set up, and that he was the king over it." MS, XXIV (May 1, 1862), p. 359; HC, VI, pp. 568-569. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter one entitled "Daniel's Prophecy."
[^142] D&C 1:17.
[^143] This view was reflected in Brigham Young's action before he led the Saints west from Nauvoo. First he wrote letters to the governors of all the states in the union requesting an asylum within their respective borders. These requests were refused "either by silent contempt or a flat denial in every instance." President Young explained: "We did this to deprive them of the chance of saying at the day of judgment, 'You could have had an asylum with us if you applied for it.'"—JD, XI, p. 18; XII, pp. 285-286.
[^144] D&C 107:23-24, 33-35; HC, II, p. 200.
[^145] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Restoration Of Keys Of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^146] HC, VI, p. 251.
[^147] Oliver Cowdery received them with the Prophet, but shortly thereafter was severed from the Church.
[^148] MS, V (March, 1845), p. 151. Wilford Woodruff stated that this series of meetings began the latter part of December, 1843, and continued until about the first of April, 1844. See his signed statement entitled "Testimony of Wilford Woodruff, Concerning Remarks by Joseph Smith to the Twelve Apostles and Others," Salt Lake City, September 21, 1883, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Orson Hyde stated that the charge which the Prophet gave the Twelve was delivered in March, 1844. See his letter to Ebenezer Robinson, September 19, 1844, published in The Return, published by Robinson at Davis City, Iowa, II (April, 1890), p. 253.
[^149] TS, V (September 15, 1844), p. 651; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 104. The Prophet was capable of a wide range of emotional expression, from sternness in rebuke to boyish conviviality in registering joy. Helen Mar Whitney, who no doubt received the information from her father, Heber C. Kimball, said: "After he had rolled off the load or delivered unto their [the Twelve's] hands the keys of the kingdom, he jumped and clapped his hands like a young school boy let out to play."—Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, p. 12.
[^150] TS, V (November 1, 1844), p. 698; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 109.
[^151] A study of the journal of Wilford Woodruff during the early months of 1844 confirms this fact.
[^152] Wilford Woodruff stated that the Twelve received "the keys" of the kingdom of God "in the endowments they . . . received under the hands of the Prophet Joseph."—TS, V (November 1, 1844), p. 700; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 111.
