Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom ( 1973)

15

Restoring the Divine Patriarchal Order

I spent the day in the upper part of the store, that is my private office, . . . setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days.—JOSEPH SMITH.

The work of restoring all things in preparation for the millennial reign of Christ consisted primarily of gathering the latter-day remnants of Israel and re-establishing among them the divine patriarchal order with all its ancient rights, powers, and glory. [^1] This work was the very heart of the restoration; all other things were subordinate to it. [^2] It was the work to which the Church was committed, that of the building up of the eternal family order on earth.

Joseph Smith taught that by natural descent in the flesh his father's family had a lawful claim to the presiding offices of the divine patriarchal order. By divine appointment, these rights and powers were centered in the latter-day Seer, and with this commission he was empowered to begin building the eternal system on earth as a means of restoring all things. The Lord said: "I am the Lord thy God, and I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, an appointment, to restore all things." [^3] Of the Prophet's right to organize and regulate the divine family order, the Lord continued: "I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time." [^4]

The Nature Of The Restoration Of All Things

The Establishment of the Patriarchal Order

Joseph Smith viewed himself and the work he was called to initiate as part of a divine drama to fulfil the design of the Lord for the human family. He wrote that "the great purposes of God are hastening to their accomplishment, and the things spoken of in the prophets are fulfilling, as the kingdom of God is established on the earth, and the ancient order of things restored." [^5] The ancient order of things was the divine patriarchal order which had to be established among the righteous to bring about the restoration of all things. Since that eternal order was to be built by means of the covenants administered in the temple, the Prophet referred to the completion of the Nauvoo Temple as "an event of the greatest importance to the Church and the world, making the Saints in Zion to rejoice." [^6] He exclaimed:

This is a day . . . in which the God of heaven has begun to restore the ancient order of His kingdom unto His servants and His people,—a day . . . in which God has begun to make manifest and set in order in His Church those things which have been, and those things which the ancient prophets and wise men desired to see but died without beholding them, . . . to prepare the earth for the return of His glory, even a celestial glory, and a kingdom of Priests and kings to God and the Lamb, forever, on Mount Zion. [^7]

Joseph Smith taught that the divine patriarchal order was Zion's covenant society—a great patriarchal theocracy based economically upon Zion's law of consecration and stewardship, administered under the united order. Those within the eternal family order were to live in cities of Zion, with the City of Zion as the center place of the glorious New Jerusalem complex. Zion's educational system was to be developed as part of the new family order, with its center in the house of the Lord. Being a system of priests and kings, men within the holy order were to be fathers spiritually as well as physically to their families and posterity, reserving their natural right to exercise political authority over their children. Politically, the government of God was to be the instrument of the sanctified family, and from Zion as an ensign and standard of truth, the law of justice and equity would go forth to govern all men. The central political office of the government of God would descend by lineage in the latter-day descendants of the ancient King David. Under the direction of the living prophet when commanded by immediate revelation from heaven, worthy and capable men would be required to take plural wives, with the penalty of excommunication executed against those who became a law unto themselves in practicing that sacred principle. By the establishment of this divine order, the Saints were to be sanctified and were to live on a spiritual plane where they would enjoy the blessings of the Second Comforter. In this way, ultimately the earth would receive again her paradisiacal glory.

The Restoration of Scattered Israel

The gathering of the scattered remnants of Israel was the central burden of Moroni's message to Joseph Smith in 1823. Placed in proper perspective, the Book of Mormon was an instrument "to fulfill certain promises previously made to a branch of the house of Israel of the tribe of Joseph," that through them might come a "restoration of the house of Israel." [^8] In the visitations of Moroni, the Prophet was given "great intelligence concerning Israel and the last days." [^9] Consistent with the divine purpose, the Book of Mormon was brought forth "to show unto the remnants of the House of Israel . . . that they were not cast off forever." [^10]

To establish the gathered remnants of Israel upon the program of the divine family order, several things had to be done. First, the rights, promises, and blessings of Abraham had to be restored, and the office and blessing of Abraham had to be centered in the proper individual and family. Second, as Israel was gathered, each person's lineage through one of the ancient tribes had to be declared by revelation. In this way the chosen remnants would be made known and assigned officially to a specific tribe of the elect family. Third, the presiding branches of the chosen family had to be given their rightful powers within the divine order. Ephraim, the birthright tribe, had to receive his rightful place in the eternal family. The descendants of Levi had to be designated and the rights and promises which God gave to that tribe honored, with the modern sons of Aaron at their head so that the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood centered in the firstborn of Aaron. Finally, the divine rights which God gave anciently to the tribe of Judah, with the seed of Jesse through David as the Chief Ruler under Christ, had to be honored; and political power for the divine patriarchal order had to center in a modern-day David.

The Continuation of Israel's Election

In discussing ancient Israel's election to the rights and promises of the divine patriarchal order, Joseph Smith said: "The election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last days they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall be the 'saviors on Mount Zion.'" [^11] Repeated reference was made to this doctrine in the revelations given to the Prophet. He and the Saints were told that they were literal descendants in the flesh of "the children of Israel." As "the seed of Abraham," the ancient patriarchs Joseph, Jacob, and Isaac were also their "fathers, by whom the promises remain." [^12] For this reason, they and other remnants of Jacob not then gathered were "heirs according to the covenant." [^13]

Brigham Young explained that "Abraham was blessed and told" that God would "gather his seed up and cleanse and wash them" in the last days. "That promised blood has trickled down through our parents until now we are here," he said. "The people who had the right to the Priesthood [the house of Israel anciently] lost it, and the Lord has brought it forth in this our day." In the new dispensation, those who had "the right" would "redeem the nations of the earth." [^14]

Parley P. Pratt was more explicit. In affirming that God's "election or covenant with the house of Israel will continue for ever," he explained:

In the great restoration of all things, this lineage will hold the keys of Priesthood, salvation and government, for all nations. As saith the Prophet Isaiah—"The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted."

And again—"Ye shall be the priests of the Lord; men shall call you the ministers of our God: but strangers shall build your walls, and the sons of the alien shall be your ploughmen and your vine dressers." [^15]

Because the Saints and other latter-day remnants of Israel who would be gathered were descendants of God's elect people in ancient times and were rightful heirs in the flesh to the former promises, they were admonished to arise in the strength of the gospel and qualify for those powers and blessings that would build Zion in the last days. When asked what Isaiah meant by the admonition, "Put on thy strength, O Zion," [^16] and to what people the ancient seer had reference, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." [^17] Because Israel was to be gathered and established upon the full program of the divine patriarchal order, a revelation disclosed that when Christ came and the millennial kingdom was fully developed, men would sing a new song, one line of which would be: "The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel, according to the election of grace, which was brought to pass by the faith and covenants of their fathers." [^18]

In an interpretation of the parable of the wheat and tares, the Lord stressed the importance of the work of gathering the remnants of God's ancient covenant people and giving them the rights and blessings of the priesthood which God appointed to their fathers. Before the field (the world) was burned when Jesus came in glory, the tares would be bound in bundles; and the wheat (the elect in the last days) gathered into the kingdom—the divine patriarchal order. When the elect were gathered and organized according to the divine family order, and the tares burned, the restoration of all things could then be consummated. Speaking to the Prophet and the Saints, who were heirs in the flesh to the ancient rights and blessings, the revelation stressed: "Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God—therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." [^19]

That restoration was not merely the return to the earth of the priesthood and its several keys, but the establishment of the patriarchal order on earth. This was to be accomplished through the ministry of those who had the legal right, by promise, to the priesthood in the last days. For this reason the revelation stated that the priesthood was to remain in and through the designated individuals and their descendants, who would bring about the restoration of all things.

Isaiah's Prophecy Of The Patriarchal Order

When the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and stated that "it was about to be fulfilled." [^20] Isaiah speaks of the patriarchal kingdom of Jehovah which will inaugurate the Lord's millennial reign upon the earth. The information which the Prophet received from Moroni could be the basis of some inspired clarifications he gave the Saints concerning the message of that chapter. He recorded them about the time he wrote his official account of the visitation of Moroni. [^21]

In writing of the patriarchal kingdom that would be established in the last days, Isaiah used the several parts of a plant—the stem, root, rod, and branch—to symbolize important presiding figures within the divine system, each of whom was to receive his office by virtue of his lineage in the flesh. [^22] To begin, Isaiah wrote: "There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse [the father of King David], and a branch shall grow out of his roots." [^23] Of the identity of the Stem of Jesse, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ." [^24]

Jesus was born in the flesh of the lineage of Jesse, the father of King David, and was a lawful heir within the divine patriarchal order to political power over Israel. Isaiah wrote of the anticipated Messiah: "The government shall be upon his shoulder." [^25] The angel Gabriel reaffirmed this fact to Mary, the Lord's mother, stating: "He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end." [^26] Both Joseph, Christ's foster father, and Mary, his mother, were of the house and lineage of David. [^27]

Direct mention of the Stem of Jesse is made only in the first verse of Isaiah, chapter 11. But from the way Joseph Smith interpreted the ancient prophet's statement, it is clear that Isaiah was speaking of Christ in verses 1 through 5. Having referred to the Stem of Jesse in verse 1, Isaiah then said:

The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. [^28]

Having written of Christ, the Stem of Jesse, in language which portrayed His character and alluded to His coming in glory in the last days, Isaiah described the millennial conditions which would be brought about with the establishment of His patriarchal kingdom:

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. [^29]

As a significant part of the divine program, Isaiah foretold the gathering of scattered Israel in the last days—not merely the gathering of the Jews, but of the whole house of Israel, to the lands of their inheritance:

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. [^30]

Isaiah made it clear that presiding figures other than the one represented as the Stem of Jesse would be involved in establishing the patriarchal kingdom of the latter days and in fulfilling the purposes of God in regard to Israel. He spoke of a rod which would "come forth out of the Stem of Jesse." [^31] Of the identity of this figure, Joseph Smith wrote: "Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power." [^32]

The figure represented by the rod would as a descendant of both Jesse and Ephraim, have a legal claim to the rights and powers of the priesthood which the Lord centered in those branches of Israel. In other words, he would have the right to exercise both political power and the power of the birthright over the patriarchal order.

Isaiah referred to a third figure in writing of the period when the divine system would be built in the last days: "In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious." [^33] Speaking of this figure, Joseph Smith stated: "Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." [^34]

Since the Prophet said the priesthood and the keys of the kingdom would rightly belong to the figure symbolized as the root of Jesse, then, like the rod of Jesse, the person so represented would descend through the presiding lines of both Joseph and Judah. Therefore, he would have a legal claim to the birthright over Israel and political power within the patriarchal order. His designation as the root of Jesse, however, could suggest that the Prophet understood he would figure more conspicuously in the political affairs of the eternal family order. In exercising the rights and powers to which he would be a lawful heir in the flesh, the root of Jesse would stand as an ensign for the gathering of the people in the day when the patriarchal order would actually be built as a standard to the world.

Joseph Smith's Place In The Patriarchal Order

Joseph, Heir to the Authority of the Presidency

Joseph Smith received the sublime calling to stand at the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, in which all things were to be gathered together in Christ within the divine patriarchal order; and he was given the commission to restore all things. [^35] These facts suggest that by right of lineage he was a natural heir in the flesh to the powers, promises, and blessings of the eternal family order. The question could be asked, Would God choose a man to initiate and direct such a work who did not meet these qualifications? He was a descendant of Abraham [^36] through the Patriarch Joseph. [^37] He and others were "lawful heirs" to the priesthood "according to the flesh," and, as indicated by revelation, the rights and promises centered in them and in their descendants, by which the restoration of the patriarchal order could be brought to pass. [^38]

All of the ancient rights, promises, and powers of the divine patriarchal order were given to the latter-day Seer. They included the promises given to Abraham; all the rights and powers of the birthright belonging to Ephraim; the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood that centered in the sons of Aaron; and the right to political power over the system which was appointed to the sons of Jesse. These facts suggest that the Prophet was a legal heir in the flesh to the major rights and powers of that divine system—that he descended in the flesh through the presiding lines of Ephraim and Jesse.

It was also a major responsibility of the Prophet's ministry to initiate the great work of restoring Israel and establishing the latter-day remnants upon the ancient covenants and promises of God. He was to do a work that would be of "great worth" to Israel in the last days, by which Israel would be brought "to the knowledge of the covenants" that God made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. [^39] The work of restoration was to begin in the days of the latter-day Seer. [^40]

Brigham Young apparently understood the rights and promises of the divine patriarchal order; he believed that the Prophet was a legal heir to its presidency in the last days. He spoke of Joseph Smith as "a pure Ephraimite," [^41] not that he had only the blood of Ephraim in his veins, but that "his descent from Joseph that was sold into Egypt was direct, and the blood was pure in him." "That is why the Lord chose him," President Young explained. "The decrees of the Almighty will be exalted—that blood which was in him was pure and he had the sole right and lawful power [to receive and exercise the keys of the priesthood in the flesh], as he was the legal heir to the blood that has been on the earth and has come down through a pure lineage." [^42] Because President Young understood that the line of Joseph Smith's descent had been revealed, he affirmed: "I know who has the right to the Keys—the Prophet has!" [^43] The latter-day Seer had "the blood and the Priesthood" to extend the divine order to others. "The keys will rest upon the Prophet," President Young emphasized, "and there is no power on earth or in hell to take it from him." [^44]

The Rod and Root of Jesse

Students of the Prophet are inclined to believe that the prophecy of Isaiah discussed earlier in this chapter applies to the latter-day Seer, and reveals in some respect his place in the patriarchal order. The fact that the persons represented by the rod and the root were to descend from both Ephraim and Jesse indicates that the presiding blood lines of those two families would have to merge into one, and that the right to the keys of both the birthright and of political power within the divine family order would center in one man, or family, in the last days. This suggests that to identify the presiding family of Ephraim was also to identify the presiding line of Judah. If Joseph Smith was born in that line which had a right to the birthright of Ephraim, he must also have had the right by lineage to royal, or political, power within the divine patriarchal order.

In support of this suggestion, the following points should be considered: First, the angel Moroni explained Isaiah's prophetic statement to Joseph Smith in 1823 and declared "that it was about to be fulfilled." [^45] It could be assumed, therefore, that one of the figures in the prophetic declaration represented the latter-day Seer. The figure represented by the rod was to be a man on whom there would be "laid much power." And the root had reference to one who would hold "the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering" of God's people in the last day. [^46]

Second, the revelation previously mentioned concerning the parable of the wheat and the tares stated that Joseph Smith and others to whom the divine communication was directed were legal heirs in the flesh to the rights and powers of the priesthood by which the divine patriarchal order could be built so that the restoration of all things in the last days might occur. It declared further: "Your life and the priesthood have remained [through your forefathers], and must needs remain through you and your lineage [i.e., descendants] until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." [^47] This was the same as saying that the divine rights and privileges of the eternal family order had come down to the Prophet and his associates and were centered in their lineage as a means of bringing about the restoration of all things. Of necessity this included the right to political power within the eternal family order. Unless the divine political order was established, the restoration of all things would not be complete. [^48]

Features Of The Restored Family Order

Restoration of the Office and Blessings of Abraham

Among the divine appointments Joseph Smith received was the right to the office and blessing of Abraham over the divine patriarchal order in the new dispensation. This was the right to preside as a patriarch—a priest and king—over the eternal system. It was the right to stand like Abraham as a father in eternal life of all who would be born into the celestial family of Christ in the latter-day dispensation, and to be as Abraham in the appointments which he and his descendants in the flesh would receive in the divine family order.

Under Adam, a great line of patriarchs had been established in ancient times, coming down through a designated lineage. These men—Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, etc.—were not fathers in the flesh of all people on earth before the flood. But within the divine family order they became fathers spiritually, in eternal life, of the faithful. Being patriarchs, they presided as priests and kings over the divine order.

This same divine order was to be restored in the last days, centering in Joseph Smith and his faithful descendants. In a revelation, the Lord mentioned the "anointing" which He "put upon" the Prophet's head and stated: "His blessing shall also be put upon the head of his posterity after him." Of the nature of that appointment, the Lord said: "As I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph: In thee and thy seed shall the kindreds of the earth be blessed." [^49]

Early in his ministry, Joseph Smith was aware that he would stand at the head of the divine patriarchal order in this dispensation. When Jesus appeared to him early in 1831 and instructed him to seal some early converts to eternal life, Joseph explained: "He has given you all to me, and commanded me to seal you up to everlasting life, that where he is there you may be also." [^50] Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, who gave this report as one of those present, added in another statement: "I was sealed to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, by commandment. In the spring of 1831, the Savior appeared and commanded him [Joseph Smith] to seal me up to everlasting life, gave me to be with him in his Kingdom, even as he is in the Father's Kingdom." [^51]

Because the Saints considered the latter-day Seer to be a patriarch over the eternal family order in this dispensation, it was said of him: "Joseph is a father to Ephraim and to all Israel in these last days." [^52] Before leaving for Carthage, Illinois, where he was killed by a mob, the Prophet assembled the Nauvoo Legion and asked the brethren: "Are you willing to lay down your lives for me?"

"Yes," they replied with a unanimous voice.

"I am your father," he then declared. "Shall I not be your father?"

Again they exclaimed with one voice, "Yes."

To Joseph Smith, his place in the divine patriarchal order was one of true fatherhood; and a father would lay down his life for his children. He replied: "I am willing to lay down my life for you." [^53]

The right to preside over the divine patriarchal order was given to the Prophet officially as he began to develop that eternal order at Kirtland, in January of 1836. He then had sealed upon his head "the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." [^54] On April 3rd of that year, Moses, Elias (Noah), and Elijah committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the full keys, powers, rights, and promises which pertained to the divine patriarchal order. [^55] As an integral part of these appointments, Elias, who held all the rights and keys of the priesthood over the human family after the flood, including "the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days," [^56] committed "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying," the Prophet reported, "that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." [^57]

The central blessings and rights of the above appointment were given to Joseph Smith and his descendants in the flesh. Oliver Cowdery originally shared that appointment in a subordinate role. But through transgression he fell from his calling, and the rights and blessings that he received were later conferred upon Hyrum Smith. A revelation declared that the latter was to "be crowned with the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that once were put upon . . . Oliver Cowdery." [^58] Consistent with the subordinate nature of this appointment, the revelation named only Joseph Smith as the one who held the office and blessing of Abraham. [^59] The Prophet did not confer the primary right to the office and blessing of Abraham upon his father or any other member of the family of Joseph Smith, Sr. Though the office of Patriarch to the Church was given to Joseph Smith, Sr., [^60] and then to Hyrum Smith and his descendants, the office of Presiding Patriarch over the eternal family order in each succeeding generation was to be filled by the Prophet's worthy descendants. For this reason, George Q. Cannon declared:

Just as sure as God has made promises, so sure will some one of Joseph Smith's posterity rise up and be numbered with this Church, and bear the everlasting Priesthood that Joseph himself held. It may be delayed in the wise providence of our God. . . . But these promises are unalterable: God made them to Joseph during his lifetime; and they will be fulfilled just as sure as God made them. [^61]

The Prophet apparently gave his son, Joseph Smith III, a blessing, promising him the appointment of presiding patriarch over the eternal family order. Joseph Smith III later wrote: "My father, in recognition of the teaching of the elders, from the revelations of Christ to the church and legendary, blessed me and conferred the birthright of the priesthood upon me." [^62] This was not an official ordination, but a blessing consistent with the right of Joseph III to receive the powers of the priesthood which Joseph the Prophet had obtained by virtue of his lineage, and subject to the contingent features which governed all such rights within the divine patriarchal order. [^63] Joseph III expressly denied that he was ordained by his father, the Prophet. When asked about it he said:

No, sir, I did not state that I was ordained by my father; I did not make that statement. I was not ordained by my father as his successor; according to my understanding of the word ordain, I was not. I was blessed by him and designated, well in a sense chosen, and the word ordain could not be applied in any other sense than by the act of pointing out or indicating only, and he indicated or designated me as his successor, . . . depending as I understood it then, and understand it now, upon good behavior, and upon any subsequent call I might receive. [^64]

The Prophet's blessing upon his son in relation to the divine patriarchal order was known to some saints at Nauvoo. Joseph III later wrote that there were those "who looked for the fulfilment of the promise, 'In thee and thy seed shall the kindreds of the earth be blessed,' made to Abraham, and repeated to my father as a revelation and promise to him." [^65] But the promise to which Joseph III referred was qualified by three points of vital significance which he either did not consider or else repudiated. First, the rights and promises to which he was a lawful heir as the Prophet's oldest living son pertained primarily to the divine patriarchal order, not merely to the general church. They were the powers, blessings, and promises of Abraham, and they were designed to be conferred through the sacred rites and covenants of the temple, including those of the holy endowment and the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. The Prophet taught that the Church was not fully organized without the temple. [^66] But Joseph Smith III would not receive and honor any of the sacred rites and covenants of the temple which his father established among the Saints at Nauvoo. In this sense, particularly, the Prophet's son failed to validate his birthright.

Second, the Prophet conferred upon the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles all the keys, powers, and rights to build the kingdom of God on earth. [^67] This included the full power to teach the gospel to the nations of the earth, to organize and preside over the Church and to develop the divine patriarchal order among the Saints with all its ancient rights and blessings. This meant that after the death of Joseph Smith, the Twelve held the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, and Joseph Smith III would have had to go to them to receive the appointment to which he was an heir in the flesh, and accept from the Twelve the full plan and program of the kingdom which the Prophet gave to them. [^68] But he chose to alienate himself from the Saints, and he never received the appointment from the Twelve.

Third, the Prophet taught that all the promises and blessings that related to the divine patriarchal order were contingent in nature and depended for their fulfilment upon the faith and perseverance of those to whom they were made. Of Joseph Smith III, Helen Mar Whitney wrote:

In the matter of certain things being pronounced upon the head of young Joseph, they, like all other promises made by the Priesthood, were upon certain conditions. Other persons besides him, who were children of promise, have had great and wonderful things pronounced upon their heads, and they seemed to think that nothing could prevent them from receiving the same in this life, but in many cases these promises have apparently remained unfulfilled. [^69]

It was tragic that the family of the Prophet did not go west with the Church after his death, but turned away from the eternal family order which Joseph Smith began to institute at Nauvoo. Since the death of Joseph Smith, there has not been a presiding patriarch appointed in the full tradition of Seth, Enoch, and Abraham. [^70] Like other features of the perfect order of Zion, that presiding office must yet be established in its fulness among the Saints.

Renewal of Ephraim's Birthright

Ephraim's birthright in the house of Israel was renewed through the ministry of Joseph Smith. The Prophet's appointment to the office and blessings of Abraham was a vital part of that birthright in the latter days. In addition, the general rights and blessings which belonged to all the children of Ephraim were to be restored and set forth in their fulness. In recognition of their birthright, the children of Ephraim would be the first to begin gathering in the last days, and through their instrumentality the other tribes of Israel were to be established in the divine patriarchal order. In speaking of Israel's latter-day redemption, Joseph Smith cited Paul's prophetic declaration, quoting the prophet Isaiah, that the Deliverer will come out of Zion and "turn away ungodliness from Jacob"—the whole house of Israel. [^71] The Prophet contributed to an understanding of this important biblical passage by explaining that Zion would be built by the descendants of the patriarch Joseph, with the tribe of Ephraim at their head. The Lord explained that the lost tribes of Israel would come to Zion. "And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim." [^72] To be crowned with glory was to be given the sacred rites and the divine program by which they could become heirs of God within the eternal family order and in this way be endowed with the glory of God.

These were matters of great importance to the Saints, for they were told by revelation that the patriarch Joseph was their father, by whom "the promises" remained which pertained to the partiarchal order. [^73] The Lord, in another revelation, said of an early convert that he was a descendant of the patriarch Joseph and "a partaker of the blessings" which were given to the fathers. [^74] At a gathering of the Richards and Young families, Brigham Young stated that "the same blood of Ephraim" which Joseph Smith had, flowed in their veins. And the Prophet's uncle, John Smith, said: "I thank God that so many are gathered together of one blood—the blood of Ephraim." [^75] If the promises which were given to the ancient patriarchs were to be planted in the hearts of their children in the last days, as the angel Moroni declared to Joseph Smith in 1823, the rights, powers, and privileges of Ephraim would have to be given to the Saints.

Many revelations set forth the responsibilities of the Saints, as the children of Ephraim, in building Zion to be an ensign to the world in the latter days. Speaking of those who were truly of "the blood of Ephraim," a revelation observed that God's people in the last days were to be "like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations." "For . . . Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her, and she shall be an ensign unto the people." [^76]

Ephraim's birthright in the latter days included the right to hold the keys of patriarchal blessings—to designate by revelation the respective tribes of Israel through which the Saints would receive their blessings within the divine patriarchal order. The keys of this power, as previously mentioned, were given to the Patriarch to the Church and to other patriarchs within the Church. The office of Patriarch to the Church belonged by right to the tribe of Ephraim.

"The visions of the Almighty" were opened to the Prophet's view when he established the office of Patriarch to the Church, December 18, 1833. Since all the rights and powers of the priesthood centered in him, Joseph Smith was "the first elder and first patriarch of the Church." He began by giving some of his associates "blessings by the spirit of prophecy." Having done so, he ordained his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., to serve as the Patriarch to the Church, to bless "the fatherless, thereby securing the blessings of the Lord unto them and for their posterity." "He . . . shall be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood," Joseph Smith declared, "even the keys of that ministry." [^77]

After the death of Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, as the oldest living son in the Smith family, was given the office of Patriarch to the Church. Before the death of his father, the Prophet said of his brother Hyrum: "He shall stand in the tracks of his father and be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood, even the Evangelical Priesthood." Joseph Smith, Sr. had also blessed Hyrum, stating: "I now seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people." [^78] The revelation which officially directed that Hyrum Smith be given the patriarchal office at the death of his father specified that it had been "appointed unto him by . . . blessing and also by right." [^79] Since that time this office has continued in the descendants of Hyrum Smith, except when temporary departures from the law of primogeniture were necessary.

Reinstatement of Promises to Aaron

Joseph Smith taught that the sons of Aaron in modern times must also be identified and honored in their ancient priesthood rights. In speaking of the calling of Aaron and his sons, the Prophet noted: "Here is a little of law which must be fulfilled. The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary—fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever." [^80] This meant that the office of Presiding Bishop in the latter-day dispensation belonged by divine appointment to the firstborn line of Aaron's sons. [^81]

Joseph Smith said of the office of Presiding Bishop: "We have no direct lineal descendant of Aaron, to whom it would of right belong." [^82] But until the firstborn in the family of Aaron was properly identified and called, the office of Presiding Bishop could be organized and function through the Higher Priesthood. In referring to the lineal right of the firstborn of Aaron, the Lord said in a revelation: "But, as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and ordained unto this power, under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^83] Under this provision the office of Presiding Bishop was organized in the Church. No literal descendant of the firstborn line of Aaron was designated and called to that office.

Reaffirmation of David's Political Rights

Joseph Smith longed for the time when the political rights of the divine patriarchal order would be recognized and honored. In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, he prayed that "the yoke of bondage" would "begin to be broken off from the house of David." [^84] Later, he explained that "the throne and kingdom of David" would be "given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his [the former King David's] lineage." [^85] In a revelation to the Prophet, the Lord referred to the blessings of the patriarchal order which come "because of the lineage of my Priesthood" and affirmed that through that holy order the latter-day David would reign over modern Israel. "Through this order, he [Jesus Christ] may be glorified," the revelation said, "and . . . through the power of anointing, David may reign king over Israel, which shall hereafter be revealed." [^86]

The Establishment Of The Divine Patriarchal Order

Instructions to the Saints

After receiving the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood in 1829 and the full rights, powers, and promises of the divine patriarchal order in 1836, Joseph Smith began to introduce the sacred rites of the temple among the Saints and to instruct them in the doctrine and program of the eternal family order at Nauvoo. [^87] Joseph F. Smith stated that from that time on, in the Prophet's public discourses, the doctrines of the patriarchal order "became the great themes of his life." [^88] Only an enlightened people could be expected to establish the new system. The Prophet treated such subjects as the need for a temple in which all things were to be gathered together in one, and by which the Saints could be endowed with glory; [^89] the necessity of the Saints to comply with all the ordinances of salvation; [^90] the grand orders of the priesthood, with the patriarchal order centered in the house of the Lord; [^91] the doctrine of heirship in which relationship the Saints could receive a fulness of the priesthood; [^92] the rise of faithful men to become kings and priests in the kingdom of God; [^93] the role of woman in the priesthood of the eternal order; [^94] the covenants which God made with the ancient patriarchs and their renewal in the latter days; [^95] the government of God; [^96] the doctrine of election as it pertained to God's appointment of rights and blessings in the flesh [^97] and man's challenge to make his calling and election sure to the fruition of those blessings in the resurrection; [^98] the mission of Elijah and the purpose and function of the sealing power of the priesthood; [^99] and the rise of man to become an exalted being like God in the resurrection, within the divine patriarchal order. [^100] This is but a partial list.

The Prophet let the Saints know that there was further information concerning the great plan of salvation which they could receive if they would prepare themselves for it. Speaking of a major revelation he received in 1832, which set forth the destiny of the human family in eternity, [^101] he said in May, 1843: "I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them." [^102] Considering that he was alluding to the law and program of the divine patriarchal order by which the faithful could inherit all things as priests and kings in celestial glory, [^103] indeed he had revealed only a small portion of what he knew. He then said with reference to the eternal family order: "The design of the great God in sending us into this world, and organizing us [according to the divine patriarchal order] to prepare us for the eternal worlds, I shall keep in my own bosom at present." [^104]

It was a challenge to get the Saints to open their minds to the greater vision of the kingdom than that which was revealed in the organization of the Church alone. "If the Church knew all the commandments," he said, "one half they would condemn through prejudice and ignorance." [^105] "Why be so certain that you comprehend the things of God," he challenged. [^106] "There are a great many wise men and women too in our midst who are too wise to be taught; therefore they must die in their ignorance, and in the resurrection they will find their mistake." [^107] Again, he observed: "It is the constitutional disposition of mankind to set up stakes and set bounds to the works and ways of the Almighty." [^108] But, he warned: "I say to all those who are disposed to set up stakes for the Almighty, You will come short of the glory of God." [^109] For a man to become an heir of God through the great program of the divine patriarchal order, he had to "put away all his false traditions." [^110] To do some good things according to one's own definition of what was right was not enough. The Prophet explained:

I . . . spoke to the people, showing them that to get salvation we must not only do some things, but everything which God has commanded. Men may preach and practice everything except those things which God commands us to do, and will be damned at last. We may tithe mint and rue, and all manner of herbs, and still not obey the commandments of God. The object with me is to obey and teach others to obey God in just what He tells us to do. It mattereth not whether the principle is popular or unpopular. [^111]

These were challenging words. The Prophet was in earnest. "Had I inspiration, revelation, and lungs to communicate what my soul has contemplated in times past," he declared, "there is not a soul in this congregation but would go to their homes and shut their mouths in everlasting silence on religion till they had learned something." [^112] Having dictated the revelation on eternal and plural marriage, July 12, 1843, he spoke sharply and with prophetic accuracy of those whom he saw would oppose the revelation of God's law. Pointing to some prominent men (not the Twelve) on the stand behind him, he said, as he addressed the Saints on Sunday, July 16, 1843: "If I were to reveal the things that God has revealed to me, if I were to reveal to this people the doctrines that I know are for their exaltation, these men would spill my blood." [^113] In his journal he reported this discourse:

Preached in the morning and evening at the stand in the Grove, near the west of the Temple, concerning a man's foes being those of his own household.

The same spirit that crucified Jesus is in the breast of some who profess to be Saints in Nauvoo. I have secret enemies in the city intermingling with the Saints, etc. . . .

Slightly touched upon the subject of the everlasting covenant, showing that a man and his wife must enter into that covenant in the world, or he will have no claim on her in the next world. But on account of the unbelief of the people, I cannot reveal the fullness of these things at present. [^114]

Foreshadowing the Perfect Order

As Joseph Smith began to develop the divine patriarchal order, he sought to teach the Saints his true position in that eternal order. He had presided as the prophet or mouthpiece of God over the Church whose purpose was to bring people into the family of Christ, perfect their spiritual union with Him, and establish them on the program of the divine family order. But in the perfected system, he would be a priest and, ultimately (in eternity), a king over that holy order.

The Sunday after Joseph Smith dictated the revelation on eternal and plural marriage, he announced his intention of taking his rightful place as the presiding patriarch over the eternal family order. He explained that he wanted to turn the leadership of the Church over to his brother Hyrum. [^115] He could then retain the keys of the priesthood over the whole system and assume his place as the presiding figure of the patriarchal order.

Hyrum Smith had been appointed to be "a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator" unto the Church, in January, 1841, to "act in concert" with his brother Joseph and to receive "the same blessings, and glory, and honor, and priesthood" given initially to Oliver Cowdery, [^116] who had received the keys and powers of the priesthood in the new dispensation jointly with the Prophet [^117] and stood for a time as an Associate President of the Church. "The office of Associate President is to assist in presiding over the whole Church," Joseph Smith explained, "and to officiate in the absence of the President." The Associate President was also "to act as spokesman" and to "hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven or the Church militant." [^118] Hyrum Smith took the place of Oliver Cowdery in this high calling, which seems to have foreshadowed the more perfect order of the kingdom.

With Hyrum Smith as an Associate President of the Church, it would be possible to develop the more perfect program of the kingdom of God. When the Prophet addressed the Saints on Sunday, July 16, 1843, he stated that he "would not prophesy any more, and proposed Hyrum to hold the office of prophet to the Church, as it was his birthright." "I am going to have a reformation [i. e., initiate a change]," he noted in his journal, "and the Saints must regard Hyrum, for he has the authority, that I might be a Priest of the Most High God." [^119]

These statements can have meaning only in the framework of the divine patriarchal order. In the more perfectly organized kingdom, Hyrum Smith apparently would "hold the office of prophet to the Church." [^120] As an Associate President, he would hold the keys of "the Church militant" [^121]—the instrument by which the divine family order was built. As "a Priest of the Most High God," Joseph Smith would then hold the keys over the total system but function primarily as the head of the eternal family order. [^122]

Willard Richards also made it clear that Joseph Smith suggested giving his brother Hyrum the right to direct the Church while he assumed his place as the presiding figure over the patriarchal order. In a letter to Brigham Young, he reported the Prophet's proclamation, then added, significantly, that the latter-day Seer "did not tell them he was going to be a priest now, or a king by and by." [^123]

The fact that Joseph Smith did not expect to become a king until "by and by," [^124] indicates that he did not plan to exercise the political powers of the system, but merely to set up the family order and function as its spiritual head. But apparently he did not (or could not) make clear his intentions in his address to the Saints. Many of them failed to understand, concluding that he simply wanted to resign his office as President of the Church in favor of Hyrum. Consequently, he reported, "certain brethren came to me and said they could hardly consent to receive Hyrum as a prophet, and for me to resign." [^125] But the Prophet had been testing the Saints to see if they would understand what he was trying to do, [^126] and to use the occasion to educate them in the true order of the kingdom. Having recorded the statement of those who supposed that he was going to resign, he reported: "I felt curious and said: 'Have we not learned the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, which includes both Prophets, Priests and Kings. . . . I will advance your Prophet to a Priest, and then to a King—not to the Kingdoms of this earth, but of the Most High God.'" [^127] His declaration that he was to advance from a prophet to a priest and, ultimately, to a king indicated that in the perfected order of the kingdom, he would move from his role as President of the Church to became the presiding patriarch (which office is both that of priest and king) over the divine family order of the last days. To show the Saints the true order, he then quoted from the Revelation of John: "Thou hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth." [^128]

There was a precedent in the Book of Mormon for this kind of arrangement. The first King Mosiah reigned over the land of Zarahemla after he and others fled from the land of Nephi. [^129] Then followed the righteous reign of his son, King Benjamin, and of King Benjamin's son, the second King Mosiah. Under the Holy Priesthood, these three men stood as both spiritual and political heads of their people in a patriarchal society. [^130] For an extended period of time, there was no church organized in their midst; but priests were appointed to teach the several families. [^131] When Alma joined the people of the second King Mosiah, "the first church" was established among them. [^132] Mosiah then gave Alma authority to organize "churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla" and "ordain priests and teachers," and preside "over the church." [^133] Under this arrangement, Mosiah reigned as a priest and king over the Nephite system, while Alma, a subordinate figure, acted as President of the Nephite church.

This appears to be the kind of relationship the Church was to have to the patriarchal order. As Joseph Smith began to develop the more perfect order of the kingdom, he apparently wanted the Saints to understand the proper relationship between the two systems, at least as far as the spiritual program of the eternal family order was concerned. Under that arrangement he would act as a priest over the family order, and his brother, Hyrum, would serve in a subordinate role as President of the Church—the instrument to bring people to Christ, perfect them in their spiritual union with the Lord, and establish them in the program of the patriarchal order. [^134]

Joseph, a Priest and King over the Patriarchal Order

Before his death, Joseph Smith was made a priest and king over the divine patriarchal order of the last days. A revelation to John Taylor several years later confirmed the Prophet's appointment. "He was called by me," the Lord said of Joseph Smith, "and empowered by me, and sustained by me to introduce and establish my Church and Kingdom upon the earth; and to be a Prophet, Seer and Revelator to my Church and Kingdom; and to be a King and Ruler over Israel." [^135]

The action apparently took place after Joseph Smith organized the General Council (popularly called the Council of Fifty), which was the nucleus of the municipal branch of the divine patriarchal order. George Miller, a prominent member of that body, stressed the political aspects of the Prophet's calling when he wrote: "In this council we ordained Joseph Smith as King on earth." [^136] William Marks, another member, reported that he was present when the Prophet was "ordained king to reign over the house of Israel." [^137]

Joseph Smith explained that this position did not pertain "to the Kingdoms of this earth," but to that of "the Most High God." [^138] Primarily it was an appointment to be a priest and a king (a presiding patriarch) in the celestial family order in eternity. Only as sufficient men were regenerated spiritually by the gospel and voluntarily established their lives on the program of the heavenly order would it apply to this earth. On this basis the millennial kingdom of Christ would be established. The Prophet taught that men hold priesthood "rights first on earth, and then in heaven." [^139] This included political rights under the priesthood. [^140] The fulfilment of this requirement was the most essential reason for his action, not the vain expression of a hidden desire for political power.

Joseph Smith also viewed the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth with a divine perspective. He organized the full kingdom so that men in his day would have the opportunity to come into it and receive its blessings of peace, union, justice, and prosperity, or be left without excuse on the day of judgment and be responsible for the turmoil and distress which would result by the inability of deficient systems to cope with the challenges of a rapidly developing age. [^141] The special preface to the volume of published revelations given to the Prophet declared: "I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments." [^142] Men in that generation could not say that they did not have an opportunity to accept the millennial kingdom which was sent to them through a living prophet. [^143]

Commission of the Keys of the Kingdom to the Twelve

When the Twelve were ordained to the holy apostleship in 1835, they were called to be special witnesses of Christ with power to extend the gospel message and program to all nations. Within the Church, they stood in an administrative position next to the First Presidency. [^144] But they were not then empowered to organize the divine patriarchal order in its fulness and administer in all its sacred rites. The keys and powers to do this were conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1836. [^145] Moses then restored the keys to gather Israel; Elias committed the promises and blessings of Abraham; and Elijah revealed "power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth." Joseph Smith explained that this included power "to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven." [^146]

Joseph Smith alone held those sacred rights and powers [^147] until he set forth the full and perfect order of the kingdom of God at Nauvoo. He then gave the Twelve and some other faithful saints all the rites, covenants, and ordinances which pertained to the temple, by which the full program of the divine patriarchal order could be established, with the keys and powers of the priesthood in their fulness as he had received them. He taught them of the sealing powers of the priesthood and administered those powers unto them. Finally, he explained in great detail the manner in which husbands and wives, parents and children, were to be united by eternal ties, and the righteous of the human family back to Adam linked together into one great and eternal system. Of the Prophet's actions at this time, Parley P. Pratt said:

This great and good man was led, before his death, to call the Twelve together, from time to time, and to instruct them in all things pertaining to the kingdom, ordinances, and government of God. He often observed that he was laying the foundation, but it would remain for the Twelve to complete the building. Said he, "I know not why; but for some reason I am constrained to hasten my preparations, and to confer upon the Twelve all the ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the priesthood, and so set before them a pattern in all things pertaining to the sanctuary and the endowment therein."

Having done this, he rejoiced exceedingly; for, said he, "The Lord is about to lay the burden on your shoulders and let me rest awhile; and if they kill me," continued he, "the kingdom of God will roll on, as I have now finished the work which was laid upon me, by committing to you all things for the building up of the kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown me from heaven." [^148]

Orson Hyde gave a similar report of these actions. In September, 1844, he said:

Before I went east on the 4th of April last, we were in council with Brother Joseph almost every day for weeks. Says Brother Joseph in one of those councils, there is something going to happen; I don't know what it is, but the Lord bids me to hasten and give you your endowment before the temple is finished. He conducted us through every ordinance of the holy priesthood, and when he had gone through with all the ordinances he rejoiced very much, and says, now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom as fast as you will be able to build it up; and now, says he, on your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest, for the Lord is going to let me rest awhile. [^149]

Wilford Woodruff also gave an account of the Prophet's actions in organizing "the quorum of the Twelve, a few months before his death, to prepare them for the endowments." "They received their endowment," he said, "and actually received the keys of the kingdom of God, and oracles of God, keys of revelation, and the pattern of heavenly things." Like his associates, Elder Woodruff reported the Prophet's injunction to the Twelve: "Upon your shoulders the kingdom rests, and you must round up your shoulders, and bear it." [^150]

It is clear from the above statements that the conferrals which Joseph Smith made at that time pertained to the temple and the divine patriarchal order which was to be built up through the sacred rites of the house of the Lord, [^151] and that therein the Prophet gave the Twelve the full keys of the perfected kingdom of God. [^152] Heber C. Kimball stressed that in administering those sacred rites, Joseph Smith "endowed the Twelve with all the power of the priesthood." [^153] Wilford Woodruff reported the Prophet as saying: "Brethren, I have had sorrow of heart and anguish of soul from fear that my life might be taken from the earth while the keys of the Kingdom of God and of this dispensation rested upon my head alone; but, thanks be unto the great Eloheim, the God of Israel, I have been permitted to seal all the keys, powers, and priesthood upon the heads of my brethren, the Twelve Apostles, that have ever been sealed upon my head by any Prophet, Apostle, or Messenger of Life and Salvation, and now I am free." [^154] Orson Hyde gave corroborating testimonies. In a letter written September 19, 1844, he said: "To us were committed the keys of the Kingdom, and every gift, key and power, that Joseph ever had, confirmed upon our heads by an anointing." [^155] Again: "President Joseph Smith in one of their councils, told the Twelve that he had given them all the keys and ordinances which had been committed to him." [^156]

Parley P. Pratt further explained that Joseph Smith bestowed upon Brigham Young "the keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers [in the divine patriarchal order], lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse." Elder Pratt emphasized: "This last key of the priesthood is the most sacred of all, and pertains exclusively to the First Presidency of the Church, without whose sanction and approval or authority, no sealing blessing shall be administered pertaining to things of the resurrection and the life to come." [^157]

All the general rites and covenants which Joseph Smith administered to the Twelve were ultimately to be given to every faithful man who made his calling and election sure to a place of exaltation within the divine patriarchal order, regardless of the office he held in the priesthood in the Church. [^158] "He designed that we should give it [that program] to you," Heber C. Kimball said of the Prophet's intentions, "and you cannot . . . obtain these things until that house [the temple] is built." [^159] This included the fulness of the priesthood and its sealing powers. With that fulness, each righteous man could then administer all the ordinances and act in all the offices of the kingdom of God under the direction of the living prophet. Brigham Young thus said of Sidney Rigdon: "If he is a king and a priest, let him go and build up a kingdom unto himself; that is his right and it is the right of many here, but the Twelve are at the head of it." [^160] It was on this basis that each faithful man could be exalted to a fulness of glory and power in the celestial kingdom of God.

This was what Joseph Smith meant when he talked of "delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church," and indicated that faithful women would receive them with their husbands. [^161] With every man and his wife holding a fulness of the priesthood, possessing power to build up an eternal kingdom unto themselves within the divine patriarchal order, Zion would indeed become "a kingdom of priests, a holy order, a chosen generation, as in Enoch's day." [^162]

Here was a glorious concept of human dignity and of social arrangement—the ultimate doctrine of the destiny of man in the divine patriarchal order. There would be no artificial hierarchy in Zion's perfected order. Instead, there would be a system of fathers and sons based upon the sources through which exalted individuals received the various endowments and attributes of life. Fathers were sources; sons were recipients. But as heirs in the divine family order under Zion's law, every son could receive the same fulness of priesthood and glory for his family that his father had for his family, with the right to build up a kingdom unto himself under Christ and the great patriarchs who held keys within the eternal family. This was the ultimate in justice and equality. The Prophet expressed the underlying principle of this great concept when he said: "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^163]

Spiritual manifestations attested to the heavenly origin of the sacred rites and powers which Joseph Smith gave the Twelve. As the Prophet administered to them, Wilford Woodruff declared: "His face shone with great brightness, and it seemed as though the room was filled with all the power of God that our tabernacles would endure." [^164] He said in more detail:

He was clothed upon with the Spirit and power of God. His face was clear as amber. The room was filled as with consuming fire. He stood three hours upon his feet. Said he: "You Apostles of the Lamb of God have been chosen to carry out the purposes of the Lord on the earth. Now I have received, as the Prophet, Seer and Revelator, standing at the head of this dispensation, every key, every ordinance, every principle and every priesthood that belongs to the last dispensation and fulness of times. And I have sealed all these things upon your heads." [^165]

These divine manifestations, with those that were given to the Saints in the Kirtland Temple, also revealed the living glory that would be associated with the development of the divine patriarchal order among the Saints when the prophecy of Isaiah would be fulfilled: "And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence." [^166]

Summary

The great work of restoring all things which Joseph Smith was commissioned to begin had as its central purpose the establishment of the eternal family order on earth in its full spiritual, patriarchal, economic, social, and political law. To this end, Israel was to be gathered in the latter days and the ancient rights of the several tribes and branches of Israel established. This was the message of Isaiah's prophecy that the angel Moroni quoted to the Prophet in 1823.

Joseph Smith received the sublime calling, as a great prophet and seer of God, to restore the gospel, organize the Church of Jesus Christ, and build the divine patriarchal order in preparation for the second coming of Christ. The Smith family apparently descended by lineage from the presiding lines of Ephraim and Jesse; and by divine appointment Joseph Smith received the same rights and blessings that God gave anciently to Abraham. The Prophet therefore had a right to preside as a patriarch—a priest and a king—over the perfected order of Zion. Under that presiding line of the eternal family order, all other features of the divine system were to be fully developed—those that pertained to the tribes of Ephraim, Levi, and Judah. Though the keys and powers to develop the divine family were restored earlier, Joseph Smith began to develop the program of the patriarchal order at Nauvoo. There he taught the Saints many doctrines of the eternal system, and there he introduced its sacred rites and covenants. Before his death, the Prophet gave the Twelve intensive instructions concerning the patriarchal order and conferred upon them every power, key, and authority which he had received to establish that divine system among the Saints. Through their ministry, every faithful man was to be given a fulness of the priesthood within the divine patriarchal order.

END VOLUME III

Footnotes

Mother [Lucy Mack] Smith is here—she is our mother, we hold her in a three-fold bond, for we hold her by blood, by the Spirit, and by the Gospel. We are connected together.—Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, op. cit., p. 107.

Bathsheba W. Smith, wife of George A. Smith, also stated of the Prophet: "I heard him preach that the ancient order of Abraham should be restored."—Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (June 1, 1892), p. 344.

If you will publish in the [Nauvoo] Neighbor and Times and Seasons the true state of the case in regard to my office as Patriarch over the whole Church, this will give me a right to visit all branches of the Church, this will give me a right to visit all branches of the Church, and intrude on no man's rights; and further to attend to all of the ordinances of God [by which the divine patriarchal order could be built up unto himself], no man being my head, I will reconcile all difficulties, and Elder Young can stand as the President of the Church, and by my most hearty wish and consent. This will settle all difficulties and restore peace and good order, and farther than this, I cannot say, only that I want all men to understand that my father's family are of the royal blood, and promised seed, and no man or set of men can take their crown or place in time nor eternity.—Journal of John Taylor, June 30, 1845, cited in B. H. Roberts, Succession in the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City, 1894), p. 22.

For a well-documented study of the life of William Smith that touches on the claim he made, see Calvin P. Rudd, "William Smith: Brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith," unpublished Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1973.

My father & Brothers are gone & I am but a youth & alone & who will be my friend here on earth. Need I say anymore. Will the brethren remember me & my claims in the Smith family. I do not mean a succession as a prophet in Joseph's place for no man on earth can fill his place. He is our Prophet, Seer, Revelator, Priest, & King in time & in eternity, & hence the 12 came next to him on earth or in heaven.—Letter dated August 21, 1844.

After the death of Hyrum, Joseph, and Samuel Smith, William had claim by lineage upon the office of Patriarch to the Church.

John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff are the only two men now living in the flesh who listened to the words and charge of Joseph Smith the Prophet to the Twelve Apostles before his death when he said, "Brethren, I have had sorrow of heart for fear I might be taken away with the keys of the Kingdom of God upon me before I sealed them upon the heads of other men. But I thank God I have lived to see the day when I have had power to give the Twelve Apostles their endowments. And I have now sealed upon your heads all the keys of the kingdom of God and the powers of the Holy Priesthood, which God has sealed upon me. And now I roll off the labor and work of the Church and Kingdom of God upon the shoulders of the Twelve Apostles. And I now command you in the name of Jesus Christ to round up your shoulders and bear off this church and Kingdom of God on the earth before heaven and earth, and before God, angles, and men, and if you do not do it you will be damned."—Letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

---
Notas:
[^1] Revelations to the Prophet indicated that the work would be offered first to the gentiles. But when the times of the gentiles were fulfilled, the day of Israel's redemption would fully arrive. This prophetic picture will be discussed in the next volume of this study.
[^2] For a statement which makes it clear that the restoration of all things was to be the establishment of the divine patriarchal order on earth, see D&C 86:8-11.
[^3] D&C 132:40.
[^4] D&C 132:45.
[^5] HC, IV, p. 599.
[^6] Ibid., p. 492.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 492-493.
[^8] MA, I (July, 1835), p. 157.
[^9] Ibid., II (October, 1835), p. 198. For a detailed report of Moroni's message concerning Israel in the last days, see ibid., I (April, 1835), pp. 109-112; HC, I, pp. 12-13.
[^10] Title page of the Book of Mormon. Moses committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north, Elias gave the rights and promises which God centered anciently in Abraham, and Elijah revealed "the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" within the elect family.—D&C 110:11-16; HC, V, pp. 530, 555. See also Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah."
[^11] HC, IV, p. 360. For a discussion of the subject of saviors on Mount Zion, see Volume II of this study, chapter eighteen.
[^12] D&C 27:10; 103:17; 132:30-31; 136:21-22.
[^13] D&C 52:2.
[^14] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, held January 8, 1845, The Utah Genealogical And Historical Magazine, XI (July, 1920), p. 112.
[^15] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 66, citing Isaiah 60:10, 12: 61:5-6. (Italics in the original.)
[^16] Isaiah 52:1.
[^17] D&C 113:7-8.
[^18] D&C 84:99.
[^19] D&C 86:8-11.
[^20] HC, I, p. 12.
[^21] Joseph Smith started to write his official history on April 27, 1838. See ibid., III, p. 25. He recorded the above statement in March, 1838.
[^22] The Prophet made clarifications on the first three of these figures only.
[^23] Isaiah 11:1.
[^24] D&C 113:1-2.
[^25] Isaiah 9:6.
[^26] Luke 1:32-33.
[^27] See Matthew 1:1-17; Luke 1:26-38; 2:4; 3:23-38. It was commonly understood by the Jews that the Messiah would be a descendant of David. They therefore answered Christ's query as to the paternity of the Messiah by saying he would be the son of David. But they were confounded when Jesus pressed the issue further by referring to David's messianic prophecy that Christ would come through David's lineage and also be David's Lord. "How then." Jesus asked, "doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?" "If David then call him Lord," Jesus further inquired, "how is he his son?"—Matthew 22:41-46. To these questions the Jews could not give an answer. They failed to comprehend the glorious truth that their promised Messiah would be both the son of David and the Son of God; and as the latter, He would be the God of Israel, David's Lord.
[^28] Isaiah 11:2-5.
[^29] Isaiah 11:6-9. See also 2 Nephi 30:8-18. This subject will be discussed in Volume IV of this study.
[^30] Isaiah 11:11-13.
[^31] Isaiah 11:1.
[^32] D&C 113:3-4.
[^33] Isaiah 11:10.
[^34] D&C 113:5-6.
[^35] See again D&C 132:40, 45.
[^36] D&C 132:30.
[^37] 2 Nephi 3:3, 11, 12, 14-17. Brigham Young said: "Joseph Smith, junior, was foreordained to come through the loins of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and so on down through the Prophets and Apostles; and thus he came forth in the last days to be a minister of salvation, and to hold the keys of the last dispensation of the fulness of times.—JD, VII, p. 290.
[^38] D&C 86:8-11. See also D&C 27:10.
[^39] 2 Nephi 3:7.
[^40] 2 Nephi 3:13, 15.
[^41] JD, II, p. 269.
[^42] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, op. cit., p. 107.
[^43] Ibid., p. 112.
[^44] Ibid., pp. 107-108.
[^45] HC, I, p. 12.
[^46] D&C 113:4, 6. Some students of the Prophet's thought conclude that both the rod and the root may represent Joseph Smith. This writer suggests, however, that these figures more appropriately represent two separate individuals in the latter days born of the same lineage, one being a descendant of the other. This would mean that the rod was made to represent Joseph Smith and the root a figure yet to come, raised up out of his descendants.
[^47] D&C 86:10.
[^48] See Joseph Smith's statement to this effect in HC, V, p. 64.
[^49] D&C 124:58.
[^50] Journal and memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, pp. 2-3; Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December, 1905), pp. 556-557. For a discussion of the points made in this paragraph, see Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Early Beginnings of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^51] From a signed affidavit by Mary E. Lightner, February 8, 1902, photostat copy of the original in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Several years later she was sealed to Joseph Smith as a plural wife, so this had no reference to a marriage sealing.
[^52] Journal History, April 9, 1837.
[^53] The report of this address is found in the journal of Samuel Holister Rogers, pp. 198-201, and the diary of William Bryan Pace, which contains a biography of his father, James Pace, pp. 3-6. Both documents may be found in the Brigham Young University Library. In light of this concept, the remarks of Brigham Young are of interest. Speaking at a meeting of the Richards and Young families, he said:
[^54] HC, II, pp. 379-380. See Volume II of this study, the section entitled "Early Beginnings of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^55] D&C 110:11-16.
[^56] D&C 27:6.
[^57] D&C 110:12. See also D&C 124:58; 132:30-31, 57.
[^58] D&C 124:95.
[^59] D&C 124:57-58.
[^60] The Prophet ordained his father to the office of Patriarch to the Church, December 18, 1833, some time before Elias committed the full office and blessing of Abraham to the Prophet, in April, 1836. It was this earlier office which was later conferred upon Hyrum Smith and has since that time been held as a general rule by one of his descendants.
[^61] JD, XXV, p. 367.
[^62] Letter of Joseph Smith III to John Henry Smith, written at Lamoni, Iowa, January 20, 1886, University of Utah Library, pp. 2-3.
[^63] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Contingent Nature of Man's Election."
[^64] The Complainant's Abstract of Pleading and Evidence, in the case commonly referred to as the "Independence Temple Lot Case," between the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and the Church of Christ, at Independence, Missouri (Lamoni, Iowa, 1893), p. 79. (Italics in the original.) See also p. 63.
[^65] Joseph Smith III to John Henry Smith, p. 3. See also p. 8. In support of this fact, see MS, VII (May 1, 1846), p. 134; Lee, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 155; Miller, A Mormon Bishop and His Son, p. 135; Correspondence of Bishop George Miller (no date or place of publication), p. 23.
[^66] See HC, IV, pp. 603-604.
[^67] See the section later in this chapter entitled "Commission of the Keys of the Kingdom to the Twelve."
[^68] See Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, pp. 24-25, where this fact is stressed.
[^69] Ibid., p. 23.
[^70] Joseph Smith gave the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young at their head, all the powers and keys to establish the presiding office of the divine patriarchal order, and in this sense the appointments which Moses, Elias, and Elijah gave the Prophet in the Kirtland Temple have remained in the Church. Under that authority, every faithful man who receives the full rites and ordinances of the temple is given all the general blessings, powers, and promises of Abraham, pertaining to his posterity. But the office of Presiding Patriarch has not yet been given to one of Joseph Smith's descendants.
[^71] HC, I, p. 313; Romans 11:25-27; Isaiah 59:20-21.
[^72] D&C 133:32.
[^73] D&C 27:10.
[^74] D&C 96:7. In 1838, Wandle Mace was ordained an Elder by Orson Pratt, in New York City. Elder Mace wrote: "Orson Pratt having arrived from the West, took charge of the mission: and very soon after his arrival he ordained me to the office of an Elder, and while his hands were upon my head he broke out in tongues—I had never heard a manifestation of the gift of tongues before,—after the tongue, he said: 'You are of the seed of Joseph, and of the tribe of Ephraim.'"—Journal of Wandle Mace, p. 21.
[^75] Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, January 8, 1845, op. cit., pp. 107-108, 115. For other statements identifying the Saints as being primarily of the tribe of Ephraim, see HC, III, p. 52; IV, pp. 8, 13, 222; JD, XXII, p. 233.
[^76] D&C 64:36-37, 41-42.
[^77] Manuscript report by Oliver Cowdery, in his handwriting, December 18, 1833, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, I (Salt Lake City, 1953), pp. 473-474. Excerpts from these blessings are found in TS, VI (July 1, 1845), pp. 947-948; HC, I, pp. 465-467. See also the latter source, pp. 443-444.
[^78] Ibid.; found also in TPJS, p. 40; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 309.
[^79] D&C 124:91. See also HC, IV, p. 229.
[^80] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 319.
[^81] See D&C 68:17-18; 107:13-16.
[^82] HC, II, pp. 477-478.
[^83] D&C 68:19; 107:17.
[^84] D&C 109:63.
[^85] HC, VI, p. 253.
[^86] Revelation through the Prophet to Newel K. Whitney, Nauvoo, Illinois, July 27, 1842.
[^87] See Volume II of this study, chapters eleven and twelve.
[^88] Deseret News, May 20, 1886; Jenson, Historical Record, VI, p. 219.
[^89] HC, IV, pp. 608-610.
[^90] Ibid., VI, pp. 184-185.
[^91] Ibid., V, pp. 554-556.
[^92] Ibid., VI, pp. 319, 474, 478.
[^93] Ibid., V, pp. 424; VI, p. 306.
[^94] Ibid., IV, pp. 602-607.
[^95] Ibid., V, pp. 256-259. See also ibid., pp. 61-66.
[^96] Ibid., pp. 554-556.
[^97] Ibid., IV, pp. 358-360; manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, pp. 318-319.
[^98] HC, V, pp. 387-390, 401-403.
[^99] Ibid., pp. 529-531, 554-556; VI, pp. 183-185, 249-254.
[^100] Ibid., VI, pp. 302-317, 473-479.
[^101] See D&C 76.
[^102] HC, V, p. 402.
[^103] The minimal requirements to enter the celestial kingdom are set forth in D&C 76:51-53. But to become heirs as priests and kings in the Father's kingdom, as described in D&C 76:55-56, required men to embrace the full law of the divine patriarchal order. Obviously the Prophet had omitted giving the more detailed law and requirements when he dictated that revelation in 1832.
[^104] HC, V, p. 403.
[^105] Ibid., II, p. 477.
[^106] Ibid., V, p. 530.
[^107] Ibid., p. 424.
[^108] Ibid., p. 529.
[^109] Ibid., p. 554.
[^110] Ibid.
[^111] Ibid., VI, p. 223. Again he said: "Any man may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and be happy in that belief, and yet not obey his commandments, and at last be cut down for disobedience to the Lord's righteous requirements."—Ibid., V, p. 426.
[^112] Ibid., V, p. 530.
[^113] Jenson, Historical Record, VII, p. 529: JD, II, p. 217.
[^114] HC, V, p. 510. With possible reference to this address, James W. Pippen said: "I heard him [Joseph Smith] speak on the marriage covenant for time and eternity, and on one occasion he remarked that Abraham and Jacob, prophets and men of God, were given the privilege of having more wives than one at the same time, and he said—'Would it be wrong for good men to have more than one wife at the same time in our day?'" Elder Pippen stated that "this occurred about the time the revelation was written on Celestial Marriage, or the Eternity of the Marriage Covenant."—Young Woman's Journal, XVII (December, 1906), p. 540.
[^115] HC, V, p. 510.
[^116] D&C 124:94-95.
[^117] See, for example, HC, I, pp. 39-41; D&C 110.
[^118] Manuscript History of the Church, Book A, 1, December 5, 1834, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also HC, II, p. 176. In giving this office to Oliver, the Prophet said: "Brother in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was crucified for the sins of the world, that we through the virtue of his blood might come to the Father, I lay my hands upon thy head and ordain thee a President of the High and Holy Priesthood, to assist in presiding over the Church, and bearing the keys of this kingdom."—Ibid.
[^119] HC, V, p. 510.
[^120] Idem.
[^121] See Manuscript History of the Church, op. cit.
[^122] HC, V, p. 510. That the Prophet was speaking of building the divine patriarchal order is apparent from his added comment, that in his address he "touched upon the subject of the everlasting covenant, showing that a man and his wife must enter into that covenant in the world, or he will have no claim on her in the next world."—Ibid. He also taught that those who had no opportunity to obey the law of God could be ministered to vicariously after death. See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "Administering Of Higher Ordinances For Dead."
[^123] Ibid., p. 512.
[^124] Idem.
[^125] Ibid., pp. 517-518.
[^126] See, for example, ibid., pp. 516, 518.
[^127] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, found in TPJS, p. 318. In another report, the Prophet was said to have commented: "It is strange, brethren, that you have been in the Church so long, and not yet understood the Melchizedek Priesthood."—HC, V, p. 518.
[^128] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843, quoting Revelation 1:6; 5:10.
[^129] Omni 12.
[^130] See chapter twelve, the section entitled "The Political Features of the Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^131] See Mosiah 2:4-6; 6:3.
[^132] 3 Nephi 5:12.
[^133] Mosiah 25:19; 26:8.
[^134] After the death of the Prophet, William Smith asserted that his relationship as a brother to Joseph Smith entitled him to preside over the Saints in all functions of the perfected kingdom which the latter-day Seer sought to establish. See, for example, HC, VII, p. 433. In setting forth this unjustified claim, he proposed that the kind of relationship be established which the Prophet alluded to in his address on Sunday, July 16, 1843. To the Twelve, William wrote:
[^135] Revelation to John Taylor, June 27, 1882. Less than two months after the Prophet's death, William Smith wrote to Brigham Young on the subject of lineal rights within the Smith family, stating:
[^136] Letter written by Miller at St. James, Michigan, June, 1855, in John Zahnd MSS, Manuscript Division, New York Public Library. The writer first came across this statement while studying at this library in August, 1963.
[^137] Zion's Harbinger and Baneemy's Organ, III (July, 1853), p. 52. Some who defected and others who opposed the Prophet misinterpreted his actions and used that which he did against him. See George T. M. Davis, An Authentic Account of the Massacre of Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, and Hyrum Smith, His Brother . . . (St. Louis, 1844), p. 7; Thomas Ford, History of Illinois (Chicago, 1854), pp. 321-322.
[^138] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's discourse, July 23, 1843.
[^139] HC, III, p. 386.
[^140] Joseph Smith made the above statement in regard to Adam and Noah, both of whom held political power in the divine patriarchal order of their day. See Abraham 1:25-26. See also the Prophet's statement concerning David's loss of political rights under the priesthood in eternity, due to his trangression on earth.—HC, VI, p. 253.
[^141] These themes will be developed more fully in the next volume of this study. Joseph Smith's intentions and actions were distorted and used by his enemies to generate the opposition which resulted in his death. The publishers of the Nauvoo Expositor, a paper which sought to expose and oppose the Prophet, published the resolution: "We will not acknowledge any man as king or law-giver to the church; for Christ is our king and law-giver."—Nauvoo Expositor, I (June 7, 1844), p. 2. Wilson Law, a publisher of that organ, sought to get a warrant for treason issued, charging that when Joseph Smith was preaching from Daniel 2:44, he "said that the kingdom referred to was already set up, and that he was the king over it." MS, XXIV (May 1, 1862), p. 359; HC, VI, pp. 568-569. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter one entitled "Daniel's Prophecy."
[^142] D&C 1:17.
[^143] This view was reflected in Brigham Young's action before he led the Saints west from Nauvoo. First he wrote letters to the governors of all the states in the union requesting an asylum within their respective borders. These requests were refused "either by silent contempt or a flat denial in every instance." President Young explained: "We did this to deprive them of the chance of saying at the day of judgment, 'You could have had an asylum with us if you applied for it.'"—JD, XI, p. 18; XII, pp. 285-286.
[^144] D&C 107:23-24, 33-35; HC, II, p. 200.
[^145] See Volume II of this study, the section in chapter twelve entitled "Restoration Of Keys Of Divine Patriarchal Order."
[^146] HC, VI, p. 251.
[^147] Oliver Cowdery received them with the Prophet, but shortly thereafter was severed from the Church.
[^148] MS, V (March, 1845), p. 151. Wilford Woodruff stated that this series of meetings began the latter part of December, 1843, and continued until about the first of April, 1844. See his signed statement entitled "Testimony of Wilford Woodruff, Concerning Remarks by Joseph Smith to the Twelve Apostles and Others," Salt Lake City, September 21, 1883, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Orson Hyde stated that the charge which the Prophet gave the Twelve was delivered in March, 1844. See his letter to Ebenezer Robinson, September 19, 1844, published in The Return, published by Robinson at Davis City, Iowa, II (April, 1890), p. 253.
[^149] TS, V (September 15, 1844), p. 651; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 104. The Prophet was capable of a wide range of emotional expression, from sternness in rebuke to boyish conviviality in registering joy. Helen Mar Whitney, who no doubt received the information from her father, Heber C. Kimball, said: "After he had rolled off the load or delivered unto their [the Twelve's] hands the keys of the kingdom, he jumped and clapped his hands like a young school boy let out to play."—Whitney, Plural Marriage As Taught By The Prophet Joseph, p. 12.
[^150] TS, V (November 1, 1844), p. 698; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 109.
[^151] A study of the journal of Wilford Woodruff during the early months of 1844 confirms this fact.
[^152] Wilford Woodruff stated that the Twelve received "the keys" of the kingdom of God "in the endowments they . . . received under the hands of the Prophet Joseph."—TS, V (November 1, 1844), p. 700; MS, V (December, 1844), p. 111.
[^153] TS, V (November 1, 1844), p. 693; MS, V (January, 1845), p. 123.
[^154] Testimony of Wilford Woodruff, September 21, 1883, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. In a letter to Heber J. Grant, dated March 26, 1887, Elder Woodruff said:
[^155] The Return, II (April, 1890), p. 253.
[^156] TS, V (October 15, 1844), p. 686; Supplement to MS, V (December, 1844), p. 1.
[^157] MS, V (March, 1845), p. 151.
[^158] They did, however, have to be ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood.
[^159] TS, V (November 1, 1844), pp. 693-694; MS, V (January, 1845), p. 123. For a statement by George A. Smith, see MS, XXXVII (February 2, 1875), p. 66.
[^160] HC, VII, p. 235. Sidney Rigdon did not receive the full rights which Joseph Smith gave to the Twelve, with their related powers. See TS, V (September 2, 1844), p. 638; MS, XXXVII (February 2, 1875), p. 66. Though President Rigdon had been ordained a prophet, seer, and revelator, as a counselor in the First Presidency, Heber C. Kimball said of him: "He has not got the same authority as others, there are more than thirty men who have got higher authority than he has."—TS, V (October 1, 1844), p. 663. Those men had received a fulness of the priesthood in the divine patriarchal order. Their power in the priesthood was greater than that of Sidney Rigdon as a counselor in the First Presidency of the Church, who lacked the fulness of the priesthood conferred in the eternal family order.
[^161] HC, IV, pp. 604, 605.
[^162] Ibid., p. 570.
[^163] Ibid., p. 380.
[^164] Testimony of Wilford Woodruff, September 21, 1883.
[^165] Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 89. Elder Woodruff spoke repeatedly of this meeting and declared that the Prophet's "face shone like amber," and that he "was transfigured before them," being "covered with a power that I had never seen on any man in the flesh before."—Young Woman's Journal, V (August, 1894), No. II; Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, Part II, p. 378; Journal History, March 12, 1897.
[^166] Isaiah 4:5.
