Bruce C. Hafen, Believing Heart: Nourishing the Seed of Faith ( 1986)

CHAPTER ONE

The Believing Heart

Yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you . . . that a seed may be planted in your heart. (Alma 32:27-28.)

One late summer afternoon when our family was visiting relatives in a large and distant city, our four-year-old son suddenly disappeared from a city park. We all began a search of the area, ultimately involving the police as well as many neighbors. After about two hours, darkness came and we still had not found our boy. Our concern changed to real worry.

Finally, we gathered our family together and with a solemnity that is rare among children, we knelt in prayer. A short time later the city police telephoned to report that they had found our son, almost precisely as we had requested in the prayer. Before long, a police car drove up to the house, its precious cargo a bit shaken, but intact.

Later that night before he dropped off to sleep, the boy's six-year-old brother said to me, as he reflected on what had happened, "Dad, you're kind of magic, sort of, aren't you?" I replied that what we'd seen was not magic—the Lord had simply answered our prayers.

Would our son have turned up anyway? I don't know; but our family chooses to believe that the prayer made a difference.

A few years ago, a university student related to his elders' quorum an event he had experienced just after being ordained a deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood. He lived on a farm, and his father had promised him that an expected new calf would be his very own to raise. One summer morning when his parents were away, he was working in the barn when the pregnant cow began to calve prematurely. He watched in great amazement as the little calf was born, and then, without warning, the mother cow suddenly rolled over the calf. She was trying to kill it. In his heart he cried out to the Lord for help. Not thinking about how much more the cow weighed than he did, he pushed on her with all his strength and somehow moved her away.

He picked up the lifeless calf in his arms and, brokenhearted, looked at it, the tears running down his cheeks. Then he remembered that he now held the priesthood, and he felt he had every right to pray for additional help. So he prayed from the depths of his boyish, believing heart. Before long the little animal began breathing again. The young deacon knew his prayer had been heard.

After he finished telling this story, the tears welled up in his eyes and he said, "Brethren, I shared that experience because I don't think I would do now what I did then. Now that I am older, less naive, and more experienced, I 'know better' than to expect help in that kind of situation. I am not sure I would believe now, even if I relived that experience, that the calf 's survival was anything more than a coincidence. I don't understand what has happened to me since that time, but I wonder if something is missing now."

Whatever his change in attitude was, I also wondered about it. Did it matter? He was a faithful Church member and a good person. But he had become less childlike, less believing. Was he simply more mature now, or had his sense of the miraculous waned?

We live in sophisticated times. We are naturally inclined to regard what might be a genuine spiritual experience as a coincidence, unless there is conclusive evidence that spiritual forces were indeed involved. However, we are sometimes required to make decisions that require action before compelling proof is available.

As developed more fully in chapter three, the scriptures teach that God deliberately, and for wise purposes, uses restraint in manifesting himself to us. Yet, paradoxically, he remains deeply interested and involved in our lives. Because of his restraint in the midst of such interest, we must learn to perceive the hand of the Lord in situations where his presence may be still and small. Our willingness to "be believing" helps make such perception possible.

The risen Lord counseled the Apostle Thomas to "reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing." (John 20:27.) Moroni, speaking to our generation, said: "And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not many mighty miracles? . . . and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a God of miracles? . . . Doubt not, but be believing." (Mormon 9:18-19, 27.) Similarly, the Lord said: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly." (D&C 90:24.)

The act of believing originates in the heart of the beholder through his or her voluntary action. (See chapter five.) On more than one occasion the Lord said to those around him, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Luke 8:8.) Few of those who observed him truly understood the parables or perceived the miracles for what they were.

It is not always easy to know at first which influences are of divine origin. Those who first heard about the Savior's healings faced this question just as we do today when we hear the testimony of a miraculous healing. Was it really a miracle, or would the person have recovered anyway? Did the Lord really help us find our boy? Did the calf really receive some new infusion of life in answer to a boy's prayer? In the early history of the Salt Lake Valley, were the seagulls really sent to take away the crickets?

Even the matter of God's existence can appear to be a close question. Some argue that with all the misery of life, there couldn't be a God; others say that the obvious order in nature could never have been accidental. Neither side seems to persuade the other on the basis of external evidence.

It just might be that the Lord planned it that way—so we are not forced by the circumstances to believe. There are so many things he could do to rend the veil. But "we walk by faith, not by sight." (2 Corinthians 5:7.)

Scholars in the philosophy of knowledge tell us that people tend to see what they want to see, especially when the evidence is ambiguous. Perhaps that is why the mists of darkness in Lehi's dream are so descriptive of the conditions of mortality. God has chosen to leave us free, amid circumstances that do not compel our belief. Here we may determine for ourselves, as an act of will, whether to grasp the iron rod in the midst of the mortal darkness. All four of Lehi's sons were born of those same "goodly parents." (1 Nephi 1:1.) The difference between the believers (Nephi and Sam) and the unbelievers (Laman and Lemuel) was not so much in what happened to them, but in their attitude toward what happened. That attitude originated within their own hearts, with each making his own free choice about being willing to be believing.

Certainly Christ might have been born under circumstances so overwhelming and miraculous that all who lived at the time of his birth could not have questioned his supernatural origin. But he came more quietly than that, a light that "shineth in the darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. . . . But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name." (John 1:5, 12; italics added.)

It was all part of a plan carefully and deliberately designed not to compel belief. Further indications of the deliberateness of that plan appear throughout the accounts of the Savior's life. Frequently he told those who were blessed by a miracle that they "should tell no man what was done." (Luke 8:56; see also Matthew 8:4.)

One essential element in that plan is the principle of "line upon line, precept upon precept." Not only does he leave to us the initiative to believe, he also imparts to his hearers only what they are ready to hear. Milk comes before meat. "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12.)

Said the Lord to Joseph Smith after revealing to him the words spoken to Moses on the mountain: "See thou show [these words] unto no man, until I command you, except to them that believe." (Moses 4:32.) Hugh Nibley has described this guiding principle as the "policy of reticence," which the Lord has always followed "to protect sacred things from common misunderstandings and to protect the unworthy from damaging themselves with them." [^1]

The Lord has also made it plain that it is not good to seek signs. (See Matthew 12:39; Mark 8:12.) Moreover, miracles are not proof of divine authority. Satan can also work wonders so marvelous "that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect." (Matthew 24:24.) Apparently, there is a profound difference between the person "that saith unto me, Lord, Lord," and the person who "doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21; emphasis added.)

A key reason for the Lord's unwillingness to compel our belief is suggested by those scriptural phrases about doing the will of the Father and "receiving him." Something happens to people who receive him—who do his will. They learn. They develop Christlike capacities and skills beyond the reach of other people. Following his will changes them. These changes do not occur within the lives of those who merely see the sign or hear the word. Such changes in character and spirit also do not happen without our active, voluntary participation. Thus, by being believing, by receiving the Lord, and by following him, the process of becoming like him is set into motion. That is a point he does not want us to miss.

Knowing these reasons for the Lord's restraint should make us less inclined to wait for irrefutable evidence before we will act like believers. The Lord is not likely to make the case miraculously irresistible. That would be contrary to the purpose of mortality, because it would inhibit the growth and development that a free environment is designed to permit.

If, then, it is not good to seek signs and wonders, some may ask why the Lord performed the great miracles of his earthly ministry. Why the wonders of Moses' time? If the Lord had the power to send the seagulls, why didn't he keep the crickets away in the first place?

One reason is revealed in the Lord's answer when Moses asked why He had performed such great wonders when He freed Israel from captivity: "that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I am the Lord." (Exodus 10:2.) I think of that passage when I see the seagull monument on Temple Square, and we have tried to tell our children what the monument stands for.

The Lord wants us to know, if we have ears to hear, that we are finally and ultimately dependent upon him. The great miracles are symbolic of the way the Savior's atonement intervenes in our lives as a pure act of grace, offering redemption "after all we can do." (See 2 Nephi 25:23.) In the wilderness of our own experience, whenever that may be for each of us, we will at some time and in some way confront that total dependence, as did the children of Israel standing before the waters of the Red Sea.

And yet, paradoxically, even that confrontation is not likely to be overwhelming, lest we be deprived of the very experiences intended to be produced by that wilderness and the free agency that accompanies it.

The Lord has used the highly visible forms of his power very sparingly—enough to leave us with clear witnesses, but not enough to compel us to believe.

Once the conduct of a person's life has shown that he is indeed a believer, the signs of divine influence will follow him, in part as a further witness, but primarily to bless others.

What a careful balance has been struck between too much and not enough in the manifestations of divine power! How essential, then, to be willing to recognize the quiet evidences for what they are.

If we are willing to see miracles, what should we look for? Elder James E. Talmage wrote that miracles have been broadly classified as phenomena that are "unusual, special, transitory, and wrought by an agency beyond the power of man's control." [^2] But in our sophisticated and complex day, few things that happen, large or small, seem to be beyond man's control.

As we have begun to understand how technological miracles operate, our tendency to ascribe what we don't understand to supernatural origins has declined. Elder Talmage wrote, "The human sense of the miraculous wanes as comprehension of the operative process increases." [^3] Having watched men walk on the moon, we are quite comfortable with wonders, so much so that even when we haven't any idea how some marvelous thing could happen—like the new cure of a dreaded disease—we assume that some expert somewhere understands how it happened. Thus, we are left stripped of a sense of wonder. Whatever it is, thinks the contemporary mind, there is some natural explanation for it.

Perhaps, in view of this modern-day tendency, we need to think of miracles not as all the phenomena we can't understand, but simply as the influence of divine forces. In a broad sense, divine forces are involved in all nature and all technology. But if the Lord is directly involved in our personal affairs, that is a special miracle, however quiet, however common it may be. Does God want us to be able to recognize that kind of miracle? Yes. "And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments." (D&C 59:21.)

Why would he be concerned that we recognize his influence? It can't be just to satisfy his need for recognition. We know too much about his character and attributes to take that possibility seriously. It must have something to do with us—with whether we receive him, with whether we become like him. If his hand touches the circumstances of our lives, and we affirmatively reach out to take his hand, we can be guided toward those experiences uniquely suited to further our personal development of a Christlike character. Thereby will we understand the meaning of "be believing, and all things shall work together for your good." (D&C 90:24.)

God is so close, so available to those who have ears to hear and eyes to see. In Jacob's dream about the ladder reaching to heaven, with angels ascending and descending it, he saw God standing at the top of the ladder saying, "I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest." And then Jacob awoke and said, "Surely the Lord is in this place: and I knew it not." (See Genesis 28:13-16.) President Harold B. Lee used to say, "Our Lord is not an absentee father. He is closer to the leaders of this church than you have any idea." He is also closer to us individually than most of us have any idea. The Lord is here, and who knows it? The faithful, those who are willing to be believing, because their greatest desire is to find him and serve him. When he is there, they know it.

All this is not intended to imply that we should be overzealous in looking for the Lord's hand, nor should it imply that God is so involved in human affairs that we are relieved of either our freedom or our responsibility in life. But it does imply that he may well be more involved in our lives than many suppose. Interestingly, the nature of that involvement probably means more, not less, for both our freedom and our responsibility.

So, what kinds of quiet miracles do believers perceive, from which they derive strength, assurance, and spiritual growth?

One example is "the awesome, sobering miracle of the newborn babe—with hands reaching, with eyes watching, with ears listening, and intelligence that responds to truth. . . .Who gave two cells the intelligence to join and divide, to become an eye, or a tooth, or the hair of the head? . . . Surely immortality is no more a miracle than mortality is." [^4]

Another example is to see a grown man cry, when, after years of neglecting his children and his wife, the Spirit penetrates his heart; and he changes—his interests, his allegiance, his countenance, his conduct.

Also, to walk through the valley of evil, and, after coming to oneself, to feel with Alma "that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror." (Alma 36:14.) And then, after much anguish, to finally understand what it means to have a Savior. In Alma's words, "And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold: yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!" (Alma 36:20.) As those who hear the confessions of the truly repentant know, there are many among us who reach that understanding with everlasting gratitude for a life-changing process that naturalistic terms cannot fully explain. That is the miracle of forgiveness.

A further illustration of how the believing heart responds is The Windows of Heaven, the historical filmstory of a modern-day prophet's inspired promise to his people that if they would pay their tithing an awful drought would come to an end. There we see a faithful farmer and his faithful wife, after the planting, the waiting, the watching, and the thirsting, falling to their knees in gratitude in the parched red soil as finally the rains come, pouring down upon their bowed heads.

And then we see President Lorenzo Snow receive a telegram in his office, telling of the rain; and we see him instinctively hasten to kneel at his bedside and say something like, "Oh, what can I do to show my gratitude that thou hast heard the prayers of thy people and thy humble servant? I would give anything, even my life."

Neither that prophet nor those farmers stood by, watching the rain, wondering if perhaps it was just a coincidence. Their attitudes, their experiences, and their instincts told them otherwise. They knew in whom they had trusted.

It should be added that the way people live has much, perhaps everything, to do with how even the still, small miracles influence their lives. "And there was not any man who could do a miracle in the name of Jesus save he were cleansed every whit from his iniquity." (3 Nephi 8:1.) Living up to that condition provides an incentive for righteous living that mere sign-seeking cannot offer.

Moreover, a believing attitude affects not only how we think, but also what we do in response to our religious commitments. The genuine expectation that God will keep his promises makes the believing heart also a faithful heart. In this way, belief leads to action.

There is an analogy here between "investing" in our relationship with the Lord and investing in economic and human relationships. The emerging collapse of communistic economic systems validates Jeremy Bentham's explanation of why private ownership of property is more economically productive than collective ownership: the human motivations that result in economic production simply do not operate fully in the absence of secure expectations about future enjoyment of the fruits of our labors. The will to labor and the will to invest depend on stable rules that assure people they will be allowed to enjoy the products of both their labor and the savings they have risked. Economic systems based on private ownership are premised on those stable rules, while systems of collective ownership are not. Therefore, as recent history demonstrates, collective systems simply cannot be economically competitive, over time, with private systems.

For the same reason, couples who view marriage as a permanent relationship will "invest" far more completely in the relationship than do couples who merely live together temporarily, perhaps waiting to see if the relationship "works out." Those living in a noncommittal, short-term relationship will not invest themselves in the relationship emotionally, financially, or otherwise, because they lack a reasonable belief that the likelihood of future benefits justifies the inconvenience and the self-sacrifice required in relationships of real commitment. Therefore, the skepticism implied by a "non-binding commitment" (a classic oxymoron) becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, because without the voluntary investment of energy, time, and self-restraint, the noncommittal relationship really cannot bear the fruits of enduring mutual support.

So it is in our relationship with the Lord. His is a stable system that assures a guaranteed return on our investments. "I the Lord am bound when ye do what I say." (D&C 82:10.) As a friend once said to me with a knowing wink, "Of course the Lord will bless you. That's his job. " But the fruits of faith do not "just happen." As chapter five suggests more fully, we actually help nourish the development of those fruits by acting in wholehearted reliance on our firm expectation that the Lord will keep his promises. If I believe the Lord will help me move a mountain, I fully invest my energy in starting to move it, even if only one shovel full at a time. If I believe the Lord will bless me with greater financial wisdom when I pay my tithing, I will literally "invest" in that expectation. And when the still, small voice begins to guide my other financial choices, I am more likely both to hear it and to respond to it, because I expected it to come along. When the voice of inspiration knocks at the door of our heart, we won't then ask suspiciously, "Who's there?" Rather, we may say, "Come in—I've been expecting you."

Therefore did King Benjamin teach his people. "Believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things. . . ; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; . . . believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; . . . and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:9-10; emphasis added.)

Many of us have experienced in some way the realization of our own long-awaited rainstorm, our miracle of forgiveness, our lost boy found, our seagulls come. And because of these experiences, we can say with Jacob, "Surely the Lord is in this place." (Genesis 28:16.) Or we can say with Moroni, "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22.)

Yet the real confirmation, the actual realization that he was "in this place," and that he actually fulfills his promises in our own lives, often comes later—the harvest of those early decisions to be believing. "On the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience." (Luke 8:15.) After a few seasons of such harvesting, and of doing what believers do, the faithful, believing heart becomes more and more a knowing heart.

Significantly, those experiences also bring with them increased capacities of character and spirit, and thus is brought to partial fruition the greatest miracle of all—our own divine potential to become Christlike. That is a miracle nature's laws simply do not, perhaps cannot, produce without the trial of our faith. And the beginning of it all is to doubt not, but be believing. That first step and the conduct that follows it are under our exclusive, personal control.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Elijah (New York: G. Schirmer, Inc., n.d.), page 21.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: N. B. Lundwall), 6:5, 7.
[^3] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 1:20.
[^4] Arthur M. Abell, Talks with Great Composers (New York: The Philosophical Library of New York, 1954), pages 5-6.
