Bruce C. Hafen, Believing Heart: Nourishing the Seed of Faith ( 1986)

CHAPTER TWO

"If with All Your Heart"

For ye know that the word hath swelled your souls, and . . . your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand. O then, is not this real? Alma 32:34-35.)

In Mendelssohn's oratorio Elijah are some songs of exquisite and tender spiritual depth. The text from one of them reads: " 'If with all your hearts ye truly seek me, ye shall ever surely find me,' Thus saith our God. Oh! that I knew where I might find Him, that I might even come before His presence! Oh! that I knew, where I might find him! 'If with all your hearts ye truly seek me; Ye shall ever surely find me.' Thus saith our God." [^1]

One fall season not long ago, I found myself thinking more than usual about this song and its message, when our closely knit community experienced several unexpected deaths within the space of a few days. One of these was Don Decker, a favorite English teacher at Ricks College, who died in a climbing accident in the Teton mountains. Another was a close friend of our older children, a high school senior named Howard Pack. Howard died of a sudden heart failure during a long-distance run. It was very hard for our three teenage sons the night the news came to us. We sat up a long time that night, just crying and talking and trying to understand things we really couldn't understand.

Then we learned of the passing of Terry Crapo, an Idaho Falls lawyer and priesthood leader who also taught at the BYU law school. Terry, who was my own age, was for me what Howard Pack was for my sons—a close friend and a rare personal example. I was especially stunned at Terry's loss, partly because of our close relationship, but partly because Terry's contributions were so extraordinary that I couldn't imagine the world getting along without him. He was blessed with rich intellectual gifts and was wholehearted and childlike in his devotion to the Church. His was a believing heart.

When Terry was a BYU student, a perceptive religion teacher named West Belnap said to him, "Terry, we have many people in the Church who have it in their heads, and we have many who have it in their hearts. But we have very, very few who have it in both their heads and their hearts." Brother Belnap admonished Terry to develop his head as well as his heart and then to give both fully in the service of God and other people. Terry Crapo did just that, as well as anyone I have known.

As I sat during Terry's funeral and looked at his wife, Val, and their family sitting on the front row, my mind went back to another funeral and another family, and I found in my memory some needed reassurance. West Belnap, the teacher who touched Terry's life, also touched mine. It was in his class that my wife, Marie, and I first met. The class was called "Your Religious Problems." (We solved our most pressing religious problem by finding each other.) West Belnap, like Terry Crapo, died of cancer in his early forties. He had also served the Church with unusual skill and dedication, having been chairman of Religious Instruction at BYU and chairman of the Adult Correlation Committee for the Church.

I will long remember the talk at West's funeral given by Elder Harold B. Lee, who was then a member of the Council of the Twelve. Elder Lee had associated intimately with West in the work of the Church's correlation committees. Rather than just stating that West had been called to another assignment, Elder Lee parted the veil of his heart enough to let the congregation know of his own pain and of his own searching to understand. He looked at West's wife and eight children on the front row and said something like this: "We say he has gone on to something more important. But as we look at this sorrowing little family, our hearts want to cry out, 'What can possibly be more important than this? And who can do the work as he did it for the university and for the Church?' " He talked further about his experiences with West. Finally he said with a sober calmness, "Nevertheless, we know in whom we have trusted. We do not understand, but we do not complain. We have learned to trust the Lord, our God."

I was stirred by the candor of Elder Lee's testimony. He was so honest. He was not embarrassed to share his true feelings. He was not content with quick, superficial answers to everything. Somehow, his honest acknowledgment of what he did not know gave added strength to what he did know. That kind of testimony is real enough to be strong when the hard times come.

We see testimonies having that kind of depth in the lives of other prophets. Think of the prophet Elijah, in despair after being rejected by those he tried so hard to rescue: "It is enough; . . . O Lord, take away my life." Think of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" Think even of the Savior: "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (See 1 Kings 19:4; D&C 121:1; Matthew 26:39.)

Each of these, in his turn, was faithful to the end. It is as if each had his moment to wonder, "Oh! that I knew where I might find my Lord." Yet each sought him with all his heart, until surely he did find him.

Our Father in Heaven wants to help us develop testimonies strong enough to withstand any kind of pressure, any kind of pain or adversity—testimonies strong enough to return us to his presence. As Joseph Smith wrote:

For a man to lay down his all, his character and reputation, . . . his houses, his lands, . . . his wife and children, and even his own life . . . requires more than mere belief or supposition that he is doing the will of God; but actual knowledge, realizing that, when these sufferings are ended, he will enter into eternal rest, and be a partaker of the glory of God.

A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation; . . . It is through the medium of the sacrifice of all earthly things that men do actually know that they are well pleasing in the sight of God. [^2]

Someone once said you can't visually tell the difference between a strand of cobweb and a strand of powerful cable—until stress is put on the strand. Our testimonies are that way, and for most of us, the days of stress for our testimonies have already begun. It may not be the death of a loved one. We might not yet have been asked to give up something that is really precious to us, though the time for such a test may well come to us by and by. Our current stress is more likely to come in the form of overpowering temptations, which show us that a shallow acceptance of the gospel does not have the power to cope with the full fury of the powers of darkness. Perhaps there is a mission call to a place of illness and disappointment, when we had planned on a mission to a place of unbounded opportunity. Or perhaps there are too many questions to which our limited knowledge simply has no answer, and those who claim to know more than we do taunt us with what appears to be a persuasive certainty.

When those times come, our testimonies must be more than the cobweb strands of a fair-weather faith. They need to be like strands of cable, powerful enough to resist the shafts of him who would destroy us. In our days of stress and trouble, we must be built "upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, . . . that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, . . . and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you, . . . because of the rock upon which ye are built." (Helaman 5:12.)

What, then, are we to do, if we are thus to seek him with all our hearts? I wish to suggest two preliminary qualifications, then some thoughts on the three elements of a complete testimony.

First, we must desire to find God above all other desires. If we want a real testimony, if we want to seek God until we find him, even if we want eternal life—all these things can be ours, if we desire them, so long as we do not desire other things more. We show what we really want by what we do, not just by what we say. So if we say we desire to grow in our faith, but the way we live suggests otherwise, we probably want something else more than we want eternal life. It might be our friends. It might be physical pleasures. Or it might only be that we don't want the Church bothering us with meetings and rules and guilt trips. Whatever it is we want so much, we are likely some day to have it. Not only will the righteous desires of our hearts be granted, the unrighteous desires of our hearts will also be granted. Over the long run, our most deeply held desires will govern our choices, one by one and day by day, until our lives finally add up to what we have really wanted.

Next, we must live worthy of having the Lord's spirit near to us. Brigham Young said:

Pray for the Lord to inspire your hearts. Ask for wisdom and for knowledge. It is our duty to seek after it. Let us seek, and we shall find; but as for His coming down here to pour His Spirit upon you, while you are aiming after the vain and frivolous things of the world; indulging in all the vanity, nonsense, and foolery which surrounds you; drinking in all the filthy abominations which should be spurned from every community on the earth—so long as you continue this course, rest assured—he will not come near you. [^3]

If we are trying to purify our desires and to live righteously, we are then in a position to build our faith in all the elements that make up a complete and deeply rooted testimony of the gospel.

I am struck by the similarity between the process of developing a testimony and the process of falling in love. Love and testimony are two of the most important human experiences, yet often we are unsure how we can be certain that either has come fully into our lives. In finding the love we seek during the courtship years, we often have in mind the personal qualities we are looking for. But even when we meet someone who has everything on our list (the test of reason), there may be something missing: the "spark," that mysterious something that makes us feel love, not just think it (the test of feeling). Yet rational satisfaction and good feelings are still not enough. To know if this relationship is the real thing, we must give it some time (the test of experience). We must see how things go when the "new" wears off. We need to know how the relationship holds up under pressure, whether it grows and stirs, almost whether it takes on a life of its own. As it is in the search for love, so it is in the search for testimony. Let us consider each element: reason, feeling, and experience.

The reasonableness of the gospel message speaks for itself. Indeed, religious faith is a more intellectually sound proposition than I once realized. As my experience grows in the world of reason and evidence, as well as in the world of spiritual things, I am increasingly impatient with those shallow skeptics who imply that religion must be taken solely on faith, as if no evidence for religious propositions exists—and as if no scientific propositions are taken on faith.

I agree with Alma, who told the skeptical Korihor, "All things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion." (Alma 30:44.) Scientific evidence tells us that if the earth were even slightly nearer to the sun, all life here would burn up. If it were even slightly farther away, all life here would freeze. When I read about the fiercely destructive power of earthquakes, volcanoes, and hurricanes, I see no way that we could carry on life as we do if the elements were not held in check by divine laws and powers. If we were truly at the mercy of arbitrary natural forces, wind and sand and tidal waves would bat this planet around like a leaf in a storm.

When I think about the creation, I wonder: What are the odds that a tornado spinning through a junkyard could create a DC-10?

I like the perspective of the restored gospel on the issue of "creationism"—that recently debated question of whether the public schools should be allowed to teach, as an alternative to evolution, the idea that the earth was suddenly created out of nothing. In a recent federal court case brought to test the right of a school board to introduce creationism into the public school curriculum, the judge held the attempt to be an unconstitutional establishment of religion. Part of the judge's difficulty was the absence of scientific evidence for the ex nihilo creation: it is inconsistent with the laws of science for matter to be created from nothing, since matter can be neither created nor destroyed, even though the elements may change their form. But, in contrast to the teachings of some other churches, the restored gospel does not teach that God created the earth from nothing. Rather, "Intelligence . . . was not created or made, neither indeed can be." Moreover, "the elements are eternal." (D&C 93:29, 33.) The earth was therefore "organized and formed" by God—but not from nothing. (See Abraham 4.)

When I think about science and religion, I recall hearing Bishop Henry B. Eyring quote the advice he and his brothers received from their father, a world famous chemist, "Remember, boys, you don't have to believe anything that isn't true."

Evidence for the claims of Joseph Smith continues to grow stronger. We needn't take his testimony and his inspired declarations only on faith—there is compelling evidence in his favor. When Joseph announced the Word of Wisdom, neither he nor anyone in the scientific community knew that tobacco causes lung cancer and is associated with many other health risks. Consider his prophecy about the Civil War. Consider his prophecy about the Latter-day Saints becoming a mighty people in the tops of the mountains of the west.

Consider his calling as a prophet while only a young man. There was nothing strange or unusual about heavenly manifestations to an inexperienced boy as part of a prophetic call. I have a friend who regards the First Vision as "so unlikely." Others speak similarly from within the prison of their twentieth century skepticism to conclude that "we just don't get books from angels"; and from such assumed premises, much incomplete reasoning flows. But if the Bible is evidence for anything, read about the callings of Noah, Abraham, Moses, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Paul, and John the Revelator. All were called in precisely the manner that Joseph was. All spoke with God or angels, just as Joseph did.

In addition, we should consider the impressive body of recent research that authenticates many ancient practices and other factual propositions contained in the Book of Mormon on subjects ranging from the Nephite legal system to geography. (See especially the work of John W. Welch and his colleagues in the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies at Brigham Young University.) Note, for example, the research on wordprints, which suggests that the Book of Mormon couldn't have been written by only one author. Learn also about the Hebrew poetry form called chiasmus. Nobody had heard of chiasmus in Joseph's day. But now this striking literary form, as clear and rigid as a limerick or a sonnet, has been discovered in ancient Hebrew literature. It has also been discovered in the Book of Mormon. Those who wrote on the golden plates knew and used Hebrew literary forms in their reformed Egyptian language—but Joseph Smith apparently didn't even know he had translated into those forms.

Then there are Thor Heyerdahl's recent expeditions in primitive reed boats across the Pacific Ocean and later the Atlantic. These trips show that small, crudely made boats could sail for thousands of miles on strong ocean currents.

Despite great efforts to do so, no one has been able to cast serious doubt on the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. So why doesn't everybody believe in its divine origins? Because God does not allow the case to become so compelling that we are forced to believe. Man's agency is too fundamental to be so compromised.

And yet, if our testimonies are based completely on empirical evidence or rational analysis, they are still more cobwebs than cable strands. Reason cannot always prevail over such opposing forces as temptation and prejudice. Also, science and history never do lead to absolute conclusions—for or against religious or other claims. Those disciplines are by their very nature subject to new evidence and new interpretations of old evidence. We would never allow in a modern court of law most of the "evidence" that passes for history in contemporary battles over the truth of this or that historical claim, because most of the available evidence violates the constitutional guarantees of due process. No one could obtain a fair trial many years after crucial events have taken place, which is one reason why laws exist to bar old legal claims.

To be strong, then, a testimony must also be built on spiritual feelings and insights. The scriptures are full of references to the influence of the Spirit on our feelings. The prophet Alma speaks of "when you feel these swelling motions," in addition to the more intellectual experience of discovering that truth can "enlighten my understanding." (Alma 32:28.) Nephi talks to his brothers about being past feeling and chastises them because they could not feel the words of the Spirit. (See 1 Nephi 17:45.)

Moroni explains that the Holy Ghost will manifest the truth to us if we pray with a sincere heart and real intent—after doing our homework. (Moroni 10:4-5.) Nephi tells us that the Holy Ghost carries his power to the hearts of the children of men. (See 2 Nephi 33:1.) Thus, the men who talked with the resurrected Christ without recognizing him on the road to Emmaus said afterward, when they realized who he was, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way?" (Luke 24:32.)

The Spirit can also convey a feeling of peace rather than a feeling of burning. As the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery: "Cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:22-23.)

I remember the night when, as a young missionary, I first became aware of the Holy Ghost bearing witness to a sincere investigator. As my companion bore his testimony to her about the Resurrection, tears filled her eyes, and I began to feel as though my heart would burst from the overflowing of spiritual force. As we left her home, I asked my companion if he had felt anything unusual during our discussion. He smiled at me knowingly and said, "Do you know what that was?" Then, recognizing that this was a new but very important experience for me, he said, "Elder Hafen, that was the Holy Ghost bearing witness of the truth. There is no other feeling like that. We may not feel it often. You can't turn it off and on like a water tap. But when in a rare moment it comes, you know what it is."

My companion's observation calls to mind the verse from Kahlil Gibran on love, in which I will substitute the word Spirit for the word love: "Think not that you can control the course of the Spirit, for the Spirit, if it finds you worthy, controls your course."

On a more recent occasion, I felt that same Spirit again, as did one of my children. We were gathered at one of those multifamily home evenings at the grandparents' house, with paper plates and chunks of hamburger buns and potato chips strewn all over the backyard. Little children were running and laughing with their cousins in a totally happy kind of bedlam. Then Grandpa mentioned that he would like to have everyone come into the living room and sit down. All the little grandchildren stopped playing and trooped into the house, where they sat down until they filled the living room floor. Everyone was very quiet, without knowing quite why they should be.

Grandpa stood in the center of the room, supporting himself with the back of a chair. He told us that he had been having trouble recovering from a recent surgery and felt the need for a blessing. He asked his sons-in-law to anoint him and bless him through the power of the priesthood. We surrounded his chair and performed the ordinance with great love and respect for him. As we finished, he thanked us for our faith and prayers, and he bore his testimony to his posterity. He seemed so quietly majestic, standing there talking to us. He told us that all he ever wants after he dies is to live with the very people who were in that room. Then he was done.

That was it—no song or prayer—everyone just began shuffling around to go pick up in the yard and clean up the kitchen.

Just then, one of our sons, who was about twelve, and a boy not then easily given to expressing personal feelings, came over to me. He was brushing away the tears from his eyes and asking, "Dad, what's the matter with me? Why am I crying? I'm not sad—I'm happy for Grandpa, and I just love him, and I want him to get better."

I said, "Why don't you go tell him that?" He ran to his grandpa and hugged him tightly and said something to him, then he came back to me even more visibly affected than before. He still wanted to know why he was reacting as he was. Then I told him, as my missionary companion had told me many years before, that this was the Holy Ghost. He was feeling love and appreciation for the priesthood and was being told by the Spirit that what he sensed was true and good. Sensing that this was one of those rare teaching moments, I asked him never to forget what this felt like, because it was the witness of the Spirit.

At an earlier time in my life, I somehow gained the impression that spiritual feelings were not within the recognized categories of epistemology—the accepted ways of "knowing" things. Because inspired feelings and impressions are not necessarily empirical (based on typical sensory observation) or rational (based on reasoning through logical thought processes), I mistakenly believed that they were part of some category of learning that belonged only to the Church. I have since discovered that "inner sight" is a source of knowledge that has long been recognized as legitimate and important in the intellectual heritage of Western civilization, even though various writers and artists have obviously had different perspectives on the subject.

The premises from which scientists reason must come from some place, since they are not self-evident. They may begin from the findings of earlier experiments, they may be based on a hunch or a preconceived bias, they may be a purely creative hypothesis, or they may indeed be provided from a divine source. One of the most celebrated of history's explorers, Columbus, was so directed: "The spirit of God . . . came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land." (1 Nephi 13:12.)

Intuitive insights have also played an important role in the arts, especially in the creative process. Nowhere is the place of divine inspiration more forthrightly acknowledged by a great artistic master than in the words of the German composer, Johannes Brahms. Brahms mentioned this very personal dimension of his experience only near the end of his long life, in an interview encouraged by his closest friend. Describing his own creative process, he said:

I immediately feel vibrations that thrill my whole being. These are the Spirit illuminating the soul power within, and in this exalted state, I see clearly what is obscure in my ordinary moods; then I feel capable of drawing inspiration from above, as Beethoven did. . . . Straight-way the ideas flow in upon me, directly from God, and not only do I see distinct themes in my mind's eye, but they are clothed in the right forms, harmonies and orchestration. [^4]

Brahms tempered this recognition of divine help with what seemed to him an obvious requirement: the need for great skill and exertion in applying the basic principles of music. I compare this to the roles of reason and experience as supplements to spiritual feelings. He said, "Don't make the mistake of thinking that because I attach such importance to inspiration from above, that that is all there is to it, by no means.

Structure is just as consequential, for without craftsmanship, inspiration is as sounding brass or tinkling cymbal." [^5]

Still, Brahms thought the works of "young composers who are atheists" would be "doomed to speedy oblivion, because they are utterly lacking in inspiration. Their works are purely cerebral." [^6] Based on his own experience, the composer honestly believed that "the powers from which all truly great composers like Mozart, Schubert, Bach and Beethoven drew their inspiration is the same power that enabled Jesus to work his miracles. It is the power that created our earth and the whole universe." [^7]

There will be both rationality and feeling in our experiences with testimony, and both are legitimate, respectable sources of knowledge. Yet we know that even spiritual feelings can be forgotten and that sometimes we may confuse lesser emotions with truly inspired impressions. Furthermore, our feelings can to some extent be influenced by unwise people who would manipulate them. And reason may not have the staying power against adversity that we will need if we are not to stand on borrowed light. Something more is necessary.

A third element in the development of testimony is simply experience. Our understanding of truth needs an incubation period, a chance to settle in and take root in preparation for the fruit that can eventually be borne. The test of time and the nurturing patience that go with it are eloquently described in Alma 32. There the thoughtful prophet teaches us what happens to the good seed after we have planted, nourished, and watered it. He warns of the hazards that are natural after the seed takes root and sprouts, when the heat of the sun can scorch the tender plant.

Alma teaches us also about the interactive relationship between faith and knowledge as part of the experiential process. After our experience confirms the early stages of growth in our testimony, it is still not an "either-or" proposition, in which we either "know" or "believe." There are elements of both. In the beginning of the process, we "cannot know" of the "surety" of God's words, for we are wholly without experience. At that stage, we act on the basis of faith, following our desires as a free will matter of choice. After our initial experiences, however, we are able to testify of what we know, for "[our] knowledge is perfect in that thing." (Alma 32:34.) Those who pay tithing when they fear they can't afford it are often blessed with new ideas to better manage their remaining funds; and suddenly they know something that nontithepayers cannot understand. From this they can generalize their witness to a knowledge, based on actual experience, that God keeps his promises. This level of certainty also becomes the foundation for the next steps in the development of "a perfect knowledge."

As our testimonies take root and draw from the rich soil of experience, we also encounter adversity. As Moroni wrote, "Dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) As our knowledge grows, we learn that the wind whistles loudest around the highest peaks. It is in this stage that we learn the difference between cobwebs and cables. But as we nourish our seedling testimony, building on our portion of sure knowledge by stretching the reach of our faith ever further, our confidence matures and our perspective broadens. Our learning from experience over time yields knowledge having a special kind of depth, for the maturing of our spiritual understanding reflects itself in the maturing of our own character. And one day "ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, . . . and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled." (Alma 32:42.)

With a perspective that beautifully blends both reason and feeling into the large framework of experience, Brigham Young put it this way:

"How shall I know?" says one. By obeying the commandments given to you. The Lord has said, Go into the waters of baptism and be baptized for the remission of your sins, and you shall receive a witness that I am telling you the truth. How? By baptism and the laying on of hands alone? No. By seeing the sick healed? No, but by the Spirit that shall come unto you through obedience, which will make you feel like little children, and cause you to delight in doing good, to love your Father in Heaven and the society of the righteous. Have you malice and wrath then? No, it is taken from you, and you feel like the child in its mother's lap. You will feel kind to your children, to your brothers and sisters, to your parents and neighbors, and to all around you; you will feel a glow, as of fire, burning within you. And if you open your mouths to talk you will declare ideas which you did not formerly think of; they will flow into your mind, even such as you have not thought of for years. The scriptures will be opened to you, and you will see how clear and reasonable everything is which this or that Elder teaches you. Your hearts will be comforted, you can lie down and sleep in peace, and wake up with feelings as pleasant as the breezes of summer. This is a witness to you. [^8]

Our testimonies draw in this way on all the dimensions of our experience, until we look back on a lifetime of impressions and insights that represent the complete fabric of a real testimony, woven one strong strand at a time. When I think in that way of what it means to know the gospel is true, many images occur to me:

Having a testimony means being alone in the mountains on a clear evening, looking at all those stars, and sensing that your life really does have meaning; sensing that you are not alone, that heaven is a real place and God is a real person, and that he knows and cares about you.

It means feeling the strength to control yourself when the forces of evil would have you do otherwise. It's realizing that this year you don't feel comfortable with those old jokes and words your friends used to say, sensing that you really have changed in your feelings about what matters, and now you know that you can continue to change and become the way you want to be.

Having a testimony is being in a meeting when a man who looks like a prophet enters the room, and feeling your heart swell as everybody spontaneously stands up and begins to sing, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and now you want to sing too.

It's being far away from home, getting acquainted with some decent person who doesn't know anything about the Church, then feeling good inside as you tell him about Joseph Smith. And as you answer his questions, you say to yourself, It's true—what I am saying is really true; and you want your friend to understand, for his own happiness—and when he begins to see it, somehow you see it better too.

It means having something to really pray about, and after finding some quiet place where you can just talk and plead, sensing that somebody is listening to you and cares about what you are saying.

It's coming home late after a date, going to your mom's room, and telling her through your laughter or your tears how the evening was, and having her take your hand in hers to tell you that she really cares about your happiness, because she has always known you were sent to her from heaven.

Having a testimony is setting an example for a friend who mocks the Church, and after beginning to wonder if you're the one who is on the wrong track, one day hearing her say to you, "Thank you for being the way you are, for being good to me when I didn't deserve it. I know this sounds strange coming from me, but I want to live a better life. Will you help me?"

It is also kneeling over the altar in a sacred room, taking your sweetheart by the hand, half listening to the great promises being said over you by one who has authority, seeing in your mind's eye the panorama of your whole life pass before you. And you feel overcome with gratitude that you are there, for you doubt that you deserve it; yet there comes an assurance that God has accepted you now, both of you, and that love eternal and life eternal are all somehow part of the same thing.

A testimony means bouncing a little child on your knee, and noticing for the first time that his smile is like your own; and then when you begin to feel what you know he feels, you taste what it means to have joy in your posterity.

It means seeing someone you love in temple clothes, in a casket, and hearing through your grief an inner voice assuring you with a deep peace that death is as natural as birth, and that your relationship with that person will endure. It is the peace that surpasses understanding, as your heart tells you things your mind does not know.

It is a grandmother and grandfather sitting side by side, close to the fireplace, after a day of remembering and sharing with their posterity. And as their seasoned hands touch in a moment of tender communication, slight smiles of knowing satisfaction pass between them, and they thank God once more that, despite all the tight places along the way, life's journey and the fulfillment of the Lord's promises have been sweet and good.

And though no combination of words seems complete enough to say what it all means to you, and it is almost too personal to talk about even if you could find the words, the important thing is your sense, deep down, that the gospel really is true. Then, if you continue to purify your desires and keep searching to find God, that quest will guide you and fulfill you all the days of your life.

"But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

"When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee . . . , if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice, . . . he will not forsake thee." (Deuteronomy 4:29-31.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Personal Knowledge (New York: Harper and Row, 1964).
[^2] Personal Knowledge, page 53.
[^3] Personal Knowledge, page 53.
[^4] See Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.)
[^5] 5. Talks with Great Composers, page 63.
[^6] 6. Talks with Great Composers, page 21.
[^7] 7. Talks with Great Composers, page 11.
[^8] 8. Journal of Discourses, 3:211.
