Bruce C. Hafen, Believing Heart: Nourishing the Seed of Faith ( 1986)

CHAPTER FOUR

Our Dealing with Uncertainty

Behold, if it be a true seed, . . . if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold it will begin to swell within your breast. . . . If ye will nourish the word . . . it shall take root; and . . . behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is . . . sweet above all that is sweet. (Alma 32:28, 41-42.)

Early in life, most of us think in terms of black or white—there is very little gray in either the intellectual or the spiritual dimension of our perspective. Thus, most of the freshmen at Brigham Young University and Ricks College have a childlike optimism and loyalty that makes them wonderfully teachable and pleasant. It is typical of these young men and women to trust their teachers, to believe what they read, and to respond with boundless enthusiasm to invitations for Church service.

Where else but in a student ward comprised mostly of freshmen would you find a Church member so thrilled to be called by the bishop as hymn book coordinator, or Relief Society Sunday morning orange juice specialist? As a returned missionary told me, one thing he likes best about being in a ward of freshmen and sophomores is that when topics such as faith or repentance are raised for discussion, nobody yawns.

As time goes on, however, experience often introduces a new dimension to a student's perspective. In general, I would characterize this new dimension as a growing awareness that there is something of a gap between the real and the ideal, between what is and what ought to be.

This gap has been described elsewhere: "[I]magine two circles, one inside the other. The inner boundary is the real, or what is. The outer boundary is the ideal, or what ought to be. We stand at the inner boundary, reaching out, trying to pull reality closer to the lofty ideals to which we have committed ourselves." We become "aware of the distance between these two boundaries when we realize that some things about ourselves are not what we wish they were, or what they ought to be. As that realization grows, so can our level of frustration." [^1]

Our experience with Church-owned institutions can make us especially vulnerable to the disillusionment that sometimes follows our awareness of this gap—in part because our "ideal" expectations may be unusually high. A BYU student, for example, may find it very frustrating to do battle with the great red tape machines that seem to control the processes of admission, registering for classes, or transferring credits from another college. She may remain unknown and nameless to her student ward bishop for weeks or even months, or she may brush up against a faculty member whose Church commitments are less visible than she had expected them to be.

At a more personal, and therefore more spiritual, level, perhaps an important prayer goes too long unanswered; or one suffers a devastating setback with grades, with good health, or with the prospects for marriage. And in such times of great need, the heavens may seem closed. One may also become increasingly conscious of others' imperfections, including those of parents, other Church members, or a Church leader. When we become acquainted at an adult level with those who have been our heroes, we naturally begin to see their human limitations. LDS students may also find themselves struggling to clarify the previously unarticulated assumptions of their personal worldview, as they first confront such controversial topics as feminism or differing political views among Church members.

New missionaries may discover a jarring sense of distance between the real and the ideal as they move from the "pre-existence" of the Missionary Training Center to the "mortality" of daily life in an assigned field of labor. I vividly recall my feelings of overwhelming discouragement during my first few weeks as a missionary in a foreign country. I had studied the language in college, but hearing the "natives" speak their mother tongue initially sounded in my ears as so much gibberish; I understood virtually nothing and was literally speechless for the first time I could remember.

And even after the language began to make sense, I repeatedly fought back the tears of disappointment when, in other dimensions of missionary service, the promised fruits of a "positive mental attitude" seemed frequently to elude me. I recall, for instance, my combined feeling of disbelief and pain the night we dropped off a newly baptized couple in front of their apartment, then after turning around down the block and driving past their apartment going the other way, our headlights illuminated the image of the new convert—his hair still wet from the baptism—lighting up a cigarette just outside his front door.

There is a kind of poignancy in those moments when we first discover that there might be some limitations to the idea that you can do anything you make up your mind to do. I once gave everything I had to that proposition, in my determination to be the greatest shot-putter in the history of my junior high school. But I simply was not big enough—it really was hopeless.

Experiences such as these can produce confusion and uncertainty—in a word, ambiguity—and we may yearn with nostalgia for simpler, easier times, when life seemed not only more clear but more under our control. We might sense within ourselves the beginnings of skepticism, of criticism, of unwillingness to respond to authority or to invitations to commit ourselves to high-sounding goals or projects that are not very realistic.

Not everybody will encounter what I have been describing, and I do not mean to suggest that everyone must encounter such experiences. However, college students are probably more likely to encounter "ambiguity" than almost any other group.

The fundamental teachings of the restored gospel are potent, clear, and unambiguous. However, it is possible on occasion to encounter some ambiguity even in studying the scriptures. Consider, for example, the case of Nephi, who killed Laban in order to obtain the brass plates of scripture. That situation is not free from ambiguity until the reader realizes that God himself, who gave the original commandment against murder, was also the origin of Nephi's instructions in that exceptional case.

Consider also the case of Peter on the night he denied any knowledge of his Master three times in succession. We typically regard Peter as something of a weakling whose commitment was not strong enough to make him rise to the Savior's defense. But I once heard President Spencer W. Kimball offer an alternative interpretation of Peter's behavior. In a talk to a BYU audience in 1971, President Kimball, then a member of the Council of the Twelve, said the Savior's statement that Peter would deny him three times before the cock crowed just might have been a request to Peter, not a prediction. Jesus might have been instructing his chief Apostle to deny any association with him in order to ensure strong leadership for the Church after the Crucifixion. [^2]

As President Kimball asked in his talk, who could doubt Peter's willingness to stand up and be counted? Think of his boldness in striking off the guard's ear with his sword when the Savior was arrested in Gethsemane. President Kimball did not offer this view as the only interpretation, but he did suggest there is enough justification for it that it should be considered. So what is the answer—was Peter a coward, or was he so crucial to the survival of the Church that he was prohibited from risking his life? We are not sure. The scriptures don't give us enough information about Peter's motivation to clarify the ambiguity.

Consider other passages. The Lord has said that he cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance. (See D&C 1:31.) Yet elsewhere he said, "I have forgiven you your sins." (D&C 64:3.) There is indeed a principle of justice, but there is also a principle of mercy. At times these two correct principles can seem inconsistent, until the unifying higher principle of the Atonement does its work.

Moreover, the Savior said, "Do not your alms before men, to be seen of them." (Matthew 6:1.) But he also said, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works." (Matthew 5:16.)

Finally, he once said, "In me ye might have peace." (John 16:33.) And the angels, in announcing his coming, sang, "On earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.) "For unto us a child is born . . . The Prince of Peace." (Isaiah 9:6.) Yet elsewhere he said, "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword." (Matthew 10:34.)

These references illustrate that even though God has given us correct principles by which we may govern ourselves, these very principles may at times be in conflict. Choosing between two principled alternatives (two "goods") is far more difficult than choosing when a stark and obvious contrast pits good against evil.

We face concrete examples of that process every day as we attempt to fulfill our duties to family, church, community, and professional concerns. I remember hearing a young mother of several children, who had a responsible Church position and a busy husband, express her bewilderment as she tried to decide what should come first in her life and when. Someone advised her, "Well, just be sure you put the Lord's work first." Her reply was, "But what if it is all the Lord's work?"

My wife and I often wonder how we should deal with our children in circumstances that were not anticipated by any of the books on child-rearing. Sometimes one of us has a clear feeling about what should be done, but often I have no idea what approach is best, so I simply defer to her with great conviction, "Well, dear, just be sure you do the right thing."

Church and family life are not the only places where the right answer is not always on the tip of our tongues. If you would stretch your mind about the implications of ambiguity, think back to the Vietnam War—should our nation have tried to do more or less than it did? Or consider whether we should sell all we have and donate our surplus to the millions of people who are starving. We might also ask how much governmental intervention into the regulation of business and private life is too much.

The people on the extreme sides of these questions convey great certainty about what should be done. However, I think some of these people would rather be certain than right.

Turning to one more fertile field to illustrate the naturalness of ambiguity, I remember Arthur Henry King's statement that most truly great literary works raise a profound question about a human problem, explore the question skillfully and in depth, and then leave the matter for the reader to resolve. He added that if the resolution seems too clear or too easy, the literature is perhaps not very good, or else those reading it have missed its point.

Recall, for example, Dostoevsky's novel, The Idiot, where the question is seriously raised whether it is possible for a true Christian to love unselfishly. The main character in the story is a pure and good man who loves two different women in two very different ways. One he loves as most men love women—she cares for him, she helps him, he is attracted to her romantically, and she could make his life very happy. The other woman—a pathetically inadequate person—he loves primarily because she needs him desperately and he has a compassionate heart. Posing the dilemma of which woman the man should marry, Dostoesvky seems to ask whether it is realistically possible to be totally devoted to the unselfish ideals of Christianity. As we might expect, he leaves that huge question unresolved, forcing the reader to ponder it for himself.

I have intentionally tried to suggest a wide variety of instances in which the answers we may seek are not as obvious as we might have expected. My suggestion is that some uncertainty is characteristic of the mortal experience. The mists of darkness in Lehi's dream are, for that very reason, a strong symbolic representation of life as we face it on this planet. There are, of course, many things very certain and very clear, as so beautifully represented by the iron rod in Lehi's dream; but there is enough complexity to make the topic of ambiguity worthy of discussion.

Given, then, the existence of a gap for most of us between where we stand and where we would like to be, and given that we will have at least some experiences that make us wonder what we are to do, I think there are three different levels in dealing with ambiguity.

At level one, there are two typical attitudes, one of which is that we simply do not—perhaps cannot—even see the problems that exist. Some seem almost consciously to filter out any perception of a gap between the real and the ideal. For those in this category, the gospel at its best is a firm handshake, an enthusiastic greeting, and a smiley button. Their mission was the best, their ward is the best, and every new day is probably going to be the best day they ever had. These cheerful ones are happy, spontaneous, optimistic, and they always manage to hang loose. They are able to weather many storms that would seem formidable to more pessimistic types, though one wonders if they have somehow missed hearing that a storm was going on.

A second group at level one has quite a different problem with the gap between what is and what ought to be. Those in this category eliminate the frustrating distance between the real and the ideal by, in effect, erasing the inner circle of reality. They cling to the ideal so single-mindedly that they just don't feel the pain that would come from facing the truth about themselves, about others, or about the world around them. I suppose it is this category that is so frequently represented in the letters to the editor of the school papers at BYU and Ricks, where such shock is occasionally expressed that some person or some part of the institution has fallen short of perfection and the writer is aghast—"surely not at the Lord's university."

Those in this group seem unable to distinguish between imperfections that matter a great deal and those that may not matter so much. I think Hugh Nibley must have had them in mind when he once spoke of those who find it more commendable to get up at 5:00 A.M. to write a bad book than it is to get up at 9:00 A.M. to write a good book. While self-discipline is a virtue, it is obvious to Brother Nibley that the exact hour when we arise is not as important as what we do once we are up.

I recall a group of students who once discussed which of the two types of people I have just described offered the most appropriate model for emulation. They felt they had to choose between being relaxed and happy about the gospel or being an intense perfectionist. After listening to the discussion, I felt that both of these categories suffer from the same limitation. It is not much of a choice when one must select between a frantic concern with perfection and a forced superficial happiness.

Both perspectives lack depth; they understand things too quickly, and they may draw conclusions from their experience too easily. Neither is well prepared for adversity, and I fear that the first strong wind that comes along will blow them over. I believe this is primarily because their roots have not sunk far enough into the soil of experience to establish a firm foundation. Both also reflect the thinness of a philosophy that is untempered by common sense. In both cases, it would be helpful simply to be more realistic about life's experiences, even if that means facing some questions and limitations that leave us feeling uncomfortable. That very discomfort can motivate us toward real growth. As President Harold B. Lee said, the true church is intended not only to comfort the afflicted, but to afflict the comfortable.

We should then step up to level two, where we see things for what they are, for only then can we deal with reality in a meaningful and constructive way.

If we are not willing to grapple with the frustration that comes from facing bravely the uncertainties we encounter, we may never develop the kind of spiritual maturity that is necessary for our ultimate preparations. Heber C. Kimball once said the Church has yet to pass through some very close places, and those who are living on "borrowed light" will not be able to stand when those days come.

We need to develop the capacity to form judgments of our own about the value of ideas, opportunities, or people who may come into our lives. We won't always have the security of knowing whether a certain idea is "Church approved," because new ideas don't always come along with little tags attached to them saying whether they have been reviewed at Church headquarters. Whether in the form of music, books, friends, or opportunities to serve, there is much that is lovely, of good report, and praiseworthy that is not the subject of detailed discussion in Church manuals or courses of instruction. Those who will not risk exposure to experiences that are not obviously related to some Church word or program will, I believe, live less abundant and meaningful lives than the Lord intends.

We must develop sufficient independence of judgment and maturity of perspective that we are prepared to handle the shafts and whirlwinds of adversity and contradiction that may come to us. When those times come, we cannot be living on borrowed light. We should not be deceived by the clear-cut labels others may use to describe circumstances that are, in fact, not so clear. Our encounters with reality and disappointment are, actually, vital stages in the development of our maturity and understanding.

Despite the value of a level-two awareness, however, there are some serious hazards at this stage. One's acceptance of the clouds of uncertainty may be so complete that the iron rod fades into the receding mist and skepticism becomes a guiding philosophy. Often, this perspective comes from erasing the outer circle, representing the ideal, or what ought to be, and then focusing excessively on the inner circle of reality.

While teaching law school, I noticed how common it is for first-year law students to experience great frustration as they discover that our legal system is characterized not by hard, fast rules, but by legal principles that often appear to contradict each other. I recall one new student who approached me after class to express the confusion he was encountering in his study of the law. He said he had what he called "a low tolerance for ambiguity." He had been wondering if part of his problem was that only weeks before, he had returned from a mission, where everything was crisp and clear, where even many of the words he spoke were provided for him. To feel successful, all he had to do was follow the step-by-step plan given him for each day and each task on his mission. Law school was making him feel totally at sea as he groped for simple guidelines that would tell him what to do. His circumstance was one more example of what is typical of college and university students in the early years of their experience.

However, by the time our law students reach their third year of study, it is not uncommon for them to develop such a high tolerance for ambiguity that they are skeptical about everything. Where formerly they felt they had all the answers, but just did not know what the questions were, they now seem to have all the questions but few of the answers.

I find myself wanting to tell our third-year law students that those who take too much delight in their finely honed tools of skepticism and dispassionate analysis will limit their effectiveness, in the Church and elsewhere, because they can become contentious, standoffish, arrogant, and unwilling to commit themselves. I have seen some of them try out their new intellectual tools in a priesthood quorum or a Sunday School class. A well-meaning teacher will make a point they think is a little silly, and they will feel an irresistible urge to leap to their feet and publicly deflate the teacher's momentum. If they are successful, they begin looking for other opportunities to point out the exception to any rule anybody can state. They begin to delight in cross-examination of the unsuspecting, just looking for somebody's bubble of idealism floating around so that they can pop it with their shiny new pin of skepticism. And in all that, they fail to realize that when some of those bubbles pop, out goes much of the feeling of trust, loyalty, harmony, and sincerity so essential to preserving the Spirit of the Lord.

If that begins to happen in our wards, in our homes, or in our marriages, we will have begun to destroy the fragile fabric of trust that binds us together in all loving relationships. People may come away from their encounters with us wondering how we can possibly have a deep commitment to the gospel and say some of the things we say.

I am not suggesting that we should always just smile and nod our approval, implying that everything is wonderful and that our highest hope is for everybody to have a nice day. That is level one. I am suggesting that we must realize the potential for evil as well as good that may come with what education can do to our minds and our way of dealing with other people.

The dangers of which I speak are not limited to our relations with others. They can become very personal, prying into our own hearts in unhealthy ways. The ability to acknowledge ambiguity is not a final form of enlightenment. Once our increased tolerance and patience enable us to look longer and harder at difficult questions and pat answers, we must be very careful, lest our basic posture toward Church-related matters gradually shift from being committed to being noncommittal. That is not a healthy posture.

Indeed, in many ways, a Church member who moves from a stage of commitment to a stage of being tentative and noncommittal is in a worse position than one who has never experienced a basic commitment. The previously committed person may too easily assume that he has already been through the "positive-mental-attitude" routine and "knows better" now, as he judges things. He may assume that being submissive, meek, obedient, and humble are matters with which he is already familiar, and that he has finally outgrown the need to work very hard at being that way again. Those are the assumptions of a hardened heart.

I once had an experience that taught me a great lesson about the way a highly developed tolerance for "being realistic" can inhibit the workings of the Spirit in our lives. When I had been on my mission in Germany about a year, I was assigned to work with a brand new missionary named Elder Keeler, who had just arrived fresh from converting, so he thought, all the stewardesses on the plane from New York to Frankfurt. Within a few days of his arrival, I was called to a meeting in another city and had to leave him to work in our city with another inexperienced missionary whose companion went with me. I returned late that night.

The next morning I asked him how his day had gone. He broke into an enthusiastic smile and said he had found a family who would surely join the Church. In our mission, it was rare to see anyone join the Church, let alone a whole family. I asked for more details, but in his excitement he had forgotten to write down either the name or the address. All he could remember was that the family lived on the top floor of a big apartment house. "Oh, that's great," I thought to myself as I contemplated all those flights of stairs. He also explained that he knew so little German that he had exchanged but a few words with the woman who answered the door. But he did think she wanted us to come back—and he wanted to go find her and have me talk to her that very minute. I explained that the people who don't slam the door in our faces do not necessarily intend to join the Church. But off we went to find her, mostly to humor him. He couldn't remember the right street, either, so we picked a likely spot and began climbing up and down those endless polished staircases.

After a frustrating hour, I decided I had to level with him. Based on my many months of experience, I said, it was simply not worth our time to try any longer to find her. I had developed a tolerance for the realities of missionary work and simply knew more than he did about it. His eyes filled with tears and his lower lip began to tremble. "Elder Hafen," he said, "I came on my mission to find the honest in heart. The Spirit told me that that woman will someday be a member of the Church." So I decided to teach him a lesson. I raced him up one staircase after another until he was ready to drop, and so was I. "Elder Keeler," I asked, "had enough?" "No," he said. "We've got to find her." I began to smolder. I decided to work him until he begged to stop—then maybe he would get the message.

Finally at the top of a long flight of stairs, we found the apartment. She came to the door. He thrashed my ribs with his elbow, and whispered loudly, "That's her, Elder. That's the one. Talk to her!"

Not long ago, that woman, her husband, and two of their five children were in our home. They had come from Germany to pick up their son, who had just completed a mission in northern Utah. Their oldest daughter has served a mission in northern Germany, the woman has been a Relief Society president, and her husband has been a bishop. We enjoyed a long, refreshing visit with them, recalling our memories of their conversion experience and sharing our experiences in the Church over the course of twenty years.

That experience is a lesson I can never forget about the limitations of skepticism and the tolerance for ambiguity that comes with learning and experience. I hope that I will never be so aware of "reality" that I am unresponsive to the whisperings of heaven.

It seems to me that the most productive response to ambiguity is at level three, where we view things not only with our eyes wide open but with our hearts wide open as well. When we do that, there will be many times when we are called upon to take some action, even though we need more evidence before knowing what to do. Such occasions may range from following the counsel of the prophets when we don't understand the basis for their conclusions, to accepting a home-teaching assignment when we are far too busy to take on any more projects. My experience has taught me always to give the Lord and his Church the benefit of any doubts I may have when some such case seems too close to call.

I stress that the willingness to be believing and accepting in these cases is a very different matter from blind obedience. It is, rather, a loving and knowing kind of obedience.

The English writer G. K. Chesterton once distinguished among "optimists," "pessimists," and "improvers," which roughly corresponds to my three levels of dealing with ambiguity. He concluded that both the optimists and the pessimists look too much at only one side of things. He observed that neither the extreme optimist nor the extreme pessimist would ever be of much help in improving the human condition, because people can't solve problems unless they are willing to acknowledge that a problem exists and yet also retain enough genuine loyalty to do something about it.

More specifically, Chesterton wrote that the evil of the excessive optimist (level one) is that he will "defend the indefensible. He is the jingo of the universe; he will say, 'My cosmos, right or wrong.' He will be less inclined to the reform of things; more inclined to a sort of frontbench official answer to all attacks, soothing everyone with assurances. He will not wash the world, but whitewash the world."

On the other hand, the evil of the pessimist (level two), wrote Chesterton, is "not that he chastises gods and men, but that he does not love what he chastises." In being the so-called "candid friend," the pessimist is not really candid. Chesterton continued: "He is keeping something back—his own gloomy pleasure in saying unpleasant things. He has a secret desire to hurt, not merely to help. . . . He is using the ugly knowledge which was allowed him [in order] to strengthen the army, to discourage people from joining it." [^3]

In going on to describe the "improvers," or level three, Chesterton illustrates by referring to women who are loyal to those who need them:

Some stupid people started the idea that because women obviously back up their own people through everything, therefore women are blind and do not see anything. They can hardly have known any women. The same women who are ready to defend their men through thick and thin . . . are almost morbidly lucid about the thinness of his excuses or the thickness of his head. . . . Love is not blind; that is the last thing that it is. Love is bound; and the more it is bound the less it is blind. [^4]

Perhaps President Harold B. Lee was thinking of Chesterton's point about women when he used to say, "Behind every great man, there is an amazed woman."

Chesterton's arranging of these categories makes me think of one other way to compare the differing levels of perspective that people bring to the way they cope with ambiguity. Consider the metaphorical image of "lead, kindly light." At level one, people either do not or cannot see that there are both a kindly light and an encircling gloom, or even if they see both, they can discern no real difference between the two. At level two, the difference is acutely apparent, but one's acceptance of the ambiguity may be so wholeheartedly pessimistic as to say, "Remember that the hour is darkest just before everything goes completely black."

How different are these responses from that calm but honest prayer at level three,

Lead, kindly Light, Amid th' encircling gloom; Lead thou me on. . . . I do not ask to see The distant scene—One step enough for me. [^5]

Consider now a final illustration of one who stood at level three. He had passed from level one because his eyes were fully open to the reality, including some of the pain, of seeing things for what they were. Yet he had moved from a level-two kind of realism to a third level where his mature perspective permitted what he saw with those wide-open eyes to be subordinated to what he felt in a wide-open heart.

The man in this case was my own father, who died some years ago. At the time of this incident, he was in his mid-fifties and was very involved in his professional life and in other heavy obligations that frequently took him out of town for several days at a time. He was tired. At a much earlier time in his life he had served for ten years in a stake presidency and had fulfilled numerous other assignments for the Church. One day a friend approached him saying that he had just been called to be the bishop of their ward. He felt he couldn't possibly accept the assignment unless my father would act as his first counselor.

It is one thing to be called as a counselor in the bishopric when one is young and full of fresh enthusiasm to learn about leadership in the Church, and when one's time is not heavily committed. One might understandably have a somewhat different attitude at a later time in life. Here are the inner thoughts of my father's heart as he wrote them that day in his personal journal:

My first reaction was, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. . . . I know something of the work required of a bishopric; it is a constant, continual grind; there is no let up. . . . I am busy and my state affairs demand what spare time and energy I have. In some respects I am not humble and prayerful enough; I have not always been willing to submit unquestioningly to all the decisions of the Church . . . but neither do I feel that I can say no to any call that is made by the Church, and so now I add to my first reaction, "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt."

I will resolve to do it as best I can. There will be times when I will chafe under the endless meetings, but I am going to get in tune with the program of the Church in every way. I do not intend to get sanctimonious, but I know there must be no reservations in my heart about my duties and responsibilities. The work of the Church will have to come first. It will not he hard for me to pay my tithing and attend regularly, as I have been doing that. But I will have to learn, I suppose, to love the Deseret News, or at least the Church Section, as much as I love the Tribune. . . . I will have to get to the temple more often. . . . I will have to become better acquainted with the ward members and be genuinely interested in them and their problems. . . . I will have to learn to love every one of them and to dispose myself in such a way that they might find it possible to feel the same toward me. Perhaps in my weak way I will have to try and live as close to the Lord as we expect the General Authorities to do.

Perhaps my appreciation for understatement and my personal knowledge that my father was an honest man make that statement seem to me a more striking example of dealing humbly with ambiguity than it really is. But his statement stirs me to want to be as childlike as my education has taught me to be tough-minded—to be wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove, as the Savior said.

I hope we may be honest and courageous enough to face squarely the uncertainties we encounter, try to understand them, and then do something about them. Perhaps then we will not be living on borrowed light. "Love is not blind; that is the last thing that it is. Love is bound; and the more it is bound the less it is blind."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] William James, Essays on Faith and Morals; ed. Ralph Barton Peery (Cleveland: The World Publishing Company, 1962), pages 53-54.
[^2] Essays on Faith and Morals, page 30.
[^3] Essays on Faith and Morals, pages 23-24.
[^4] Essays on Faith and Morals, page 28. Emphasis added.
[^5] Essays on Faith and Morals, page 28.
