Bruce C. Hafen, Believing Heart: Nourishing the Seed of Faith ( 1986)

CHAPTER FIVE

"Their Arm Shall Be My Arm"

But if ye neglect the tree, and take no thought for its nourishment, behold it will not get any root; . . . Now, this is not because the seed was not good, neither is it because the fruit thereof would not be desirable; but it is because . . . ye will not nourish the tree, therefore ye cannot have the fruit thereof. (Alma 32:38-39.)

The American writer and teacher William James explored the need for a believing heart a century ago in two memorable talks to college students: "The Will to Believe" and "Is Life Worth Living?" James said, "The question of having moral beliefs . . . is decided by our will. . . . If your heart does not want a world of moral reality, your head will assuredly never make you believe in one." [^1]

James also suggested the stirring idea that our freely chosen willingness to believe may actually be a determining factor in whether God's promises to us can be fulfilled—in part because our beliefs impel the actions that only we can take to "nourish" the seed of faith in its growth toward becoming the tree of eternal life. Even though it is God's greatest work and his glory to see us enjoy eternal life (see Moses 1:39), if we "neglect the tree [of eternal life], and take no thought for its nourishment" (Alma 32:38), no matter how good the seed nor how sweet the fruit, "ye cannot have the fruit thereof" (Alma 32:39). If we deny ourselves that blessing, not only are we left unfulfilled, but we also frustrate God's own desires to bless his children. Using James' phrase, "God himself . . . may draw vital strength and increase of very being from our fidelity." [^2]

Prompted by this idea, this chapter will consider the possibility that our spiritual development not only depends on the Lord's help, but that he depends on our help to enable that development. Our context for developing this thought will be the ongoing struggle between good and evil.

As a backdrop for that discussion, we should place William James' idea into its natural environment in his thoughts about the attitude of being believing. One of his best-known insights regarding "the will to believe" is that the agnostic attitude (the stance of delaying a decision on questions of religious faith until more tangible evidence exists) is simply impossible as a practical matter. Indeed, agnosticism can lead to the same outcome as deliberate atheism:

[B]elief and doubt are living attitudes, and involve conduct on our part. . . . If I doubt that you are worthy of my confidence, I keep you uninformed of all my secrets just as if you were unworthy of the same. If I doubt the need of insuring my house, I leave it uninsured as much as if I believed there were no need. . . . There are . . . inevitable occasions in life when inaction . . . must count as action, and when not to be for is to be practically against; and in all such cases strict and consistent neutrality is an unattainable thing. [^3]

Thus, because our own attitudes and choices heavily influence the outcomes of our life experience, James believes that whether life is worth living "depends on the liver"—that is, on who is living it. This is because "optimism and pessimism are definitions of the world," and our own reactions to the world necessarily determine which definition is correct. Because the way life treats us depends so much on how we treat life, we are constantly at risk:

"Not a victory is gained, not a deed of faithfulness or courage is done, except upon a maybe; not a service, . . . not a scientific exploration or experiment or textbook, that may not be a mistake. It is only by risking our persons from one hour to another that we live at all. And often enough our faith beforehand in an uncertified result is the only thing that makes the result come true." [^4]

James asks us to suppose that we are climbing a mountain, and we have worked ourselves into a position from which the only escape is by leaping across a deep chasm. Of this predicament he writes, "Have faith that you can successfully make" the terrible leap, "and your feet are nerved to its accomplishment. But mistrust yourself . . . and you will hesitate so long that, at last, all unstrung and trembling . . . you roll in the abyss. . . . Refuse to believe, and you shall indeed be right, for you shall irretrievably perish. But believe, and again you shall be right, for you shall save yourself. You make one or the other of two possible universes true by your trust or mistrust—both universes having been only maybes, in this particular, before you contributed your act." [^5]

In this way, our faith in the unseen world inspires us to do the things that allow the fruits of God's promises to be demonstrated in the visible world. Unless we freely choose to be involved, some of God's promises will remain as unfulfilled as if they did not exist. For example, unless we repent, we are as lost as if there were no Atonement: "[H]e that . . . goes on in the ways of sin . . . remaineth in his fallen state. . . . Therefore, he is as though there was no redemption made." (Mosiah 16:5.) This validation process leads James to the central point of this chapter:

I confess that I do not see why the very [meaning] of [the] invisible world may not in part depend on the personal response which any one of us may make to the religious appeal. God himself, in short, may draw vital strength and increase of very being from our fidelity. For my own part, I do not know what the sweat and blood and tragedy of this life mean, if they mean anything short of this. If this life be not a real fight, in which something is eternally gained for the universe by success, it is no better than a game of private theatricals from which one may withdraw at will. But it feels like a real fight—as if there were something really wild in the universe which we are needed to redeem; and first of all to redeem our own hearts from atheisms and fears. For such a half-wild, half-saved universe our nature is adapted. The deepest thing in our nature is this . . . dumb religion of the heart in which we dwell alone with our willingnesses and unwillingnesses, our faiths and fears. [^6]

Is it possible that God himself "may draw vital strength and increase of very being from our fidelity"? I believe it is possible, not only because we must nourish the seed of faith in our own lives, but also because he needs us to help nourish those seeds in the lives of others.

One helpful framework for developing the idea that God needs our help is to consider the conflict between Good and Evil—a very real war in which we are all participants. Our part in that war is intensely personal when the forces of Good and Evil pull us in opposing directions. Our part is also a critical element in assisting others to cope with evil forces, which in turn helps the "Lord of our far-flung battle line" win his own victories in the war for his children's souls. [^7] He has already summoned us to this duty and sent forth the battle cry: "[L]et my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me." (D&C 105:31.)

Recent historical developments have taken a turn that can sharpen our perspective on the current state of this Great War. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, we have seen, read, and almost literally felt the world tipping over the steep edge of an historical watershed in Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union. The events of this period have rearranged our basic assumptions about the future course of world history. For nearly half a century, we were unable to imagine the world on any terms other than a continuing struggle between the free and the communist worlds. Of course, communism is far from finished in China, Russia, or other places; but the power of communist ideology as a dominant worldwide force seems mortally wounded.

That notion—the apparently impending collapse of communist ideology—led political theorist Francis Fukuyama to ask whether we are approaching "the end of history." [^8] Fukuyama's question was based on German philosopher Georg Hegel's theory that the natural pendulum of human history swings events and cultures through an inevitable spiraling process that is beyond our power to control. Karl Marx's entire theory of communism drew upon Hegel's vision of history, including Marx's prediction that the long-term economic tensions of "dialectical materialism" would lead to the ultimate collapse of capitalism. This vision has had such power in the communist world that it seemed to dictate not only the events of history, but it also dictated everyday political policy and prescribed the place of each individual as a tiny pawn controlled by a vast, universal system.

Recent events have shattered the legitimacy of Marxist theory, which also seems to shatter the assumption that the world might be moving toward some large-scale historical end. As the world rubs its eyes in disbelief at the rubble of this disintegrating theory of history, Fukuyama suggests that the ideology of the liberal-democratic states, whose philosophical roots are located in the French and American revolutions, is the only game in town. Future historical events will of course continue, but on a random and unpredictable basis rather than toward the development of some grand design.

It is both a strength and a weakness that democratic liberalism makes no claim to a grand Hegelian plan of history. Democratic theory puts its entire trust in the voice of the people, a voice that does not sing to a predetermined script. This fact about democracy is its greatest blessing, but it is also its Achilles heel. As King Mosiah wisely foresaw: "Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; . . . [But] if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you." (Mosiah 29:26-27; emphasis added.)

Once the spectre of communism is removed from our vision, we can actually see the real struggle of human history more clearly. That struggle is, as it has always been, both an ideological and a personal contest not between competing economic or political theories, but between Good and Evil. The future does not hinge on whether Karl Marx or Thomas Jefferson correctly predicted which fates control our destiny, but on whether the people "doth choose iniquity." Emerging political freedoms will increasingly free people to choose or reject moral beliefs. But if their hearts do not want a world of moral reality, neither their governments nor their heads will make them believe in one.

Are we at the end of cosmic-level developments in history? Not quite. The Iron Curtain is rising, but only on the next act in a greater drama, a mightier war, that must yet be played out. There will be a real end of history, but not yet.

Over the past few years, even as Zion has begun enlarging her borders and stretching her stakes across the globe, the Evil One has also been lengthening his stride, moving over the landscape like Darth Vader in seven-league boots. We can feel the earth shake as he moves, because, as C. S. Lewis wrote, this world is "enemy-occupied territory," for "an evil power has made himself for the present the Prince of this World." Lewis continued: "Christianity is the story of how the rightful king has landed, you might say landed in disguise, and is calling us all to take part in a great campaign. . . . When you go to church you are really listening in on the secret wireless from our [allies]; that is why the enemy is so anxious to prevent us from going." [^9]

The momentum of this war currently favors the enemy who occupies the territory. A few years ago, the Russian writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn delivered a disturbing commencement address at Harvard University in which he lamented the choices the free world has been making. Thundering like an Old Testament prophet, Solzhenitsyn decried the irony he sees in America's having voluntarily embraced the same atheistic materialism that communism forced on his beloved Russia. He believes the Western democracies have destroyed the concept of the "Supreme Complete Entity which used to restrain our passions and our irresponsibility." We have deprived ourselves of "our most precious possession: our spiritual life. It is trampled by the party mob in the East, by the commercial one in the West." [^10]

We may indeed be approaching a kind of final showdown in the war of all the ages; and that will be the real end of history. As the modern prophets have noted in public statements over the past few years, [^11] we are now living in the time prophesied through Joseph Smith, "when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." (D&C 1:35.) Yet, as was also prophesied for this same historical moment, "The Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst." (D&C 1:36.)

In these days, the pace and intensity of the great war have quickened, as the spiritual equivalent of atomic weapons and globally effective laser guns has taken the place of the arrows, muskets, and tanks of earlier regional struggles. This, then, is a time when the Lord needs not just any instruments in his hands, but finely honed ones—instruments prepared to sustain a climate of freedom and be a light unto the world until the final work is done.

In these times the Lord just might need us very much. He especially needs able, gifted men and women whose entire foundation for life is a commitment of sacrifice and uncompromising faithfulness toward building his kingdom and establishing Zion.

Sidney Rigdon was a talented man whom the Lord invited to lend his talents to the cause of Zion. Tragically, Sidney Rigdon's life did not ultimately rise to that opportunity. But the Lord's words to Sidney in 1830 might also have been addressed to the modern Saints whose gifts and talents are needed in these days of intensifying conflict:

And the time speedily cometh that great things are to be shown forth unto the children of men; But without faith shall not anything be shown forth except desolations upon Babylon. . . . Wherefore, I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit; And their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; . . . Keep all the commandments . . . and I will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish. . . . Fear not, little flock, the kingdom is yours until I come. Behold, I come quickly. (D&C 35:10-11, 13-14, 24, 27; emphasis added.)

Unless we live in such a way that our natural talents are enhanced "by the power of [his] spirit," we are not of much use to the Lord's cause, no matter how gifted we may seem. But if we do live worthy of divine help, even those who may seem weak and unlearned can be given power to "thrash the nations" with such strength that their arms become the Lord's arms in wielding the weapons of truth.

I realize increasingly that we are utterly dependent upon the Lord. Sometimes we make the serious mistake of thinking that we somehow "pay" completely for our own sins through our repentance and that we must become "perfect" through setting goals and achieving them through our own great effort. But if we are honest about it, we learn soon enough that no matter how earnestly we labor, we always fall woefully short. Only the Lord can make full and final compensation for our mistakes and our inadequacies. The good news of the gospel is that he really will do that for those of the broken heart and contrite spirit who do all they can in good-faith. [^12] As Nephi said so simply, "For we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.)

The other side of this coin, however, is that the Lord cannot save us without our own good-faith effort—"all we can do"—no matter how much he would give to make us his. Some people worry about becoming so dependent upon God that they might give up their own agency. But I do not believe God could take away our agency, even if he wanted to. For that reason, I suspect he is far more conscious of our agency than we are. He not only would not, he cannot control us against our will.

William James was right: Despite our dependence on the Lord, whether he can fulfill his promises also depends on us. In that sense, God may need us—and we may need each other—more than we have any idea. So he calls upon "the weak things of the world" and augments their own strength, making their arms into his arms as they "fight manfully" for him.

As we sense how much he needs us in this way, we will see that the more we have to give him, the more it means to him when we give him all we have.

What terrible risks we are taking! Is it possible that the great plan of life would have been frustrated if Adam and Eve had not chosen as they did, or if the Savior had not been willing voluntarily to drink the bitter cup? I suppose the Lord would have found some other way. But insofar as a struggle for my soul is part of the war between Good and Evil, if I fail in my part, modest though it may be on a cosmic scale, the war is lost as far as I am concerned.

George Eliot wrote about the famous violin maker, Antonio Stradivari, who correctly understood the relationship between his work and God's: "Tis God gives skill, but not without men's hand: He could not make Antonio Stradivari's violins without Antonio." And because the master violin maker understood that, he said to himself, "If my hand slacked, I should rob God, since God cannot make a Stradivari violin without Antonio."

We cannot know how much difference our valiance actually makes to the final cosmic outcome in the struggles mankind faces before the real end of history. Our individual part may seem limited and modest; but it is not trivial.

In addition, we may well find that our most important arenas of battle are not in highly visible or even highly ideological settings, but are in a multitude of small-scale circumstances. Leo Tolstoy's sad story of adultery, Anna Karenina, eloquently teaches this truth with irrefutable understatement. Indeed, in interesting counterpoint to Fukuyama's question about the "end of history," Tolstoy once said he could "see no reason whatsoever to seek out general laws of history," because the greatest moral struggles occur in prosaic, everyday events. [^13]

Russian literature scholar Gary Morson builds on Tolstoy's point: "Most historians and philosophers tend to focus on the big events—on wars, revolutions, [and] dramatic incidents. Individual people, too, tend to [dwell on the meaning of] exceptional events and big decisions." [^14] But "Tolstoy's characters achieve wisdom when they learn not to seek the great and poetic but to appreciate the small and prosaic." [^15] Thus, rather than looking for large, visible patterns or waiting for grand moments on the historical stage, the wisest of Tolstoy's characters assume personal responsibility for the integrity of their lives on a routine and ordinary basis, "like the moment-to-moment conscientiousness of a good mother." [^16]

For this reason, Anna Karenina cautions us powerfully against believing that romantic passion detached from family responsibility is the ultimate form of love. On the contrary, love is nowhere more potent or more significant than in marriage and family life. At the same time, it is hard to "imagine Romeo and Juliet routinely sitting down to breakfast," because even a strong, stable marriage can seem "hopelessly boring and middle class" to those who think life's romance and meaning are found only in grand and dramatic gestures. [^17]

This insight reinforces rather than undermines our commitment to lend our strength to God in the historic war between Good and Evil, because that war is being fought on a daily basis, right now, in every personal relationship, in every home, and in every work place. "Most literature and most Western thought has described evil as something grand, terrifying, and Satanic, but Russian literature teaches us that [evil] is ordinary and banal." Thus, the devil who visits Dostoevsky's Ivan Karamazov is "petty, commonplace, fashionably liberal, and politely skeptical. Hell, it turns out, is just like the world—it has adopted the metric system—and the devil himself is, remarkably enough, an agnostic." [^18]

In the accumulation of our small-scale choices, our attitudes, our habits, our quiet influence on other individuals or small groups—in the aggregation of a thousand moments, here a little and there a little—we are fighting the greatest of wars on the grandest stage of history. Here God must count on our voluntarily taking the initiative for what Tolstoy called "moral alertness," precisely because the environment seems ordinary and prosaic, with no glaring lights, screaming sirens, or atomic blasts to warn us that there is, in fact, a war going on.

In this environment of subtle, at times almost invisible, warfare, the Lord's dependence on our voluntary action illustrates those "inevitable occasions" William James described, where "inaction . . . must count as action, and when not to be for is to be practically against." Here belief becomes a "living attitude, and involve[s] conduct on our part." [^19]

The idea that God may benefit from our help is delightfully illustrated by the play, The Green Pastures, by Marc Connelly. This play is not to be taken as religious doctrine—including its inference that God has just been making everything up as he goes along. The Green Pastures tells the story of man's spiritual history from Adam until the time of Christ from the viewpoint of children in a Christian black culture.

As the play opens, we see a group of children having a fish fry in heaven. When "de Lawd" comes upon the scene and asks, "How's de fish fry goin?" the children are very sad, because they don't have enough "firmament"—which sounds something like custard—to go with the fish. So de Lawd "rares back" and pronounces a miracle, creating enough firmament so they'll never again have to worry about having enough. Then there is so much leftover firmament that he decides to use it to create an earth where some of his "chillun" can live and grow—as something of an experiment.

Then we see the stories of Adam and Eve, Noah and the Flood, and Moses leading the "Chillun of Israel" out of Egypt. Then the people become so wicked that God thinks he should have left no survivors after the Flood; in fact, he repents of ever having created them. They are so bad he decides to just let them self-destruct.

In a scene showing God's "office" in heaven, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses come to plead with "de Lawd," urging him to reconsider. But he replies, "Ev'ry day fo' hund'eds of years you boys have come in to ask dat same thing. De answer is still de same!"

But then God is bothered every time a certain man passes his office without coming in. Gabriel (his assistant) tells him that's just old Hosea, a recent prophet: "You needn' be bothered by him hangin' aroun' de office all de time. I'll tell 'im. Who's he think he is?"

At this point, let us introduce Hosea, the Old Testament prophet, by recalling Elder Ronald Poelman's talk in the April 1982 General Conference. Telling the Hosea story in a modern setting, Elder Poelman described a man whose wife left him for an ugly life of adultery and other sins. One day the man saw the woman in a pitiful state and felt such compassion for her that he paid her financial debts and asked her to come home with him, that he might heal her pain. As he did so, he discovered anew his love for her. Elder Poelman compared this man's tender spirit of forgiveness with the mercy Hosea extended to the woman he married, whom the Book of Hosea describes, perhaps allegorically, as "a wife of whoredoms." (Hosea 1:2.)

The Book of Hosea itself begins by showing Jehovah's anger with the children of Israel, whose unfaithfulness toward God is compared to the unfaithfulness of harlots: "I will not have mercy upon [Israel's] children; for they be the children of whoredoms." (Hosea 2:4-5.) "For the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more." (Hosea 9:15.) But by the end of the book, somehow God's heart is softened: "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt. . . . [T]hey knew not that I healed them. . . . How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? . . . mine heart is turned within me . . . I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger . . . for I am God, and not man; the Holy One in the midst of thee. . . . [F]or there is no saviour beside me. . . . O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help." (Hosea 11:1, 3, 8-9; 13:4, 9.)

Returning to The Green Pastures, we find that the story of Hosea implies for Marc Connelly that perhaps Hosea's spirit of forgiveness somehow helps persuade Jehovah to forgive the infidelity of Israel.

For some reason, every time Hosea walks past God's office, God hears the voice of a man on the earth. The man is Hezdrel, one of Hosea's followers, who is preparing to help defend Jerusalem in a great battle. God is tempted to go down to earth to see this man, but, in his frustration with his children's weaknesses, he refuses to go.

Gabriel says, "I hates to see you feelin' like dis, Lawd." God replies, "Dat's all right. Even bein' Gawd ain't a bed of roses." Then Hosea's shadow is seen once more, and God rushes to look out his window at the earth below. "I hear you," he says. "I know yo' fightin' bravely, but I ain't comin' down. Oh, why don' you leave me alone? You know you ain't talkin' to me. Is you talkin' to me? I cain't stand yo talkin' dat way." So God decides to go down, not to help, but just because "I'm jest feelin' a little low, an I'm only comin' down to make myself feel a little better, dat's all."

God goes to see Hezdrel, who says, "Who is you?" and God replies, "Me? I'm jest an ol' preacher, from back in de hills. . . . I heard you boys was fightin'. I jest wanted to see how it was goin'."

HEZDREL: Well, it ain't goin' so well.

GOD: Dey got you skeered, huh?

HEZDREL: Look yere, who is you, a spy in my brain? . . . Listen, Preacher, we ain't skeered. We's gonter be killed, but we ain't skeered.

GOD: How is it you is so brave?

HEZDREL: Caize we got faith, dat's why!

GOD: Faith? In who?

HEZDREL: In our dear Lawd God.

GOD: But God say he abandoned ev'one down yere.

HEZDREL: Who say dat? Who dare say dat of de Lawd God of Hosea?

GOD: De God of Hosea?

HEZDREL: How come you so puzzled 'bout de God of Hosea?

GOD: I don' know. Maybe I jest don' hear things. You see, I live 'way back in de hills. . . . Ain't de God of Hosea de same Jehovah dat was de God of Moses?

HEZDREL: (contemptuously) No. Dat ol' God of wrath and vengeance? We have de God dat Hosea preached to us. He's de one God. . . . (reverently) De God of Mercy.

GOD: Hezdrel, don' you think dey must be de same God?

HEZDREL: I don' know. I ain't bothered to think much about it. . . . Dat ol' God, . . . I guess he lived wid man so much dat all he seen was de sins in man. Dat's what made him de God of wrath and vengeance. Co'se he made Hosea. An' Hosea never would a found what mercy was unless dere was a little of it in God, too. Anyway, he ain't a fearsome God no mo'. Hosea showed us dat.

GOD: How you s'pose Hosea found dat mercy?

HEZDREL: De only way he could find it. De only way I found it. De only way anyone kin find it.

GOD: How's dat?

HEZDREL: Through sufferin'.

GOD: (After a pause) What if dey kill you in de mo'nin, Hezdrel?

HEZDREL: If dey do, dey do. Dat's all. . . .

GOD: (Proudly) Dey cain't lick you, kin dey, Hezdrel?

HEZDREL: (Smiling) I know dey cain't. (Trumpet) You better get out o'yere, Preacher. . . . It'll soon be daylight.

GOD: I'm goin'. . . . Want me to take any message?

HEZDREL: Tell de people in de hills dey ain't nobody like de Lawd God of Hosea.

GOD: I will. If dey kill you tomorrow, I'll bet dat God of Hosea'll be waitin' for you.

HEZDREL: I know he will.

GOD: (Quietly) Thank you, Hezdrel.

HEZDREL: Fo' what?

GOD: Fo' tellin' me so much. You see, I been so far away, I guess I was jest way behin' de times."

In the next scene, God is in his office with Gabriel, who says, "You look awful pensive, Lawd. You been sittin' yere, lookin' dis way, an awful long time. Is it somethin' serious, Lawd?

GOD: Very serious, Gabriel.

GABRIEL: (Awed by his tone) Lawd, is de time come for me to blow [mah horn]?

GOD: Not yet, Gabriel. I'm just thinkin' . . . bout somethin' de boy tol' me. Somethin' 'bout Hosea, and himself. How dey foun' somethin'.

GABRIEL: What, Lawd?

GOD: Mercy. . . . Through sufferin', he said. . . . I'm tryin' to find it, too. It's awful impo'tant to all de people on my earth. Did he mean dat even God must suffer?" [^20]

God looks out over the audience and a look of surprise comes into his face. Then he seems to realize the terrible price he must pay with his own life to find the mercy he seeks. The lights go out, and just before the final curtain falls, a voice offstage cries, "Oh, look at him! Oh, look, dey goin' to make him carry it up dat high hill! Dey goin' to nail him to it! Oh, dat's a terrible burden for one man to carry!"

Even allowing for its doctrinal limitations, this story calls to mind again the Lord's words to Sidney Rigdon: "Wherefore, I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit; And their arm shall be my arm, . . . and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet." (D&C 35:13-14.)

Could it be, even if only in some small way, that "God himself . . . may draw vital strength and increase of very being from our fidelity?"

We know that our Father in Heaven is a God of body, parts, and passions. He is not some cold, abstract essence. When I think of God's passions, I think of how my own passions—my sense of love or sorrow or joy—have much greater depth than they had twenty or thirty years ago. Knowing that, I can only imagine how much deeper his feelings must run.

Do you think the things we do could stir his feelings? I was touched once to hear a college student describe what it meant to her to know that the Savior bears the pain of all her sins. She said that nothing motivated her obedience more than her desire not to make his burden any heavier than it already is.

I have always been moved by Enoch's account of what it was like to see the Lord cry, as He beheld the wickedness of his children who were in the grip of Satan's chains. Enoch was astonished. He recalled God's limitless power and majesty, then he asked, "How is it thou canst weep?" The Lord replied, "Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge [and their] . . . agency; And unto thy brethren have I . . . given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood. . . . Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; . . . wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" (Moses 7:31-33.)

Even though our Father is omnipotent and omniscient, he does feel emotion, and he feels it deeply. Thus, the Almighty God, the Lord of Hosts, wept; for he could not and would not revoke man's agency.

For this very reason, in the approaching showdown in the war between Good and Evil, it does matter to him when we lend our strength to his cause. Being a parent and a teacher helps me understand how that could be, because I have recently come to know the feeling of being lifted and encouraged by my former students or by my own children, who are becoming old enough to see human needs with adult eyes. Similarly, I recently saw a family to whom I helped teach the gospel over twenty-five years ago. Their righteous endurance and their high expectations of me make me yearn to become as faithful as they naturally think their missionary is: Those I once tried to lift now lift me.

Not many years ago, Elder LeGrand Richards, then in his nineties, gave a devotional talk at Ricks College. I sat behind him on the stand holding his cane, which he asked me to tap against the heel of his shoe when he had only two minutes left. As he told his wonderful stories, I saw the tears in the eyes of the students in the first few rows. I still remember one of them later saying that she believed hearing her Father in Heaven talk to his children will surely be much like hearing Elder Richards talk to the Ricks students.

After the devotional, we tried to usher him out of the auditorium to protect his strength, but he stopped us and said firmly, "Aren't you going to let me shake hands with the young people?" We protested that he shouldn't spend his precious strength standing in line to do that, especially because he hadn't eaten anything in several hours. He shook his head and smiled, trying to be patient with us, then said, "Listen, brethren, these young people think I am here to strengthen them, but the main reason I am here is because they strengthen me! Now you let me shake hands with as many of them as want to come." So he stood in line for more than an hour, and seemed stronger afterward than he was before. Elder Richards literally drew vital strength and increase of being from his association with the faithful Saints.

Elder Marion D. Hanks once said that the most important factor in solving human problems is, very simply, the competence and the character of the people trying to solve them. There is a great need today for even a sprinkling of skilled, intelligent people here and there across the earth, who have also developed some standing with the Almighty through a lifetime of devotion to Him. Having done their best to prepare to help Him in this way, they will be in a position humbly to ask Him to help them, not only with the big problems, but with an endless collection of small problems that together threaten the peace and safety of mankind as never before.

"We are all enlisted," as the LDS hymn says, in what appears to be the final battle between Good and Evil; and here, as "in all important transactions of life," wrote William James, "we have to take a leap in the dark. . . . If we decide to leave the riddles unanswered, that is a choice; if we waver in our answer, that, too, is a choice: but whatever choice we make, we make it at our peril. If a man chooses to turn his back altogether on God and the future, no one can prevent him," not even the Lord himself. [^21]

We need him, but he also needs us, to help ensure that life truly can fulfill us with the riches of eternity. Concluded William James:

These, then, are my last words to you: Be not afraid of life. Believe that life is worth living, and your belief will help create the fact. The 'scientific proof' that you are right may not be clear before the day of judgment. . . . But the faithful fighters of this hour . . . may then turn to the faint-hearted, who here decline to go on, with words like those with which Henry IV greeted the tardy Crillon after a great victory had been gained: "Hang yourself, brave Crillon! we fought at Arques, and you were not there." [^22]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co, 1949), pages 435-36.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:381.
[^3] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^4] See Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Company Printers, 1884), pages 407-13.
[^5] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., ''To Them of the Last Wagon,'' reprinted in The New Era (July 1975), page 8.
[^6] ''To Them of the Last Wagon,'' pages 10-11.
[^7] Donna Hill, Joseph Smith: The First Mormon (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1977), page 194.
[^8] History of the Church, 2:427-33.
[^9] Joseph Smith: The First Mormon, page 435.
[^10] As quoted in James E. Faust, ''The Refiner's Fire,'' Ensign (May 1979), page 53. Emphasis added.
[^11] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^12] History of the Church, 2:383.
[^13] 13. See Gary Saul Morson, ''Prosaics: An Approach to the Humanities,'' The American Scholar (Autumn 1988), pages 515-518.
[^14] 14. Morson, ''Prosaics,'' page 519.
[^15] 15. Morson, ''Prosaics,'' page 519.
[^16] 16. Morson, ''Prosaics,'' page 523.
[^17] 17. Morson, ''Prosaics,'' pages 523-524.
[^18] 18. Morson, ''Prosaics,'' pages 523-524.
[^19] 19. Essays on Faith and Morals, page 24.
[^20] 20. Sixteen American Famous Plays, Bennett A. Cerf and Van H. Cartmell (Garden City, New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1941), pages 161-70.
[^21] 21. Essays on Faith and Morals, page 62.
[^22] 22. Essays on Faith and Morals, page 31.
