Bruce C. Hafen, Believing Heart: Nourishing the Seed of Faith ( 1986)

CHAPTER SIX

When Do the Angels Come?

God is merciful unto all who believe on his name; therefore he desireth, in the first place, that ye should believe, yea, even on his word. And now, he imparteth his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also. (Alma 32:22-23.)

At selected moments in history, God has sent his holy angels to instruct, witness, comfort, and minister to his children. Think of the angel who visited Adam after the Fall to teach him about the Atonement; the angel who announced to Mary that she would conceive and bear the child, Jesus; the angels who sang glories to God and declared peace on earth at the moment of Christ's birth; the angel who comforted the Savior in his hour of anguish in the Garden of Gethsemane; the angels at Christ's tomb, who told the two Marys that he was risen; the angels who came to Joseph Smith with the Book of Mormon and the keys of the restored priesthood.

No wonder the angels came at such times. These were the crowning events of human history: the Fall and the first promise of redemption for mankind, the birth of Christ, the completion of the Atonement, the Savior's resurrection, and the restoration of the gospel.

But holy angels have come at other times, moments that were significant not because of their historic grandeur, but because of their personal, spiritual meaning in the lives of ordinary but faithful men and women. Some angelic visitations of this kind were highly visible, even overpoweringly so: think of the angels who ministered to the Nephite children in the sublime account recorded in 3 Nephi 17; the angel who came to chastise Alma the younger and the sons of Mosiah in answer to a father's prayer (see Mosiah 27:11-16); the angel who wrestled with Jacob through the night and changed his name to Israel (see Genesis 32:24-32); or the angel who reproved Laman and Lemuel's treatment of young Nephi (see 1 Nephi 3:29).

There may be some difference between these two kinds of angelic assignments—those who come on official priesthood business and those who come to minister in very personal ways. For example, I have heard some people wonder if angels must always be male. It will not surprise me to learn some day that the angels who visit the earth on special assignments related to priesthood keys were indeed all males, such as the appearance of Moses and Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matthew 17:2-3), or the appearances of Moroni or Peter, James and John to restore the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood authority to Joseph Smith. (See D&C 13; 128:20.)

But not all angels must be male, and not all angelic visits are to men. As Alma said, God "imparteth his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also." (Alma 32:23.) Moreover, there may be a difference between "ministering" and "administering" angels. As stated by President Joseph F. Smith,

When messengers are sent to minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers, but from the ranks of our kindred, friends, and fellow-beings and fellow-servants. The ancient prophets who died were those who came to visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. . . . In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing from the divine Presence messages of love, of warning, or reproof and instruction, to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh. [^1]

This chapter is primarily concerned with ministering angels who come for personal reasons. Frequently, angelic visits of this kind are very quiet—sometimes so quiet that those who receive the manifestation are unaware of all that is taking place. This limited awareness should cause no surprise. For reasons bound up in mortality's very purpose, God has deliberately drawn a veil between our world and the world of the angels. That veil involves the root principle of faith: "Faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

Yet the ministry of unseen angels remains one of the most sublime forms of interaction between heaven and earth. The angelic presence not only reveals powerful evidence of God's concern for us; the angelic presence, even when unseen, also bestows tangible assurance and spiritual sustenance upon those in great need.

Think, for example, of the angel who came to comfort the sleeping prophet, Elijah, when he was in such despair that he wished to live no longer. (See 1 Kings 19:4-8.) Or recall when Joseph Smith "saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, . . . in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and wept." [^2] In this same panoramic vision, the Prophet Joseph "saw Elder Brigham Young standing in a strange land, . . . in a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men . . . who appeared hostile. He was preaching in their own tongue, and the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his hand, protecting him, but he did not see it." [^3]

For an unforgettable picture of the unseen angelic armies that protect God's faithful children, think of Elisha's frightened young servant who cried when he was surrounded by an ominous army, "Alas, my master! how shall we do?" Answered Elisha, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." Then "Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha." (2 Kings 6:15-17.)

Sometimes Church leaders may ask us to accept callings or to assume obligations that strike us as inconvenient or distasteful—or worse. At such times we may feel like saying to ourselves in a tone of irritation, "The Lord will not leave me alone." But at other times, when we, like the young servant, feel overwhelmed and surrounded by enemies and troubles, there comes the comforting assurance: The Lord will not leave me alone.

An honest and colorful nineteenth-century Latter-day Saint named Eli H. Pierce preferred that the Lord would leave him alone; then, as he came to know the reality of unseen angels, he discovered the other meaning of not being left alone.

Eli was utterly astonished when his calling as a full-time missionary was announced over the pulpit at the October 1875 General Conference. Prior to that moment, his life "had been entirely given up to temporalities." He didn't know the scriptures, he had made only one attempt at public speaking, and his work for the railroad "would have deprived me of . . . religious services even had my inclinations led in that direction, which I frankly confess they did not." He smoked cigars, played billiards habitually, and wrote that a phrenologist said he was "too level-headed to ever make a sanctimonious church member." Thus, his mission call made him marvel and wonder "if the Church were not running short of missionary material?"

When he received word of his call, Eli Pierce was "sitting lazily thrown back in an office rocking chair . . . reading a novel and . . . sucking a [massive] old Dutch pipe." But immediately upon hearing that he had been called, Eli wrote, "I threw the novel in the wastebasket, the pipe in a corner, and started up town to buy a catechism. Have never read a novel nor smoked a pipe from that hour." He later said the "thought of disregarding the call . . . never once entered my mind." His only concern was, "How can I, who am so shamefully ignorant and untaught in doctrine, do honor to God . . . and merit the trust reposed in me by the Priesthood?"

Some of Eli's friends predicted he "would tire of working for glory before I had been out six months" and would "seek my level by uniting with some comedy troups or minstrel show." But he was rebaptized, set apart as a missionary, and traveled forthwith to New York City.

Brother Pierce labored first in "prayerfulness" and "humility" to develop his own faith, until at last he "obtained the coveted testimony" and was "blessed of the Lord in freedom of speech." After preaching the gospel for a number of months with considerable success in various eastern states, Eli had an unusual experience in a small branch of the Church in Pennsylvania.

He was asked by the branch president to help administer to the president's youngest child, who was near death. When the child's mother objected to the blessing but would not leave the child's bed, Eli and the father "retired to an upper room to pray." The mother then sent her older little girl "to spy on us." The two men "prayed earnestly and fervently, until we felt that the child would live." Then they noticed the little girl "standing in the half-open door gazing intently into the room," as if she were "entranced for some seconds."

After her father spoke to her, the little girl asked, "Papa, who was that other man in there?" He answered, "Brother Pierce." She said, "No, I mean that other man." He replied, "There was no other, darling, except Brother Pierce and myself; we were praying for baby." She shook her head, and, with perfect composure, said, "Oh, yes there was; I saw him standing between you and Mr. Pierce, and he was all dressed in white."

The little girl reported her experience to her mother, "who tried every means in her power to persuade the child that it was a mere delusion, but all to no purpose. . . . She knew what she had seen and nothing could shake that conviction. The baby was speedily restored to perfect health." [^4]

When do the angels come? They come for such as this.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. eloquently captured the blessing of unseen angels in the lives of ordinary, devoted people in his masterful sermon, "To Them of the Last Wagon." President Clark delivered this message in 1947 on the one-hundredth anniversary of the entry by Brigham Young and the pioneers into Salt Lake Valley. He expressed thanks for "Brothers Brigham and Heber and Wilford" and the other "mighty men" who led the early Saints across the wild plains. But he paid his primary tribute to the "vast multitude" who settled the valleys of the Great Basin under their leaders' direction, amid "hardship and suffering, neverending work and deep privation, tragic woes and heart-eating griefs, abiding faith and exalting joy," their "testimony burning always like an eternal fire on a holy altar, that the restored gospel was true." [^5]

As the title of his talk suggested, President Clark reserved his most reverent gratitude for "the meekest and lowliest" of the pioneer Saints, represented by "the last wagon in each of the long wagon trains" that toiled across the plains and mountain canyons. In possible analogy to the feelings of rank-and-file Church members who may believe they have only limited access to heavenly visions and angelic influences, he compared the last wagon with "the Brethren" who led the wagon trains, "out in front where the air was clear and clean and where they had unbroken vision of the blue vault of heaven."

By contrast, "back in the last wagon, not always could they see the Brethren way out in front, and the blue heaven was often shut out from their sight by heavy, dense clouds of the dust of the earth. . . . Sometimes, they in the last wagon glimpsed . . . the glories of a celestial world, but it seemed so far away, and the vision so quickly vanished, because want and weariness and heartache and sometimes discouragement were always pressing so near." And while the "Saints buoyed up the Brethren out in front with encouragement, with praise, and sometimes even with adulation," those in the last wagon simply "prayed again and pushed on, with little praise, with not too much encouragement, and never with adulation. For there was nearly always something wrong with the last wagon or with its team."

After describing the grinding frustrations of the last wagon, with its lame oxen, broken hubs, and sick children, President Clark spoke of a pregnant mother trying to breathe through heavy, choking dust. Then, at last:

"The morning came when from out of that last wagon floated the la-la of the newborn babe, and mother love made a shrine, and Father bowed in reverence before it. But the train must move on. So out into the dust and dirt the last wagon moved again, swaying and jolting, while Mother eased as best she could each pain-giving jolt so no harm might be done her, that she might be strong to feed the little one, bone of her bone, flesh of her flesh. Who will dare to say that angels did not cluster round and guard her and ease her rude bed, for she had given another choice spirit its mortal body, that it might work out its God-given destiny?"

President Clark then concluded: "My mother was one of those babes so born in 1848, ninety-nine years ago." [^6]

Thinking of angels watching over this Utah-bound exodus of nineteenth-century Israel brings to mind the Lord's promise to Moses as he prepared to lead Israel out of the wilderness of Sinai: "Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee unto the place which I have prepared." (Exodus 23:20.)

This vivid imagery of the ministering of unseen angels in the pioneer era introduces another illustration from Church history that will suggest a more general perspective about when the angels come—a comparison between the dedication of the Kirtland Temple and the dedication of the Nauvoo Temple.

The veil between heaven and earth is fixed enough that even when the angels are there, we are not likely to be immediately aware of their presence. Yet, even in the early stages of our own spiritual development, it is not uncommon for us to experience unmistakable contact with the unseen world. Sometimes these experiences carry sufficient impact to move our sense of belief to a sure sense of knowledge, and we exclaim with Alma, "O then, is not this real?" And Alma replies to us, "Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is discernible." (Alma 32:35; emphasis added.)

Nonetheless, our tasting of this light does not yield perfect knowledge, for we must patiently nourish the tree "that it may get root" against the day "when the heat of the sun cometh and scorcheth it." (Alma 32:37-38.) As we wait for additional flashes of spiritual light, our days of nourishment and testing can last many years.

The early manifestations of "discernible" light in our spiritual development frequently occur in youthful conversion experiences, missionary service, or perhaps attendance at a Church-owned university, college, or Institute of Religion. These crucial, formative periods of spiritual breakthrough may be compared with the Kirtland period in Church history; and the years that follow may be compared with the period of Nauvoo and beyond.

The early years of Kirtland were an unusually happy time for Joseph Smith and the Saints. A steady stream of wonderful events had blessed them all in only a few years: the vision in the grove, the publication of the Book of Mormon, the formal organization of the Church, the optimistic launching of missionary work, the school of the prophets, and mighty revelations outlining the glorious future that awaited the Saints of the Most High. It was a youthful, buoyant time. The Saints had no inkling of what awaited them, coiled like a deadly snake barely around the corner of history: mobs, persecution, apostasy, and martyrdom.

One of Joseph Smith's biographers described a winter in the happy Kirtland years: "It was a season for snug fires, jolly company, and rewarding study. . . . Joseph attended several weddings and officiated at several others, enjoying the festivities. . . . As he wrote, 'Our hearts were made glad with the fruit of the vine . . . and we felt disposed to patronize all the institutions of heaven.' Parties and feasts were frequent, and Joseph was 'much blessed with company' at home. . . . [He] enjoyed the out of doors, also, and frequently noted in his journal that the weather was perfect for sleighing." [^7]

And then the angels came. Indeed, the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in March of 1836 represented what might be the greatest spiritual outpouring in all of modern Church history. Joseph wrote in his journal that, shortly after the dedicatory prayer was offered, "Frederick G. Williams arose and testified that [during the prayer] an angel entered the window and took his seat between Father Smith and himself. David Whitmer also saw angels in the house."

In a special evening meeting, the Prophet wrote that "Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; . . . and I beheld that the Temple was filled with angels. . . . The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place." At one of the concluding meetings, Joseph wrote, "The Savior made his appearance to some, while angels ministered to others, and it was a Pentecost and an endowment indeed, long to be remembered, for the sound shall go forth from this place into all the world, and occurrences of this day shall be handed down upon the pages of sacred history, to all generations." [^8]

Now contrast those glorious experiences with the dreadful conditions under which the Nauvoo Temple was dedicated less than ten years later. Joseph and Hyrum had been slain. The Church was racked with dissension and apostasy, and the dark spirit of the martyrdom hovered over Nauvoo like the destroying angel of death. The Saints knew they could not stay. They worked frantically to finish the temple, even as they also hurried to gather provisions and prepare wagons for their plunge into the great westward unknown: "Although they knew that they would have to give it up, their temple was to be the finest they could produce. The work went on despite poverty, anxiety, sickness, and desperate efforts to prepare for the exodus. Toward the last, when harassments increased, laborers carried their weapons with their tools and worked under constant guard. They built an edifice of beautiful white sandstone, towering over the countryside and visible for miles up and down the Mississippi." [^9]

Part of the Nauvoo Temple was dedicated in October 1845, even before it was finished; and in December of that year, Brigham Young began to administer the temple ordinances day and night. Within a mere two months, the first company of wagons started across the frozen Mississippi, never to return. Within three years, the temple was burned by an arsonist, and two years later a tornado demolished what was left of it.

The story is told of a blind convert named Brother Williams who came from Massachusetts to Nauvoo in time to help complete the temple. The other workmen wondered how to use him, but they finally assigned him to turn the grindstone in the carpenter shop on the temple site. Brother Williams had heard the stories of Kirtland, and he believed fervently that when the Nauvoo Temple was dedicated, the Savior and even the resurrected Joseph would return. He anticipated great spiritual manifestations that would heal his blindness. He believed that each stone they were laying brought him one step closer to the Savior's healing hand.

But the Nauvoo Temple dedication was no Kirtland. As far as we know, there were no visible manifestations, no angelic ministries, no Pentecost.

Our youthful years as missionaries and students are, despite their typical growing pains, frequently a kind of Kirtland for us: a simple and beautiful time, filled with intellectual breakthroughs, private spiritual moments, and emerging idealistic convictions often reinforced by living in a complete community of Saints. Those years may lift us for a time above the noise and smoke and confusion of worldly valleys to a high mountain peak, where the air is fresh and pure, where our vision is clear and unbroken, and where we can develop a growing closeness to the Infinite.

But the day always seems to come when we must leave our Kirtlands. When we do, sooner or later, we may experience our own kind of Nauvoo, perhaps more than once. We will have our own frozen rivers and parched deserts to cross, a moral or financial or intellectual wilderness to tame. It will not always be fun. Perhaps we will feel bewildered and disappointed, and we may look back longingly to those youthful years, wondering why we cannot recapture the way things were in our days of Kirtland.

When our Nauvoo comes, some of us may feel like Joseph who was sold into Egypt. Rather than finding ourselves buoyed up by the broad-scale support system of Kirtland's Mormon village, we may live in the lonely isolation Joseph knew among the Egyptians. But we, like Joseph, must bloom where we are planted, no matter what corner of the vineyard we inhabit. Of course we, like Joseph, will not be of the world, even as we remain in the world, that it may be said of us as it was of him: he was "a goodly person, and well favored." (Genesis 39:6.)

Amid such loneliness, we will be pressured to follow the moral norms of a spiritually alien culture. We must then be like Joseph, who, when tempted by Potiphar's wife, "fled, and got him out." (Genesis 39:12.) The Potiphars who observe us may then say of us, as was said of Joseph, that "the Lord was with [him]," making "all that he did to prosper in his hand." (Genesis 39:1-3.) And eventually they may say, as Pharaoh said of Joseph, "Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?" (Genesis 41:38.) Then, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell once said, when we are surrounded by worldly famines of the soul, we, like Joseph, must help to find solutions, not just be another hungry mouth to feed.

After leaving our Kirtland, we may find ourselves living in a culture that offers little reinforcement for our belief in the ideals of family life. The surrounding environment may even discourage and attack our devotion to marriage and children. Some of us may then begin to feel a growing sense of distance in our marriages, as those around us take for granted that modern men and women should not feel bound by unconditional family commitments. But we will know better, for we lived once in Kirtland, where the spirit whispered to us that the doctrine is true: marriage is sacred and love is forever.

When our Nauvoo comes, some of us may feel the waning of our sense of spiritual wonder, as the accumulating pressures and pollutions of life seem to cast doubt on the reality of inspiration or the worth of the institutional Church or the value of giving ourselves unselfishly to others. Especially in that kind of Nauvoo, some of us may turn away bitterly and say that the stories of Kirtland are not really true. "How could they be true?" some will ask. "We see no angels here, not now, when we need them most. What happened at Kirtland must have been the foolish imagination of our youth." We will feel pressure to see things this way, for we may be surrounded by unbelievers who whisper tauntingly in our ears as did the enemy in Nauvoo: "Your Prophet is dead. Wake up—it was all a childhood dream."

When our Nauvoo comes, it will neither surprise us nor throw us off course, if we have kept the image of Kirtland burning brightly in our memories. When our Nauvoo comes, "It is all right," we will say, "we understand. We receive our full witness only after the trial of our faith. After much tribulation cometh the blessings." And we will pick up our wagons and our families and head West.

As we do, we will sense that Kirtland was given to us as a first witness, to be told to our children and their children's children, that they may know that God is the Lord. As Felix Mendelssohn wrote in Elijah, "He, watching over Israel, slumbers not nor sleepeth." We will know that, always, for we were there, that season in the Mormon village of Kirtland. Yet we also understand the profound reasons why the Nauvoos must come.

I still think of Brother Williams, his blind eyes glistening with hope, waiting for Jesus and his angels to come to the Nauvoo Temple. I don't know what happened to him after Nauvoo. Did he find the healing he hungered for? Did he find his Savior and see the face of Brother Joseph? I suppose that he and the other faithful ones of Nauvoo did find the enlightenment and the peace they sought—but later, perhaps within the last wagon along some dreary prairie trail, or in struggling to build a new life, far away in the West.

I suppose that Brother Williams made the same discovery as did the Saints in the Martin and Willie handcart companies, when many perished as they were trapped by heavy, early snows on their way across the plains. Elder James E. Faust once quoted from one of the survivors of that handcart tragedy:

Not one of that company ever apostatized or left the Church, because every one of us came through with the absolute knowledge that God lives, for we became acquainted with him in our extremities. I have pulled my handcart when I was so weak and weary from illness and hunger that I could hardly put one foot ahead of the other. I have gone on [to some point I thought I could never reach, only to feel that] the cart began pushing me. I have looked back many times to see who was pushing my cart, but my eyes saw no one. I knew then that the angels of God were there. [^10]

Such unseen angelic manifestations in the "extremities" of our lives may, over time, have more profound meaning than the more visible outpourings of Kirtland. If we are true and faithful, the Lord himself may be "in [our] midst and [we] cannot see [him]." (D&C 38:7.) Even if we do not see him, he can "be on [our] right hand and on [our] left, and [his] Spirit shall be in [our] hearts," and the angels who came to Kirtland will be "round about [us], to bear [us] up." (D&C 84:88.)

Moreover, our memories of Kirtland can be enriched by our later, perhaps more turbulent, experience. The very meaning of earlier witnesses may well grow richer with the perspective of time. It is because of what we saw in Kirtland that we ventured to Nauvoo. That we have once seen so clearly is our witness that we can again see clearly, with greater depth, even in the very midst of our afflictions.

After all, the angels are there. And someday, perhaps not so far away in time or space, we might be prepared enough and have reason enough at last to see the angels of Kirtland once more. The conditions on which our vision may pierce the veil are not fully known to us. Those conditions are not always known even to the prophets. When Elijah was about to be taken from the earth, his successor as prophet to Israel, Elisha, asked that a double portion of Elijah's spirit might remain with him. Elijah said this was "a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so." Suddenly, flaming horses and a chariot of fire appeared and took Elijah by a whirlwind into heaven. And the Lord granted the desire of Elisha's heart, for his eyesight pierced the veil: "And Elisha saw [the angels], and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof." (2 Kings 2:9-12.)

Who are those horsemen? When do they come, and where do they go?

They must not be far away, for they have come again in the modern age. Not long before the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith's scribe saw "in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion." [^11] The next day, after Joseph and the Twelve had sealed holy anointings on the heads of one another, "the heavens were opened unto Elder Sylvester Smith, and he, leaping up, exclaimed: 'The horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof!'" [^12]

Whoever they are, in their chariots of fire, the horsemen of Israel watch over the Saints with such care and power that we know of a surety: "They that be with us are more than they that be with them." (2 Kings 6:16.)

From Eli Pierce and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., I learn that the angels can be very near at the blessing of a sick child or at a baby's birth. From the history of Kirtland, I learn that they come to celebrate and bear unforgettable witness in the formation of faith, even if we must wait for more complete witnesses until our faith has been tried by fire. From the scriptures, I learn that God's angels can ever bear us up, whether we see them or not. Knowing this, I suppose that the angels come in our hours of greatest personal need. A moment of high spiritual significance in one person's life may not seem to have cosmic or historic meaning, but such moments can have acute personal consequences that matter very much to those who are sent to strengthen us from beyond the veil.

When do the angels come? I suppose they come:

When a father who feels unworthy to bless his child asks another man to speak for God to his little one; and the father, listening, resolves that he will become worthy, that the priesthood for his children may be his own hands and his own voice.

When a young woman is with a young man whom she honestly loves, but he grows weak in the face of temptation. In the crucial moment, she teaches him tenderly about restraint, and he knows that she truly cares for him, and that she cares for his future and her own, and perhaps one day for their future together.

When a man in his mid-thirties is tormented by a crisis of his faith in the restored Church—he sees a close friend lose his testimony and leave the Church; his bishop uses poor judgment in handling an unfounded accusation against the man's wife; and he finds that the sermons and lessons he hears in Church seem increasingly superficial. He suppresses his impulses toward cynicism and cries out in many prayers for perspective, patience, and new light.

When a mother and her child watch together after dark, as the moon comes up to greet them, and they talk together softly of the secrets of the night, of the God above who loves them, and the purpose of all they see. The seeds of faith are planted and love's own warmth is felt.

When a father walks the floor of a hospital room through the hours of the night, trying to comfort the cries of a very sick baby, knowing that the sleep he needs must wait, perhaps for many nights; and knowing that the life of his child is in the Lord's own hands.

When a kindly bishop befriends the young, showing that he understands them and can keep their secrets. And in the quiet of the evening one comes to him to talk; and as one heart listens to another, the tears of remorse flow together with the tears of understanding. A soul begins to heal, forgiveness begins to work its miracle, and the bishop has a lifelong friend.

When a husband speaks harsh words that wound his companion's heart; seeing her tears of pain, this time his anger turns to shame and he asks her to forgive. She forgives him, again, but asks if such hurt must come again; and not only does he promise, but next time controls that anxious tongue, and this temple marriage becomes gradually more celestial.

When a single woman blessed with both intelligence and professional training feels continually undervalued and put down by many men with whom she interacts at Church and with whom she works at her office. Years of frustration build toward anger that begins to color her interpretation of every event and every relationship. She remembers the blessing of having been close to sensitive, loving patriarchs in her life—her father, a teacher, and a humble stake patriarch—and she prays for patience and the gift of knowing how to help both men and women work in harmony together with compassionate understanding.

When a tall, college-age grandson has far too much to do, but sees, without being asked to see, that his frail grandmother yearns to be taken for a walk outdoors. He knows his needs can wait, and he engages her fully in happy conversation as they stride along together, his strong arm holding her clasped hands.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co, 1949), pages 435-36.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:381.
[^3] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^4] See Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Company Printers, 1884), pages 407-13.
[^5] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., ''To Them of the Last Wagon,'' reprinted in The New Era (July 1975), page 8.
[^6] ''To Them of the Last Wagon,'' pages 10-11.
[^7] Donna Hill, Joseph Smith: The First Mormon (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1977), page 194.
[^8] History of the Church, 2:427-33.
[^9] Joseph Smith: The First Mormon, page 435.
[^10] As quoted in James E. Faust, ''The Refiner's Fire,'' Ensign (May 1979), page 53. Emphasis added.
[^11] History of the Church, 2:381.
[^12] History of the Church, 2:383.
