One Saturday morning while I was serving in the Lima Peru Temple, a group of about 20 children from one of the Lima stakes came for a visit. After warmly shaking the hand of each child, the temple president spoke to them about the sacred work of the temple. He especially emphasized the continuation of family relationships and the meaning of the phrase “Families are forever.”

The children were reverent and listened carefully. One of these visitors was a little girl named Rosita, who was five years old. That night she stayed up late until her father returned from work, waiting for him on the edge of her bed.

When he arrived, he was surprised to see his daughter still awake. Rosita jumped off the bed and ran to him. He picked her up, and she put her arms around his neck and kissed him.

“And how is my little Rosa?” he asked.

“I am well, Papi.”

“Were you a good girl today?”

“Yes, Papi.”

“Was there something you wanted me to do for you?”

She nodded her head.

“What is it? What do you want, sweetheart?”

“Papi,” she said, pausing briefly, “when are you going to take me to the temple?”

Her father paused a few seconds before answering.

“I’m going to take you, Rosa. It’s just that I’m working hard right now, and I’m really busy. But I promise I will take you.”

“Thank you, Papi,” said Rosita, hugging and kissing her father again.

“Now go to bed and try to sleep.”

Many months later, Rosita’s family gathered in one of the sealing rooms of the temple. Moments of great rejoicing followed the sealing ceremony. Rosita’s father, with great love and tenderness, embraced each of his children, ending with the youngest—Rosita.

“Some months ago this little girl made a trip to the temple with the Primary children from our stake,” Rosita’s father told the sealer who had performed the ceremony. “That night she waited for me to get home from work and asked me when I was going to take her to the temple. I knew she didn’t just want to see the outside of the temple, so I have had to put my life in order and get rid of my bad habits. It has taken a lot of effort, but I have finally succeeded. Today is the most beautiful day I have ever experienced because today my family has been united for all eternity.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127075803" id="aside1_p1">“Papi,” Rosita asked her father, “when are you going to take me to the temple?”</p> [/SIDEBAR]
