To provide for our family, my husband works hard offering taxi service on his motorcycle. He was recently in a traffic accident but miraculously did not suffer serious injury. He did, however, have to recuperate while his motorcycle was being repaired.

Because my husband was unable to work, we were worried. We had no other income, and our nation’s economic crisis further heightened our concern.

During sacrament meeting the Sunday following my husband’s accident, two of the talks centered on compassion and how we could develop this Christlike attribute. Afterward, one of our ward members approached me to say that a branch member was in dire need of food. She wondered if we could donate “a kilo of love”—a kilo (2.2 lbs.) of whatever kind of food we had on hand at home. I told her she could count on our support.

When our family arrived at home after church, I discussed the conversation with my husband. We were going through our own trial, but we felt blessed nevertheless.

“Although we are going through difficult days,” he said, “we have enough to make it from day to day, with maybe even a little extra to share.”

That afternoon, a neighbor who had heard of my husband’s accident, asked us to come visit. When we arrived, the neighbor gave us a box filled with 7 kilos (15 lbs.) of food, along with other items we needed. We were astonished. Neither of us had expected that kind of blessing.

As I talked to my husband about this experience, I could not help but recognize God’s hand and thank Him for His immense love for us. He had seen our willingness to share what we could—a single kilo of love—and had blessed us with seven times our offering.

Times of trial and scarcity can bring out the best in each of us. They offer us opportunities to develop and show Christlike attributes. I know that not all acts of love generate immediate blessings in return, but I know that the Lord watches over His children. He will answer our prayers as we answer the prayers of others by serving and sharing—even when all we have to give is a single kilo of love.
