Our small, simple, consistent decisions affect the course of our lives.

Consider, for instance, the power of a consistent drip of water. Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles once illustrated the principle of small and simple spiritual nourishment by explaining the function of a drip irrigation system: “The steady drips of water sink deep into the ground and provide a high moisture level in the soil wherein plants can flourish. In like manner, if you and I are focused and frequent in receiving consistent drops of spiritual nourishment, then gospel roots can sink deep into our soul, can become firmly established and grounded, and can produce extraordinary and delicious fruit.”

A “mighty change in [our] hearts” (Alma 5:14) can be a product of small, consistent decisions. The decision to read the Book of Mormon each day, say a prayer, or do a kind deed to lighten someone’s load may seem insignificant. But “by small and simple things are great things brought to pass” (Alma 37:6).

While small drops of water can nourish, they can also erode. Similarly, small decisions in our lives can lead to growth—toward the Savior—or to erosion of our testimonies, away from Him. Consistently neglecting the small actions that connect us to Jesus Christ can slowly cause faith to falter and commitment to waver.

President Russell M. Nelson has taught, “As we seek to be disciples of Jesus Christ, our efforts to hear Him need to be ever more intentional. It takes conscious and consistent effort to fill our daily lives with His words, His teachings, His truths.” Coming to Jesus Christ involves intentionally making small changes in our lives.

Of course, there are times when more dramatic change is required. “If we are involved in grievous sins, the Lord is clear and unequivocal; we need to stop, get help from our bishop, and turn away from such practices immediately.” For the most part, however, we can look to our seemingly small actions to change our behavior.

When you reflect back on your life, you can see that your small, Christ-centered choices have added up to real change. It often doesn’t take a dramatic overhaul—it takes one small decision, and then another, and then another, to turn toward Christ.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="161266041" id="aside1_p1">Prayerfully consider what your next “drop of water” could be. What could you do today to “hear Him”?</p> [/SIDEBAR]
