Psalm 82:6 reminds us of our divine heritage: “Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.”

Similarly, President Russell M. Nelson fervently asked us to know the truth about who we are:

“My dear friends, you are literally spirit children of God. You have sung this truth since you learned the words to ‘I Am a Child of God.’ But is that eternal truth imprinted upon your heart? …

“Worldly identifiers will never give you a vision of who you can ultimately become. They will never affirm your divine DNA or your unlimited, divine potential. …

“… As you embrace these truths, our Heavenly Father will help you reach your ultimate goal of living eternally in His holy presence.”

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about our divine heritage as children of God (see the “divine nature” and “individual worth” collections). They have also shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“These are stressful times for all of us, but the gospel of Jesus Christ gives us ample reason to be of good cheer. Through His prophet, God has given us the challenge to persist through adversity, and the teachings of Jesus Christ outline the path to prevail toward our divine destiny of eternal life. You know you are children of God, a uniquely divine heritage. God loves you. He is a powerful mentor, and He has promised to help you if you but seek Him in the way He has taught.

“Establish in your mind and your personal priorities the powerful truth that you are a beloved child of God. His love endows you with the self-respect, the strength, and the motivation to move against whatever problems you face in your life. And never forget that His servants love you. We love you. In all our concerns, as we work through all our challenges, we urge that we be of good cheer, because He has overcome the world. We can too. Remember, our Father’s plan is a plan of happiness.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, May 22, 2023, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“No matter your attitude toward God, He will not cease to love you.

“How many times will Heavenly Father be patient with you?

“More than you can comprehend.

“How many times will He forgive you?

“More than you feel you deserve.

“How often will He nurture and comfort you?

“More than you can ever know.

“There is no end to the grace and mercy of our benevolent God. No limits to the depth of His love. No barrier to His compassion for His children.

“God is not our opposition. He is our mentor. Our guide. Our healer. Our Savior.

“His self-admitted purpose and greatest joy is our happiness through immortality and eternal life.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Feb. 8, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“When Heavenly Father looks upon us, His children, He sees us for who we truly are. He knows everything about us. Our fears, despair, and our loneliness. But He also knows and rejoices in our faith, our righteous desires and triumphs. He celebrates the times we have overcome obstacles, whether those be physical, mental, emotional, or spiritual. But mostly, He knows our infinite potential. Your infinite potential. He sees the best version of us, the glorious person we have the potential to become.

As you follow our beloved Savior, Jesus Christ, your faith will grow. Your confidence will wax strong, and one day, you will surely know that your efforts were worth the journey. You can do this. Believe. Believe in God. Believe in yourself. Choose to follow the Savior. Draw near to your Heavenly Father, and He will draw near to you.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Sept. 18, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Let me assure you that if you are married or single, have a large family or a small one, you are still part of the Lord’s family. I rejoice that the great plan of salvation is big enough for all of Heavenly Father’s children. And how especially grateful I am that God’s plan provides a way for family relationships to extend beyond the grave. I testify that when we return to the presence of God, we will be eternally united with those we love most.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, May 15, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“It is clear we have a Father in Heaven who knows and loves us personally and understands our suffering perfectly. His Son, Jesus Christ, is our Savior and Redeemer.

“Our Father’s plan of happiness for His children includes not only a premortal and mortal life but also a potential for eternal life, including a great and glorious reunion with those we have lost. All wrongs will be righted, and we will see with perfect clarity and faultless perspective and understanding.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Oct. 19, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“Each generation needs to understand who they are and their eternal identity. [This can be] difficult to discern because the adversary does not want you to have a clear understanding of God the Father and Jesus Christ and Their plan of happiness for you and who you are in relation to Them.

“The lesson is to not let doubts or disbelief overcome our faith.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Dec. 7, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“The construction of … temples around the world is truly an expression of the love our Heavenly Father has for His children. It is also a testimony that our Heavenly Father lives and He cares about the eternal salvation of His sons and daughters everywhere. It is a beautiful testimony of the divine vision and plan God has for us, His children, our ancestry, and posterity.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, Oct. 9, 2023, facebook.com/soares.u.

“My single sisters, know I feel to speak to you and to all my sisters who need to know they are loved and known by our Heavenly Father. …

“Dear beautiful women and daughters of God, I know that our Heavenly Father and Savior are aware of you. They love you. They hear the pleadings of your heart, your concerns, your sorrows, your joys. You are never alone. You can find complete understanding in Them. You were meant to partner with the Lord in a powerful way through your covenants. In Isaiah chapter 49 the Lord gives us insight into His great love for you and me. In [verses 14–16] it says:

“‘But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.

“‘Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

“‘Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.’

Your walls—your needs, challenges, desires—are continually before Him. There is never a time you are not on His mind and in His heart. You are graven upon the palms of His hands. I love you, and I pray you will find sweet nourishment, healing, and peace in God’s unfailing love for you as His daughter.”

Sister Kristin M. Yee, Facebook, Mar. 8, 2023, facebook.com/RS2ndCounselor.

“Growing up in Queens, New York, I sometimes felt lost in the crowds of people living in the inner city. At times I felt quite isolated and lonely, even though I was surrounded by so many people.

“When I was introduced to the gospel of Jesus Christ, I started to experience the Light of Christ coming into my life. As I accepted invitations to read the scriptures, to pray, and to ponder, the light inside of me started to grow. I felt very known to God, where I previously felt unknown to everyone else.

“As a teenager, I leaned into that light early, and I stay leaned in to this day. President Russell M. Nelson teaches that it’s ‘vital’ to experience the love of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ—especially in our present day and age. I’m grateful for that critical experience in my youth and that Their love and light continue to propel me forward today.

“God’s love and light keep my divine identity as a beloved daughter of God in the forefront and is how I choose to present myself and navigate my way in my daily life. It has also allowed me to see the divinity of all of God’s children—my brothers and sisters. God’s love can pierce the very center of the hearts of His children. When we feel it—when we experience it for ourselves—we come to know why ‘it is the most desirable above all things … and the most joyous to the soul’ (1 Nephi 11:22–23).”

Sister Tracy Y. Browning, Facebook, July 27, 2023, facebook.com/Primary2ndCounselor.
