The missionary training center in Accra Ghana welcomes up to 60 missionaries per week to prepare for missionary service in countries throughout the world. The missionaries in the MTC reflect the tremendous diversity in the Church with missionaries from over 50 countries having received their training at the Ghana MTC.

On 27 January 2024 the MTC in Ghana received its first missionary from Pakistan. Sister Arooj Shamoon’s journey to Accra was not an easy one. Due to visa and transportation delays, Sister Shamoon arrived four days late, but anxious to begin her missionary experience. She has been called to the Botswana/Namibia Mission and has been sent to the Accra MTC to learn English.

Sister Shamoon’s path to missionary work began very early in her life. She was baptized with her two siblings when she was eight years old, even though her parents were not members of the Church. “I stayed close to the Church because of the leaders in our branch. I was particularly close to the Relief Society president,” said Sister Shamoon. “I was very young when I received my testimony, and it has always been very strong.”

Although the Church doesn’t release the membership numbers in Pakistan, there are three districts and 13 branches throughout the country. Sister Shamoon is from Gujranwala, a large city of over 2 million people, tucked in the Northeastern area of Pakistan. She is a member of the Gujranwala Branch in the Lahore Pakistan District.

Sister Shamoon’s brother currently serves as a missionary in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. He is serving in the Pakistan Service Mission. “My brother is a great example to me. I have always looked up to him,” she said.

Asked why she wanted to serve a mission, Sister Shamoon noted that, “I have received many blessings in my life. I have a strong testimony of the gospel. I know that Jesus lives and loves us and that His gospel has been restored. I love the Book of Mormon and know that it is true. I’m anxious to share my testimony about these things with the people in Botswana.”
