Boyd K. Packer, Things of the Soul ( 1996)

3

Called of God by Prophecy [^1]

In discussing a very sacred subject, one that fills me with gratitude each time I contemplate it, I begin with a question asked by the prophet Mormon more than fifteen hundred years ago: "Has the day of miracles ceased? Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved?" (Moroni 7:35-36.)

This ancient prophet answered his own question with these words:

Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain.

For no man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have faith in his name; wherefore, if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption. (Moroni 7:37-38.)

During His ministry, the Lord promised that "these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover" (Mark 16:17-18).

Such miracles have always been a witness of His church on the earth, and they are known among us-I could even say they are common among us-but they are not often talked about. We regard them with humility and with unmeasured reverence. It isn't about those miracles that I would write. It's about another miracle, a very quiet one, one that is constantly with us, and always apparent, and yet ofttimes ignored.

The Miracle of Revelation

In a testimony meeting, a friend of mine told of a conversation he'd had that week with a fellow employee in a business establishment. My friend had regarded him as an active member, a faithful member of the Church always, and yet in this conversation he made the comment that he didn't believe there was much inspiration in the way people were called to office in the Church. He said they were called from desperation or something else but there couldn't be much inspiration in it.

I don't know whether that comment was sparked by a call he had received himself for which he felt unworthy; or perhaps he had been offended by someone who was called and who was, he thought, ineligible; or maybe he referred to one of the few-and there are a few-who accept a call in the Church unwillingly and really fail to perform. For the one who doubts the influence of inspiration in Church calls to office, and for us all, I quote a verse from the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord is speaking: "I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing. Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above." (D&C 58:32-33.)

Let us consider the quiet miracle relating to the calling of members of the Church to office and their response to that call. That's a miracle by which I never fail to be humbled-that process by which a person is designated to receive a call in the Church and the witness he receives as he answers it. The suggestion that there is no inspiration in it is something we have to contemplate.

Early in my Church leadership experience I learned a very important lesson. I think it was the second time I had met Elder Harold B. Lee; I had been introduced to him once before. I was serving as a member of a stake high council, and on one occasion the stake president presented in our meeting the name of a certain man to be called to a position of leadership in the stake. I was teaching seminary at the time, and Brother Leon Strong, also a seminary teacher, had talked to me a time or two about this man. We had commented on what an able man he was and how sad it was that he couldn't do more than he did in church service because of a handicap of his wife's. She had one personality trait that I think could be characterized by the term malicious.

When the stake president presented the name of this man for a presiding office in the stake and called for a vote Brother Strong and I cast negative votes. That is rather unusual. The president talked it over for a few minutes and then said that he felt he'd like to proceed anyway, and asked if we would sustain him in issuing this call. Immediately the issue changed. In my mind, then, it was a vote to sustain the stake president, not necessarily a vote for placing this man in the office; and when the president called for a vote, Brother Strong and I joined the other ten members of the stake high council in voting affirmatively.

When our stake conference was held a month or two later, when the ordinations were to take place, Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve was the visitor. After the conference we assembled in the stake center for the ordinations. Elder Lee ordained and set apart a bishop and his counselors and some others, and then this man was called forth to be ordained by the member of the Council of the Twelve. Brother Strong nudged me-we were sitting together-and with a smile on his face he leaned over and said, "Well, Brother Packer, now we'll see whether this Church is run by revelation."

Elder Lee put his hands on the man's head, began the usual introductory words to an ordination, then hesitated. Then he said words to this effect: "The other blessings relating to your activities and life and occupation that you've heard pronounced upon the others here apply to you as well, but there is a special blessing." And then that man received the longest blessing, the most pointed of them all; and in reality it was not a blessing for him but a blessing for his wife. It was a very interesting thing to observe.

When the meeting was over, immediately I went to Brother Lee and said, "Did you know this brother before you ordained him?"

"No," he said. "I didn't know him. I think I hadn't seen him till I came into this room."

I said, "He received a very unusual blessing." And Elder Lee said, "Yes, I felt that."

Later, the president of the stake explained: "I meant to talk to Elder Lee about that and tell him that here was a man who had need of a special blessing, but in the press of business we just didn't have time." And so Brother Strong was right. That day we did see whether this Church is run by revelation.

With the Church growing in the way it is, those of us who are members of the Council of the Twelve are employed almost constantly on our stake conference assignments in the organization and reorganization of stakes somewhere in the world. It never fails to be a very interesting and a very inspiring experience-an assignment I would not cherish, I would not seek, save it were that the principle of revelation is a practical, operative principle and can be and is constantly employed.

Think of going somewhere in the world and arriving on a Saturday afternoon. Sometimes, when planes are delayed, we come late and the meetings have to be rearranged. Yet the following morning there must be new leadership called, people we've never seen; and sometimes there's a language barrier. If we were doing it in man's way, there would be a personnel file; there would be interviews and reinterviews; there would be times of study, the interviewing of many who know the individual, and so on. But it doesn't work that way; it can't, for there isn't time. The world is too large, and there are too many stakes and too many places to be. It's a marvelous thing to be able to go before the Lord, to present a simple question, and to get a direct, positive, unmistakable answer. I'm ever humbled by that. This is a miracle, this process of the call and release of members in the filling of Church positions.

Missionary Miracles

What kind of miraculous persuasion is it that would have a young man, vigorous, active, interested in life itself-at the one time when he, by normal appraisal, ought to be more interested in material things-be willing to respond to a call to serve on a mission, pay his own way, give a tithing of his life, two years, preaching the gospel? Miracle? Oh, yes; but we have tens of thousands of them.

As I was presiding over the New England Mission, we had two missionaries who were two thousand miles away from mission headquarters. And I thought one day: "That's an interesting process. You take a common, garden-variety, teenage young man; you call him on a mission; you set him apart; you give him another teenager as a companion; and you send him out someplace with a certain amount of money a month provided by himself or his family. You then give him a simple list of instructions: No dating, rigid mission rules, spend all your time preaching and proselyting, and so on. Ofttimes, too, he's provided with an automobile. Well, it's insane when you think about it. It couldn't possibly work. The only justification is that it does."

The two missionaries, two thousand miles away, could be depended upon because somehow they had come to know that this was their church too, and Jesus Christ was their Lord, and this process of sustaining-the process, the simple process, of revelation relating to the call-was an operative principle of life in this church.

What is it that would cause a man to set aside his personal pursuits, to interrupt his business or professional activities, to yield in political preference, often to give up seniority, often retirement benefits, to go anywhere on earth, without question and without any unusual compensation or persuasion-no material compensation-simply to preside over a mission?

I recall an experience when I was supervising the missions in western Europe. We needed a mission president with a certain language proficiency. Several names were brought forward, but none of them seemed to be right. Then one of the Brethren remembered that he had met a man-I think it was in Korea-several years before, a member of the Church who was in the customs service. Somehow there was just the mention of that name and the Spirit confirmed it. Because of the time pressures he was called by telephone to preside over the mission.

I visited him a few weeks later. He was living in Washington, D.C. In his employment he was within reach of the number one office in his category. His lifetime had been spent progressing through the ranks, with the thought that perhaps one day he would stand at the head of that division. His senior officer had indicated that because of a health problem he himself would retire early, and that this man was being recommended for the position he was vacating. It was just at that time that the telephone call came.

I wanted to get acquainted with him, and he invited me to stay overnight. He brought me a message from his superior. The message was this: "Tell that Brother Packer of yours that you're no missionary; I've worked with you for thirty years, and you haven't converted me. Tell them they're making a mistake. And you're making a mistake. You're a fool." (I'm leaving out one word.) "If you will give up your retirement and all that you've reached for-why? Why would you do it?"

Simple answer: he had been called. We live to know, in this church, that the response to a call does not depend on the testimony and witness of the one who delivers the call. It depends, rather, on the testimony and witness of the one who receives it.

It was very interesting. We were looking for a man who spoke French. It was not until after he was in the mission field, and we had some opportunities and responsibilities relating to problems of some members we had in Spain, that we discovered he also wrote and spoke Spanish fluently. I suppose if we'd searched through the Church for a man who spoke French, spoke Spanish, and had had some diplomatic experience, particularly as it related to customs work, we would have gone afar in the world and not found him. Yet he was found through the "chance" memory of one of the Brethren who had met a man a few years before in Korea who spoke French.

Calls to Church Offices

Now, with each call in the Church there come, it seems to me, three things: First, something by way of preparation, not infrequently a spiritual prompting. On these weekends when we call a new stake president, it's an interesting thing to ask, "President, when did you first learn of this call?" knowing full well that the annunciation of that to him didn't come from me. He then will tell those sacred experiences, which we'll not repeat here, about how he knew, so that he could prepare for this call.

Usually the next thing that is related to a call is a trial. It's like a test, perhaps like a test one receives at school-and incidentally, like the tests at school, a person can fail if he will.

I might mention here an experience of a young couple. This young lady and her husband (they had two children, a tiny girl and a baby two weeks old) graduated from college, and he had a business opportunity in Salt Lake City. So they moved to that city.

They were active in the Church, and Bishop Bowles-it was in the Belvedere Ward-called them into his office the first week they were there. The bishop said: "We're building a new building, and we need all the help we can get. Are you willing to serve?" They both said they were. And he said, "Would you like to suggest where you'd like to serve?"

That's a little unusual in the Church, but she was happy for the opportunity. She was a teacher. She said she'd like to teach in the Sunday School or in the Young Women. The following Sunday she was sustained as second counselor in the presidency of the Relief Society! She protested, and even used the word shocked, and this is a quote: "That organization is for my mother, not for me." She said she had no experience in the Relief Society, and, I quote again, "I have no desire to learn."

Well, the bishop prevailed, as bishops will, and she answered the call. Because of remodeling and construction they held Relief Society in a dismal room in the basement, in the furnace room. While the furnace was on, it was terrible, and when the furnace was off, it was intolerable. Her children caught cold. On at least two occasions she went to the bishop and asked to be released. On both occasions the bishop said he'd think about it.

To make things worse, she met with a serious automobile accident. After some period of treatment, she was recovering at home. Part of the injury was a terrible laceration of her face. This became infected, and they called a doctor one Sunday night. He made preparation for some further attention, but he said, " I think we can't touch this surgically; it's too close to the nerve in your face." He gave her what attention he could and explained how grave the situation was.

It was as the doctor was leaving that Sunday night that the bishop appeared at the door, after a long, busy day, as Sundays will be for a bishop. He said, "I was just on my way home from some interviews and saw the light on and wondered if there was trouble here." This woman was in agony. When the bishop said, "Is there anything we can do for you?" she answered from her pain and with tears: "Yes, Bishop. Now will you release me from the Relief Society?" He said he would pray about it. And when the answer came back, it was, "Sister Spafford, I still don't get the feeling that you should be released from the Relief Society."

This great and lovely woman, Belle Spafford, who for many years presided over our Relief Society in the Church, was tested in those early days of her life. I think something like that may come to many of us-to most of us perhaps-when we're being tested, as it were.

The Lord Can See Ahead

I recall an experience I had in Japan as a young man in the military service at the end of World War II. I'd been away from home about four years. We were given points. You received a point for every month you'd been overseas, points for the number of battles you'd been in, and so on; and when the war was over, the high-point man went back to the States first.

Of course, there were millions of men to be brought back, and shipping was in great demand, so there was nothing more important than to look at the bulletin board and see the qualifying number of points come down. At the same time you were earning more points, and the time came when you knew by the number on the board that the next ship in would be the one that would take you home. At last I saw that number posted, and I thanked the Lord that finally I could go home.

It was that day that my commanding officer called me in and told me we were opening a new flight at Osaka and that I was to be the operations officer. Well, I expressed myself to him. I might have been court-martialed for what I said. I think I'll even admit I used a few scriptural terms out of context. He listened very patiently, and when it was all over he said, "Well, that's all right, Packer; you're still going." And so it was.

That afternoon, on a C-47, with all my gear and the others who'd been assigned, I sat bitterly grumbling over the fact that it would take months again, that it wouldn't be just an assignment of a week or two. Then I challenged the Lord, saying, "Why is it?" I had never wanted anything so much as I wanted to be home. I'd prayed for it, I'd tried to earn it, I'd tried to deserve it, I'd tried to behave myself, and then, when it was within my grasp, the very thing I wanted most was denied me.

Somehow, I don't remember how, I took hold of myself; but looking back now, I can say the Lord was answering my prayers then. There came from that experience, from things that happened in those few months, lessons essential to the preparation for the calling that is now mine. I couldn't see that far ahead, but by those tests or trials that we receive the Lord ofttimes will prepare for us what He has in mind.

Now, the third thing, with reference to this quiet miracle, is that with the setting apart comes an endowment of power and inspiration, a sustaining power that will secure the success of anyone called to office in this church. The Lord knows what the Lord knows, and He said, "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways" (Isaiah 55:8). Sometimes we challenge, in our own hearts, when the Lord gives us an experience. We wonder, and yet there's that quiet miracle.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said, "one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks, nor declines" (Conference Report, April 1951, p. 154).

Then there's the article of faith: "We believe that a man must"-not could be, or might, or sometimes is. "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof" (Articles of Faith 1:5).

Now, the world doesn't see that. Some members of the Church don't see that. The man who said we're called by desperation or something else is a man who is not possessed of the right spirit. For "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14). And I have come to know that whenever you find criticism, and cynicism, and ridicule over something as sacred as this, invariably also you find disobedience.

Keep in mind that word. "I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing. Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled." (D&C 58:32-33.)

The Witness of the Spirit

When I was organizing a stake in Samoa, there appeared before us in the interviews those wonderful Samoan brethren. One of them, a branch president, stood there-white shirt and a tie, lava-lava tied around his waist, barefooted. I told him we were organizing a stake and seeking a stake president and asking his suggestions on men who could fill that position. He said: "Yes, I know. I've prayed about this." And he continued, "I've come to know, by the voice of the Spirit, that Bishop Iona will be our new stake president."

He was right. But I wasn't anxious to have him make the announcement, and so I pressed him for another name.

He said, "No, just one name."

And I said, "Suppose he were not available or not eligible? Won't you suggest another name?" He stood there for a few minutes, and then, looking me straight in the eye, he said, "Elder Packer, are you asking me to go against the witness of the Spirit?" This wonderful man was possessed of that Spirit, as all of us can be, each of us answering the calls that come.

I affirm that the principle of revelation is constantly operative in the Church. Every week as the Apostles go out across the world, we have those experiences. We don't talk about them much. They are like the other miracles; they are the signs that follow those who believe. Let us all be reverently grateful for the sustaining power of the Spirit.

Address given at Brigham Young University devotional 27 March 1973.

---
Notas:
[^1] Address given at general conference April 1986.
