Boyd K. Packer, Things of the Soul ( 1996)

Part Three

Church

13

The Only True and Living Church [^1]

It has been my privilege during my years as a General Authority to meet with missionaries and members in many countries. Always as we meet we find a common question that confronts us. Members of the Church, especially our missionaries, often hear this statement: "If there is anything I resent, it is those that say they are right and everybody else is wrong." They object, of course, to the declaration concerning the exclusive delegation of authority to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I understand, of course, why a person might feel that way. Nevertheless, I would say to him: "Hold on, think for a moment. Surely you can't believe that in the great and confusing variety of religious beliefs not one of them is true, is right." Such a proposition generates atheism.

That other view, the one most widely held, is that all of them are right-that in effect they are all alike. If there is a typical response to our missionaries, it is: "I already have a church. One is just as good as another and it doesn't matter really which one we belong to, or whether we belong to any. We will all end up in the same place anyway."

An Untenable Concept

Surely no one who really thinks would hold to that position. Nevertheless many people accept it when they would not for a moment apply it or relate it to any other phase of their lives. They would not, for instance, take the same position with regard to education. Who would not smile at a statement that all schools are alike, that one is just as good as another, and that a person deserves the same diploma no matter which school he attends, or which course he takes, or for how long!

Would you agree to send students to just any school, taking any variety of courses, and then award them specialized degrees, anything they wanted-in architecture, law, medicine? Such an attitude would suggest that a man would be just as good a surgeon by not studying for it as he would be following the prerequisite courses. No person who has given it real, substantial thought would take such a position, and no one of us would want to be under the knife of a surgeon who had been trained, or maybe I should say untrained, in such a pattern.

Isn't it strange, then, that so many are able to apply such a view to religion? They advocate: Go to any school, take any course, or go to no school at all, and we'll all end up in the same place with the same heavenly diploma.

That just isn't reasonable, nor is it true.

A Fundamental Position

The position that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true church upon the face of the earth is fundamental. Perhaps it would be more convenient and palatable and popular if we were to avoid this position; nevertheless we are under a sacred obligation and a sacred trust to hold to it. It is not merely an admission; it is a positive declaration. It is so fundamental that we cannot yield on this point.

To those who think us uncharitable on this account we say that this position was not devised by us; it was declared by Jesus Christ, for He gave commandments to the early brethren "to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually" (D&C 1:30).

Other Churches Incomplete

Now, this is not to say that the other churches, all of them, are totally without truth. They have some truth-some of them very much of it. They have a form of godliness. Often the clergy and the adherents are dedicated, and many of them practice well the virtues of Christianity. They are, nonetheless, incomplete. By the Lord's declaration, "they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (Joseph Smith-History 1:19).

The gospel might be likened to the keyboard of a piano-a full keyboard with a selection of keys on which one who is trained can play a variety without limits: a ballad to express love, a march to rally, a sweet melody to soothe, and a hymn to inspire; an endless variety to suit every mood and satisfy every need.

How shortsighted it is, then, to choose a single key and endlessly tap out the monotony of a single note, or even two or three notes, when the full keyboard of limitless melody and harmony can be played!

How disappointing it is that when the fulness of the gospel, the whole keyboard, is here upon the earth, many churches tap on a single key! The note they stress may be essential to a complete harmony of religious experience, but nonetheless it is not all there is. It isn't the fulness.

Single-Key Tapping Neglects Many Principles

For instance, one taps on the key of faith healing to the neglect of many principles that would bring greater strength than faith healing itself. Another taps on an obscure key relating to the observance of the Sabbath-a key that would sound different indeed if played in harmony with the other essential notes. A key used like that can get completely out of tune. Another repeats endlessly the key that relates to the mode of baptism and now and then taps one or two other keys as though there were not a full keyboard. And again, the very key used, essential as it is, just doesn't sound complete when played alone to the neglect of the others.

There are other examples, in many of which parts of the gospel are endlessly stressed, and the churches build upon them until alone they sound nothing like they would if blended with the full measure of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Not that we say the key of faith healing, for example, is not essential. We not only recognize it-we also rely on it and experience it; but it is not the gospel itself, nor its fulness.

We would never hold that baptism is not essential, absolutely essential, for it constitutes the official enrollment in the church and kingdom of God. If that key is played alone, however, without the counterpart key of authority, the fulness and the harmony are gone and it becomes dissonant. And without the keys of faith and repentance it is meaningless; and perhaps worse, it is counterfeit. This happens when the authority we speak of is lacking.

Now, we do not say the churches are wrong so much as we say they are incomplete. The fulness of the gospel has been restored. The power and the authority to act for God is present with us. The power and the authority of the priesthood rests upon this church. The Lord revealed: "This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:19-21.)

The Great Apostasy Continues

In these last days, when the consummate power of evil moves against us, the great apostasy spoken of in the scriptures moves to its inevitable conclusion. The Christian churches that should be the bulwark against it seem to provide little substance for either their members or their clergy. And we see the frightening specter of empty churches and of a clergy promoting causes they, above all, should resist.

In my travels on Church assignments it has been frightening to me to see the churches closed, boarded up, with weeds growing in the yard; or churches open but empty. We face the frightening thought of a generation raised without any contact with scripture.

It is not unusual to find people who take an interest in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but who give only casual attention to the ideal that the fulness of the gospel is here. They become attracted by a single key, a doctrine, often one to which they take immediate exception. They investigate it by itself alone. They want to know all there is about it without reference-in fact, with specific objection and rejection-to anything else. They want to hear that key played over and over again. It will give them little knowledge, however, unless they come to see that there is a fulness-that there are other complementary ideals and doctrines that present a warmth and a harmony and a fulness, that draw at the right moment upon each key, which if played alone might itself seem discordant.

Now, the one-key danger is not limited to investigators. Some members of the Church who should know better pick out a hobby key or two and tap them incessantly, to the irritation of those around them. By doing this they can dull their own spiritual sensitivities. They can thus lose track of the inspired knowledge that there is a fulness of the gospel and can become, individually, as many churches have become: they may reject the fulness in preference to a favorite note. As this preference becomes exaggerated and distorted, they are led away into apostasy.

Seek Knowledge through theSpirit

I counsel readers to think about this matter. More than that, I would urge them to pray about this matter. Thinking on its own is inadequate as the basis for man's wisdom. There is another, more perfect, manner of communication through the Spirit: "For the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God" (1 Corinthians 2:10).

Speaking to the Corinthians, Paul said: "Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Corinthians 2:13-14.)

Any soul has the right, indeed the obligation, to make an appeal through prayer for the answer to this question: Is there a true church? After all, that is how it all began-with a fourteen-year-old boy who went into a grove. He had two questions: Which of all the churches was true? and which should he join? There he experienced a marvelous vision of the Father and the Son, and there the dispensation of the fulness of times was ushered in. Subsequently the authority to act for God was restored, and that rests yet with this church.

I bear witness that these things are so. Jesus is the Christ. He lives. And His church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is the only true and living church upon the face of this earth.

Address given at general conference October 1971.

---
Notas:
[^1] Knowledge of the subject. This interesting quality pervades all the rest and, in my estimation, sets forth the truest test of Joseph Smith the Prophet.
