Boyd K. Packer, Things of the Soul ( 1996)

14

Called to Serve [^1]

At first, the word of the gospel was passed from friend to friend, from family to family. Copies of the Book of Mormon had a way of getting from one person to another. This is the way most of the early families heard the gospel.

Missionary Work Began Early

In 1830 Samuel Smith, with a few copies of the Book of Mormon, set out as the first missionary of this dispensation. Among the book's converts was Heber C. Kimball. The Book of Mormon has great converting power. It also converted Brigham Young.

Oliver Cowdery was called by revelation in the fall of 1830 "to go unto the Lamanites and preach my gospel unto them" (D&C 28:8). Peter Whitmer, Jr., Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson joined him. They stopped at Kirtland, Ohio, where they left a thriving branch of twenty members. A new convert, Frederick G. Williams, joined them there.

They walked about fifteen hundred miles. Parley P. Pratt later wrote: "We carried on our backs our changes of clothing, several books, and corn bread and raw pork. We often ate our frozen bread and pork by the way, when the bread would be so frozen that we could not bite or penetrate any part of it but the outside crust." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 52.)

Following a conference held earlier that month, on June 19, 1831, Joseph Smith, with some others, left Kirtland for Independence, Missouri. They preached the gospel along the way and, when there, to the Lamanites. Among them was William W. Phelps, who three days before they left had been commanded by revelation to be baptized, and had been ordained an elder "to preach repentance and remission of sins by way of baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God" (D&C 55:2). From that same conference twenty-eight missionaries were called to labor in pairs.

Missionary Principles Established

Two principles had been established for missionary work. Missionaries were called of the Lord through priesthood authority, and they were to travel in pairs. Those principles are honored to this day.

David W. Patten was baptized. He was ordained an elder two days later, given a license, and with a companion sent to preach the gospel in Michigan. Thus a third principle was added. The granting of a missionary license or a missionary certificate became a revered principle in missionary labors. This principle is also honored to this day. Each missionary carries a certificate.

In 1834 Wilford Woodruff, by vote of the branch at Adam-ondi-Ahman, was ordained a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood, given his license, and with a companion sent to Tennessee on a mission.

During the days of bitter persecution in Kirtland the Prophet Joseph Smith called the Twelve together. Although he needed the strength and protection of those he could trust, he called these men to go abroad on missions. When the troubles were over and many people had left the Church in apostasy, they were replaced tenfold by converts flooding from Europe.

To serve missions, sometimes the brethren left their families sick and destitute. The first Latter-day Saint hymnbook, published in Kirtland in 1835, had a section titled "Farewell Hymns." How significant! Perhaps only those early missionaries could feel the full meaning of these simple lines by William W. Phelps:

I go devoted to His cause,

And to His will resigned;

His presence will supply the loss

Of all I leave behind.

Missionaries from Utah

After the move to the Salt Lake Valley, notwithstanding the Saints' poverty and their struggles to establish homes, missionaries were called and sustained at general conference-often to the surprise of those called. In the general conference of October 1869, George Q. Cannon read the names of 141 brethren, called from many of the settlements, to go on short missions to the eastern states. Sixteen of them were bishops.

One message threads its way through the letters from the Brethren to local leaders: "We need more missionaries! We need more missionaries!" And this is the call we make today: We need more missionaries! We need more missionaries!

I have a letter signed by President John Taylor, written on April 12, 1884. It has an interesting letterhead:

The President's Office

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

P.O. Box B

Salt Lake City, Utah

"P.O. Box B" became the symbol of the mission call for generations of Latter-day Saints. A letter from Box B was a call to the mission field. Those letters came unannounced: no interviews, no asking whether it was convenient-just a letter from Box B, a call to serve.

Here is a response addressed to Box B, datelined Beaver, Utah, August 30, 1879:

President John Taylor:

Dear Brother,

Yours of the 27 instance notifying myself to make my arrangements to go on a mission to the United States is to hand. You ask an answer of me. My answer is, I am glad that I am counted worthy by my brethren to go on a mission or fill any place of trust and I hope that I shall never do any thing to forfeit the confidence reposed.

I know of nothing now to prevent my going as desired although plenty to do at home.

That simple phrase "although plenty to do at home" no doubt referred to a wife and family to feed and clothe, children to teach, a farm to keep, cows to milk, a garden to tend, a home to complete. All were set aside because a letter had come from Box B.

To continue the letter:

I hold myself in readiness to act where I am supposed to do the most good. The work has to be done. The people warned. All should have a hand in the great work of the last days. I hope this may find you well in body and mind.

Praying God to bless and preserve you to perform the grate labors that devolves upon you.

Your brother in the gospel,

J.R. Murdock

One Sunday afternoon after church, George T. Benson and his family stopped at the store in Whitney, Idaho, to pick up the mail. The store was closed, but the letter boxes were open. As they rode home in the buggy, Sister Benson sorted through the letters and found one from Box B. They sold part of the farm to finance Brother Benson on his mission. He left his wife and seven children (including young Ezra) and answered the call. The eighth child was born four months after he arrived in the mission field.

Young David Kennedy was engaged to lovely Lenora Bingham. They had sent out their wedding announcements. Then came a letter from Box B. He hurried to his bishop, who counseled them to marry-and then for him to leave immediately on his mission. She would wait and support him.

I repeat the lines of William W. Phelps:

I go devoted to His cause,

And to His will resigned;

His presence will supply the loss

Of all I leave behind.

I go because the Master calls;

He's made my duty plain-

No danger can the heart appall

When Jesus stoops to reign.

Perhaps a few refused the call from Box B, but we have no record of them.

Much has changed since those Box B days, but one thing must not change. We must not-we cannot-lose the spirit of the call, for it is a demonstration of the power of revelation.

Today's Arrangements for the Call

As the Church has grown and spread abroad, of course there must be orderly procedures for processing and assigning missionaries to a specific mission, arranging transportation, getting physical examinations, and so forth. The method of calling missionaries has necessarily become a good deal more regimented than it used to be. Nevertheless, bishops and stake presidents must not come to view themselves as merely interviewers and fillers of forms and senders-in of recommendations. These things must be done, but in all of this we must not forget the sacred nature of the call by the spirit of revelation.

Perhaps the most precious thing that we carefully maintain is the letter of call to a specific mission from the President of the Church. This is much to be treasured by every missionary. But the Church is so large now that the President of the Church cannot pray about each soul by name, individually. No ward is so large, however, nor any stake so extended, as to prevent both bishop and stake president from praying on their knees over the name of each young man, separate and apart from any other name-asking the Lord through the veil how to keep them worthy, when each should be called, and how to inspire each one with the sacred nature of the call. The stake presidents and bishops must be careful not to draw back from this sacred work in the calling of missionaries.

The final call and the assignment to the field of labor remain with the President of the Church. He may call upon his counselors and upon members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to assist him, all of whom have been sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. This sacred duty never goes outside that small circle of men who have had the keys of the kingdom conferred upon them.

While the written call comes from the President of the Church, the spirit of the call, the obligation to serve, the promise of blessings to those who answer the call, all of the very personal interviews and sacred teaching moments-these must rest with bishops and stake presidents. They are to reach out and prepare every young man and call him to service.

Each young man who is physically able to serve has a sacred priesthood duty to remain worthy, to be willing to answer the call to be a missionary. And it is a call; it is not just an option or an invitation. The stake president and the bishop must teach them that, so that they never turn down a call from the Lord.

Bishops and stake presidents are consecrated as priests and teachers over the people. The stake president sets the missionary apart to his calling, and, as with others he is authorized to ordain or set apart, he has a major responsibility relating to the call itself. In order for young men to answer this call to serve, something spiritual must happen to them. But first it must happen to the bishops and the stake presidents, as it happened to a stake president many years ago.

Making the Call

When I was a young man, Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles came to our stake conference. He related this experience, which had occurred when he was a young stake president in Arizona. I have never forgotten it.

The stake presidency had determined to call a new stake superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, the equivalent of our Young Men president today. One day he left his office in the bank and went next door to see a young businessman. He had a question for him.

"Jack, how would you like to be superintendent of the young men in the stake?"

"Aw, Spencer, you don't mean me. I couldn't do anything like that." Jack refused to accept the position.

Stake President Kimball persisted: "Sure you can, Jack. You relate well to young people. You would be a good superintendent." He tried to persuade him, but to no avail. Jack would not do it.

Brother Kimball went back to his desk in the bank. For hours he brooded over his failure. Then a marvelous thing happened. It came to him! Of course, Jack would not respond to such an invitation from Spencer. He had made a terrible mistake.

There is a commanding phrase in the Book of Mormon. Jacob had called the people to the temple to teach them. Of this he said, "Wherefore I, Jacob, gave unto them these words as I taught them in the temple, having first obtained mine errand from the Lord" (Jacob 1:17).

Stake President Kimball now did as Jacob had done in ancient time. He "obtained his errand from the Lord." He returned next door and asked forgiveness and for permission to start over.

"Brother Jones, last Sunday the stake presidency met to prayerfully consider a vacancy in the office of stake Young Men's superintendent. The names of several men came into the discussion; yours was among them. We all felt that you were the man the Lord would have serve in this calling. So we knelt in prayer to ask the Lord what was His will. The Lord confirmed to the three of us, by revelation, that you were the man He wanted to be called to that position. Brother Jones, as a servant of the Lord I am here to deliver that call."

"Well, Spencer, if you are going to put it that way Â�" To which Stake President Kimball replied, "I am putting it that way!"

Of course, Jack would not respond to an invitation of that kind from Spencer, but Elder Jones could not refuse a call from his president.

What occurred between those two visits transformed Brother Jones, but it happened to Stake President Kimball.

That is the very essence of what we need to have happen if we are to increase the number of missionaries. What happened to Stake President Kimball that day must happen to every bishop in every ward and every president in every branch in the Church, and every stake president and every district president in the Church. Then we shall have our missionaries.

Sometime after hearing that experience from Elder Kimball, I was called as a high councilor and given responsibility for several hundred students at a large Indian school. In those days there was a Sunday evening session at stake quarterly conference that was prepared by the Sunday School. Our stake president assigned us to prepare a dramatization featuring the Indian students. He wanted it to be fitting for Sunday but in the nature of a pageant.

It was a very difficult assignment, for we lacked the talent to write the script. There was only one person in the stake who had that talent. After praying over the matter, we asked the stake president if we might call her to write the script. The president then told us that something had offended her, and I can remember he said, "She's turned sour." She had requested release from the stake Sunday School board and refused to serve in any capacity.

But there was no one else who could do it. Could we have his blessing in at least approaching her? He doubted we would succeed, but said we could have his blessing.

It was late when my companion and I called at her home. We knocked on the door, and the porch light came on. She opened the door and said, "Well, who might you two represent here at this time of night?" Almost without thinking, I replied, "Sister Wight, we represent the Lord."

She was much affected by those words and said with emotion, "Well, in that case I can't refuse any request you make of me, can I?" We told her that was true. She accepted the call and wrote an inspiring script. She was active again. And we had been taught a lesson.

As a church, we must be very careful not to lose this precious gift. Local leaders must not only process and recommend missionaries but also must maintain and develop the spirit of the call and convey it to the next generation intact. Otherwise, what a loss it would be to those who would go through life without having had that experience and influence in their lives, and what a disaster to the Church!

The Missionary and the Leaders

The obligation to prepare for a mission is a moral protection for our youth. They must come worthily. We must have each one of them arrive at the age of a mission call in worthiness. The call and the worthiness are inseparable.

Why should a young man stay morally clean? Because there is a calling awaiting him. It is expected of him. It is required of him. He must not disqualify himself. Clearly, bishops and stake presidents will assure a higher standard of worthiness by pressing the duty to serve on a mission than they will achieve by pressing worthiness for the sake of worthiness alone.

Since this matter demands a spiritual approach, it will not do to concentrate on figures. We must think names instead of numbers. Leaders will need to pray in particular instead of in general. Bishops and stake presidents should have names on their papers-the family name and the given name by which each young man is known. The efforts should be directed toward adding the title "elder" and "missionary" to those names. Then this work will move.

If leaders pray over the names of individuals, they will come to know what they must know if the young man is to serve on a mission. Much of this must come by inspiration. Prayerful leaders have discernment; they will know, for instance, why a young man withdraws from his calling.

Suppose one young brother hears his parents speak in worried terms of finances. He may have seen the overdue bills or answered a call from a collector. He may have seen the anxiety on his father's face or heard it in his mother's voice as they put off a creditor for another month.

He may have decided, because he is a young man, that he will not add to the financial burdens in that family by serving a mission. How will he know that there are ways to help a young man finance his mission? He only knows he will not add to the financial burdens of his parents. He may disqualify himself first.

Discernment and Revelation

That is what the bishop must discern. He will not feel it while filling in blanks on forms or numbers in lines on paper. He will feel it on his knees with the names of young people on his mind. He will feel it while a young man is sitting before him in a personal interview. It is then that revelation will come.

When I was a very young man I was called to the little hospital in Brigham City to give a blessing to a distant relative of my wife's. She was fading away. The doctors had told them that she had just hours to live, and the family had given up all hope. They had come in from a tiny community out in Box Elder County, and they were gathered there to spend the last few moments with their mother. I joined the grieving husband in administering to her, and he asked if I would be voice. It was one of those times when a blessing of comfort to her husband and to her family was about all that could be done.

But those were not the words that came. And a listener would have wondered whether I understood that it was the husband, not the wife, who needed the comfort. After the blessing, I was very much troubled, and I am sure the family felt confused and disappointed at what had been said. But as the days were to unfold, it was not the wife who died but the husband-suddenly! Unexpectedly! The wife made a sudden turn, rallied, and quickly recovered. And it was the words in that unusual blessing that gave her strength to carry on.

The second experience happened when I was asked to open a Quorum meeting with prayer. It was as though I did not know the subject of the meeting, for the words that came in my prayer were on the Book of Mormon and very little else. That puzzled me, worried me, for a day or two. And then it came to me. I realized that notwithstanding all the prayers and preparation that we had made for our mission presidents conference and all the things we had included in it, we had not built enough into our counsel on the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon, Another Testament of Jesus Christ, is our message. Without gimmicks, without any huckstering, we must see that the Book of Mormon is moved out into the world. Every copy that can be placed anywhere must be placed there. That is the message: The Book of Mormon, Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

The Power of the Call

Now a few further words on missionaries.

The principle of self-reliance is deeply rooted in our doctrine. There is a cause-and-effect relationship between the calling of missionaries to go abroad and the growth of the Church at home.

There are countries which have received missionaries from the center stakes of Zion for a hundred years or more, where they have not yet developed the tradition that their young men serve on missions. As a result, in some missions the number of converts is fewer in a whole year than it is in many missions in a single month.

In other countries, where the gospel has been preached for only a generation or two, they enjoy very rapid growth, with more converts in a month than some missions produce in a year. In those countries their youth are called to missions in generous numbers, notwithstanding they are the developing countries where our members are poor, very poor.

The stakes that accept missionaries from the center stakes of Zion and do not send missionaries are not spiritually safe. They will not grow either in numbers or in spiritual strength. The key is the calling of missionaries.

The spirit of Box B, the spirit of the call, will be the salvation of the Church in these countries. The principle of which I speak is a true principle.

We need to counsel and inspire. We must use the power we already have in our hands, the power of the call. We need teachers to teach with inspiration. We need parents and teachers and leaders who will pray with and about our young people.

The youth will be casual about serving if we are casual about preparing and calling them. They need a "cause." Give them the cause, the greatest on earth. They will serve on missions if they are called to serve on missions. If they are invited or recommended or interviewed only, and asked to consider only, they may turn down a call from the Lord.

The Certain Sound of the Trumpet

Years ago, as an Assistant to the Twelve, I accompanied Elder Spencer W. Kimball, then a member of the Twelve, to a conference of what was then known as the Southwest Indian Mission. We had two hundred missionaries assembled in the stake center on Main Street in the middle of the business district in Snowflake, Arizona.

In those days the missionaries lived in huts and makeshift quarters scattered across the reservations. I think I am not uncharitable if I describe their circumstances as being dismal and forbidding. It was difficult to give the missionaries some courage. They felt self-conscious and inadequate.

In the earlier days of the Church there was a strength that missionaries received from street meetings. In the Southwest Indian Mission there were very few communities, much less streets. The people were scattered and the missionaries needed some help and encouragement. Brother Kimball was determined to lift their morale, to rally them to service.

Brother Kimball was a musician. He had a very fine voice and could play the piano. He also understood young people. On that occasion we did something that I had never done before, nor have I done it since. I suppose it would not be appropriate except under those very circumstances.

What we did was this: After meeting for much of the day, we were invited to take our hymnbooks and stand and sing "Ye Elders of Israel." As we were singing, Brother Kimball gave the signal for us all to follow him. The side doors of the stake center were swung open, and we followed Brother Kimball down the walk and out into the middle of Main Street in Snowflake, Arizona. All traffic stopped.

The missionaries followed, falling into ranks of four, two hundred of them, singing "Ye Elders of Israel." Brother Kimball and I and President J. Elmer Baird, the mission president, were in the lead. Singing the stirring anthems from the hymnbook all the way, we marched down Main Street through the business district for four blocks, turned one block to the left, marched four blocks back, again around the corner and into the stake center, still singing.

That did something to that mission. The young elders who had never held a street meeting were imbued with courage they had not known before. I learned something from that experience. I learned that you can rally the young elders of Israel. I learned that they will march to a certain sound of the trumpet.

In my generation, we marched away to war. We did not wait to be conscripted. Tyler Nelson and Elmer Yates and Wilford Stokes and hundreds of thousands of others did not return. But that was the price that had to be paid for the cause, and we all went willingly. The youth of Zion will serve a cause and they won't have to be conscripted. They will go if they are taught and they are called!

There is a stirring song entitled "Called to Serve" that was once often heard in a Primary setting but is now in our regular hymnbook. Oh that it could be carried in the heart of every Latter-day Saint young man as he grows toward manhood, and every young woman as she matures! Oh that it could be sung, occasionally at least, in every zone in every mission in the world!

Called to serve him, heav'nly King of glory,

Chosen e'er to witness for his name;

Far and wide we tell the Father's story,

Far and wide his love proclaim.

Called to know the richness of his blessing-

Sons and daughters, children of a King-

Glad of heart, his holy name confessing,

Praises unto him we bring.

Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name;

Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name;

Forward, pressing forward, as a triumph song we sing.

God our strength will be; press forward ever,

Called to serve our King.

(Hymns, 1985, no. 249.)

Address given at Regional Representative seminar at general conference April 1985.

---
Notas:
[^1] Knowledge of the subject. This interesting quality pervades all the rest and, in my estimation, sets forth the truest test of Joseph Smith the Prophet.
