Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Preface

From 1944, when I entered medical school, until 1984, when I was called to serve as one of the "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23), most of my professional attention was directed to the acquisition of knowledge and its application toward the relief of illness. My foremost foes were those of ignorance and disease, of distress, of disability, and of death.

My specialty training as a cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon brought me in contact almost daily with seriously ill patients who faced the real prospect of death. Of necessity, I looked upon death as a formidable foe to be fought. In fact, for all conscientious doctors, death's gateway from life also threatens as a potential gateway to defeat.

Realistically, every patient of every doctor, if followed long enough, will pass away. And when death does occur, a sense of sadness naturally seems to prevail, regardless of the age of the deceased.

Having served as a surgeon in many states of the United States of America and in many countries of the world, I have encountered a broad range of reaction among families whenever a loved one is lost. For some, their grief seems to be almost unbearable. For others, their loss seems to be mercifully couched in love, with their heartaches softly cushioned by faith in their Heavenly Father. They seem to be spiritually strengthened by knowledge almost tangible—a knowledge of life continuing after death.

Such was the case with one man I remember well. I spoke with him on the eve of a serious operation that I was to perform. As I again explained the high risk of both the operative procedure and the alternative, he calmly stated, "My life is ready for inspection." Fortunately he survived the operation and lived for many years. Innumerable individuals found happiness by emulating the example of his great faith.

Perhaps even more difficult than personally facing the gateway of death is coping with the grief inflicted by the loss of a loved one. Not long ago at the funeral of a friend, I visited with two distinguished brothers—former surgical colleagues of mine—whose lovely companions had both passed away. They said that they were going through the most difficult period of their lives, adjusting to the almost unbearable loss of their partners. These wonderful men then told of their cooking breakfast for each other once a week—sharing that rotation with their sister—as they tried to lessen the loneliness imposed by the departure of their sweethearts.

In my years of service as a servant of the Lord, I have tried to think more as he thinks. I have tried to know more of his teachings and to do more that he would have me do. With an eye single to his glory, I have sharply focused upon his remarkable statement:

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

With that focus, my thinking has become more concerned with eternal considerations. An uncommon word describes that viewpoint—eschatological. [^1] Now I have come to view death as the gateway to immortality and eternal life. And as I have come to comprehend more about life in all of its phases, I no longer feel that death is always that foe to be feared. Instead, I view it as a potential friend to be understood. To some extent, I understand what the prophet Jacob meant when he said, "Death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator." (2 Nephi 9:6.) Death is a fellow-traveler with whom each of us will one day walk. Only the time and the place of that rendezvous are not known.

Dealing with grief occasioned by the passing of a loved one is made more tolerable because of the Lord, who provided sublime gifts of comfort and peace. He offered "the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send" in his name. "He shall teach you all things," the Lord said, "and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you."

Then the Master added: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:26-27.)

Comfort and peace! What divine and priceless gifts!

Remarkably reassuring for those who encounter grief is the promised visitation of the Holy Ghost—the divine Comforter—who will provide hope and perfect love. And when nourished by prayer, that hope and love will endure until the end, when all saints shall dwell with God. (See Moroni 8:26.)

These gifts extend to all who truly believe in him, and are granted because of his infinite love for us. His peace comes as we comprehend his grace and act according to his will. It comes from faith founded upon his infinite atonement. To find that hope, that reassurance, and the ability to carry on, the bereaved person will seek to know the Lord and to serve him. It is his atonement that will make our future bright, regardless of the dark days inevitably encountered on life's journey. The poetess so declared:

Upon the cross he meekly died For all mankind to see That death unlocks the passageway Into eternity. [^2]

When our mission in mortality is over—when we have passed through the gateway to immortality and eternal life—there the gatekeeper will be. "The keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

His gospel will help us to prepare for that great day of judgment. His gifts will assuage the grief of the bereaved and bring joy to those who love him. He will help them to fulfill their noblest purposes in life.

My main qualification for presuming to write this book is found in my love of the Lord and for my brothers and sisters throughout the world. I would be their servant and help to bring his comfort, peace, and blessings to all of God's children everywhere. This book has been written with the hope that its readers may also come to know the proper place of death as a grand gateway in God's wondrous way for his children. Death isan essential element in his divinely designed plan ofsalvation.

I hope earnestly that faith, knowledge, hope, and gratitude may spring from the pages of this book.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Definition: concerned with ultimate or last things, such as death, judgment, and heaven. The word is derived from two Greek terms, eschatos, meaning "last," and ology, meaning "study of."
[^2] 2. Vilate Raile, "Upon the Cross of Calvary," Hymns, no. 184.
