Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 1

The Purpose of Life

Before we can comprehend the reason for the gateway and the purpose of death, we must first understand the purpose of life. Imagine how difficult it would be to understand the plot of a complex three-act drama if we missed act one and left before act three. Our perspective would surely be limited, wouldn't it? In the drama we know as mortal life, the curtain goes up at birth. Childhood yields to youth, then adulthood, which accedes to old age. And when the breath of life ceases, the curtain goes down. But that scenario pertains only to act two of the great drama.

Act two is intimately related to the first and third acts. Act one began long ago in premortal realms. There we were numbered among "all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made." (D&C 38:1.) We were spirit sons and daughters of our loving Father in Heaven, eager for an opportunity to come to the earth to receive a body. That body was to be created in the image of our divine parentage. It was to serve as the tabernacle for our eternal spirits.

Through the miracle of birth, spirit children of God obtain their physical bodies. But they do not do it as a group. With the relatively rare exception of multiple births, they are born one at a time. Each of us is born as an individual. Only as an individual is each person tested, converted to the Lord, allowed to repent, and baptized.

"There was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead." (Alma 12:24.)

And as an individual, each of us will die, be resurrected, be judged, and be allowed to gain admittance to the third act of our own drama.

Thus, while in act two, each human soul consists of two component parts: an eternal spirit and a physical body. Those two components of each human life "are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected." Only when those components are united and later reunited at the time of resurrection can an individual "receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.)

No doubt we understood this concept while participating in act one. There, as premortal spirit children of God, we were excited to enter act two in order to obtain a body and to experience mortality. When the foundations of the earth were laid, "when the morning stars sang together, . . . all the sons of God shouted for joy." (Job 38:4, 7.) To be granted physical flesh of one's very own is an exciting and enabling privilege. Without a body, or when spirit and body are separated, one cannot receive a fullness of joy.

Our bodies are truly amazing. They can defend themselves, repair and regulate themselves, even reproduce themselves. Physicians can literally spend an entire professional lifetime studying the intricacies of the structure and function of the human body. Yet the constituents of the body are not unique. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, other elements, and chemical compounds by themselves are common and of little intrinsic value. Should we ever get an inflated feeling of our own worth, this scripture should make us humble: "For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." (Genesis 3:19.)

Concepts of death are a challenge to teach, especially to children. Sometimes interpretations as understood and expressed by children are humorous. One leader shared this story with me:

A little boy came home from Primary one day. His mother asked him what he had learned. He replied, "My teacher told me that I used to be dust and I would be dust again. Is that true, Mommy?"

"Yes," the mother replied. "A scripture tells us so: 'For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.'"

This little boy was wide-eyed and amazed. The next morning, he was scurrying around getting ready for school, looking for his shoes. As he crawled under the bed, lo and behold, there he saw balls of dust. He ran to his mother in wonder, saying, "Oh, Mommy, somebody's under my bed, and they're either coming or going."

Like all dust of the earth, our physical remains will be recycled. Indeed their ingredients are biodegradable. Our bodies were not created to live in mortality without limit. They were built in such a way that they were subject to illness, injury, aging, and death. Sand runs continuously through mortality's hourglass of time. We start to die the moment we are born. Why? The reason is simple. Our Heavenly Father wants us to return to him. He gave us life, and he provided the means by which we could return to him. Viewed from an eternal perspective, we live to die; and we die to live again. [^1]

The creation of the earth fulfilled many divine purposes. It was to serve as a dwelling place for men, women, and children. According to scripture, it was to provide a temporary testing area for God's children: "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:24-25.) Thus, the earth might be labeled as our arena for obedience testing.

The earth was also fashioned to sustain human life. All of this effort was designed to the end that families could become eternally linked, without which the earth would be, in the Lord's words, "utterly wasted." [^2]

Illness, Blessings, and Healing

Things can and do go wrong with our physical bodies. They can be injured and are surely subject to illness. Our Maker has instructed us to care for them and not to defile them. We are encouraged to avail ourselves of competent medical counsel and heed it. We are to honor the body as a temple of God, and allow no forbidden thought, sight, sound, or substance to enter its sacred precincts.

We are also privileged to request and receive blessings administered by priesthood authority. This pattern was described in the New Testament: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up." (James 5:14-15.)

Administrations to the sick were established during the time of Jesus and practiced thereafter. Authority to perform the ordinance was restored in the latter days, as part of the promised "restitution of all things." (Acts 3:21.) To his servants, the Lord gave this remarkable promise: "Verily I say, whomsoever you bless I will bless." (D&C 132:47.) He gave this instruction through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me." (D&C 42:44.)

That scripture carries assurance beyond compare. It states that priesthood blessings unto the faithful will be recognized by the Lord. Sometimes mortal pleas for healing or prolongation of life are granted, and sometimes they are not. Blessings and prayers should not presume to overlook or attempt to override the will of the Lord. His will is to be honored as supreme. We should follow the example of the Son of God, described poetically by Eliza R. Snow:

By strict obedience Jesus won The prize with glory rife: "Thy will, O God, not mine be done," Adorned his mortal life. [^3]

Our Creator divinely designed our pathway. We were not destined to be stranded in mortality forever. Such an arrest of our progression would completely thwart God's "great plan of happiness." (Alma 42:8.) [^4] Moreover, we have this remarkable reassurance from him: "Those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D&C 42:46.)

It was my privilege to be close to both President Spencer W. Kimball and President Ezra Taft Benson during their final days here on the earth. In each instance, the setting was peaceful and serene, faithfully portraying the sweetness described in scripture just cited. Those solemn occasions were also blessed by a spirit of submissiveness to the willof the Lord.

In contrast, even the extreme violence associated with the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum brought a halt to their merciless persecution and rewarded them with sweet reunions inrealms above.

Our purpose in life is to be tested, to develop faith, to make and keep sacred covenants, and, later, to leave. Our ultimate and highest destiny is to return to our heavenly home. When that time comes, it can be as momentous as the time of birth. Birth is the gateway to mortal life; death is the gateway to immortality and eternal life.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), p. 216.
[^2] Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2, p. 217.
[^3] As one who practiced cardiovascular surgery for many years, I cannot resist the opportunity to note that these verses from Ezekiel alluded to a heart transplantation—even centuries before our present era of sophisticated open-heart surgery. Ezekiel's imagery may have been figurative and used only as a metaphor, but the description of the replacement of a "stony heart" with a "heart of flesh" is equally apropos to the current clinical operation.
[^4] Eliza R. Snow, "O My Father," Hymns, no. 292.
