Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 5

When Children Die

Years ago when I was a young resident at a large university hospital, I became acquainted with a very special child. She was only three years old, as I recall—bright, beautiful, and bubbling with personality. Frequently while I was making rounds I would visit her, not because she was my patient, but because she was my dear little friend. I shall identify her as Julie, though that was not her real name.

Julie was afflicted with leukemia of the most severe variety. In contrast with present progress in the treatment of that dreaded disease, relatively little could be done for her in those days. Julie's dutiful and devoted parents became my good friends too. They were members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and that made us feel like family. Julie's mother was more active in the Church than was her father, a wonderful man who simply had not as yet made his way to full participation.

Little Julie's cheerful outlook and complete faith in the Lord influenced all of us for good. Ironically, the deeper her decline, the higher her spirituality seemed to rise.

Julie's death occurred just prior to her fourth birthday. Though we sorrowed, we realized that we were all more devoted Latter-day Saints because of her. Her father had been deeply moved and changed by her great faith. Her passing brought him face to face with life, death, and the plan of salvation. No longer could he postpone his decision to declare his gratitude and allegiance to God, who had granted life to little Julie. Instead of becoming embittered, he became a powerful disciple of the Lord and a compassionate and capable leader in the Church. Subsequently, he served as a stake president, a regional representative, and the president of a temple. There he sealed many families for time and for all eternity. Julie's mother continued to be a stalwart, and all who knew her judged her to be a model matron in the temple where her husband presided. Today, little Julie's parents are numbered among Sister Nelson's and my very choice friends.

I relate this incident because I learned a tremendous lesson from this exceptional child. The illness that claimed her life influenced innumerable individuals for good, both directly and indirectly. For her parents, the gateway did not become a passage of gloom. It became the gateway of gladness, opening opportunities to bind the hearts of countless children to their fathers, and fathers to their children.

I also learned that every now and then, the Lord takes these special spirits back home to him early, as if to spare them some of the weighty trials that mortality would have brought. Repeatedly I have seen that happen. Spiritually mature and sensitive children are called by their Creator prematurely (according to human criteria) to pass through the gateway to immortality and eternal life.

The Prophet Joseph Smith expressed himself on this subject. He said, "The Lord takes many away even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again."

He further explained: "All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham. The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable wicked world." [^1]

From Julie and other extraordinary children like her, I learned that there is no premature death for a righteous individual. Death can be premature only if a person is not prepared to meet his or her Maker. As Paul declared: "The sting of death is sin." (1 Corinthians 15:56.)

Sorrowing parents need not censure themselves because they cannot save the lives of all of their children. Even parental error is not transmitted to their children's accountability: "The sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world." (Moses 6:54.)

Lamenting parents may safely place their trust in the hands of God, who lent them each precious little life in the first place. Though parental grief is real, normal, and divinely encouraged (see D&C 42:45), it can be eased to a tolerable degree by sincere gratitude—and understanding. Those little ones are children of our Heavenly Father, too. The Psalmist said, "Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward." (Psalm 127:3.)

Infants and little children are accorded unique consideration in the judgment scale of the Lord. He has revealed to his prophets these enlightening scriptures:

"All children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation." (Moroni 8:7.)

"All children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D&C 137:10.)

"Little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me; for it is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure, that great things may be required at the hand of their fathers." (D&C 29:46-48.)

"Little children also have eternal life," added Abinadi. (Mosiah 15:25.)

Not only do these remarkable scriptures providetruth and soothing reassurance, but they also influence decisions in the care of children who are critically ill. Occasionally the question is posed about possible baptism of a child who may not survive until accountability at age eight. An understanding of the doctrine provides a sure answer to that question. Baptism is not needed. A sample of relevant scriptures confirms that statement:

"Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (D&C 93:38.)

"All little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing." (Moroni 8:22.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie paraphrased that scripture in his own positive manner: "Little children shall be saved. They are alive in Christ and shall have eternal life. For them the family unit will continue, and the fulness of exaltation is theirs. No blessing shall be withheld. They shall rise in immortal glory, grow to full maturity, and live forever in the highest heaven of the celestial kingdom." [^2]

President Joseph F. Smith penned one of the most exalting and expansive statements on the condition of children who depart from mortality's veil of tears at an early age. He wrote: "They will inherit their glory and their exaltation, and they will not be deprived of the blessings that belong to them; for, in the economy of heaven, and in the wisdom of the Father, who doeth all things well, those who are cut down as little children are without any responsibility for their taking off, they, themselves, not having the intelligence and wisdom to take care of themselves and to understand the laws of life; and, in the wisdom and mercy and economy of God our Heavenly Father, all that could have been obtained and enjoyed by them if they had been permitted to live in the flesh will be provided for them hereafter. They will lose nothing by being taken away from us in this way. . . .

"Joseph Smith, the prophet, was the promulgator under God of these principles. He was in touch with the heavens. God revealed himself unto him, and made known unto him the principles that lie before us, and which are comprised in the everlasting gospel. Joseph Smith declared that the mother who laid down her little child, being deprived of the privilege, the joy, and the satisfaction of bringing it up to manhood or womanhood in this world, would, after the resurrection, have all the joy, satisfaction and pleasure, and even more than it would have been possible to have had in mortality, in seeing her child grow to the full measure of the stature of its spirit. . . .

" . . . When the mother is deprived of the pleasure and joy of rearing her babe to manhood or to womanhood in this life, through the hand of death, that privilege will be renewed to her hereafter, and she will enjoy it to a fuller fruition than it would be possible for her to do here. When she does it there, it will be with the certain knowledge that the results will be without failure; whereas here, the results are unknown until after we have passed the test." [^3]

Sweet and innocent children surely return to their loving Father in Heaven. Earthly parents understandably wonder what those children will be like in their subsequent reunions. While I cannot answer such questions fully, precious insights can be gained from another statement of President Joseph F. Smith: "The spirits of our children are immortal before they come to us, and their spirits, after bodily death, are like they were before they came. They are as they would have appeared if they had lived in the flesh, to grow to maturity, or to develop their physical bodies to the full stature of their spirits. If you see one of your children that has passed away, it may appear to you in the form in which you would recognize it, the form of childhood; but if it came to you as a messenger bearing some important truth, it would perhaps come as the spirit of Bishop Edward Hunter's son (who died when a little child) came to him, in the stature of full-grown manhood, and revealed himself to his father, and said, 'I am your son.'" [^4]

Parents who have surrendered the sweetest and smallest flowers from the family's garden need to remember our loving Heavenly Father. He has promised a special reward to those who now suffer in silence, who spend long days and longer nights through their trying times of bereavement. Our Creator has promised glory. He said, "For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand." (D&C 58:4.)

That promised glory includes the blessing of reunion with each little child who has left the family circle early to help surviving members of the family to draw nearer to God. Those little children still live and are a heritage of the Lord.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] From Poems by Alan Seeger. Copyright 1916, by Charles Scribner's Sons. Cited in One Hundred and One Famous Poems, comp. Roy J. Cook (Chicago: Contemporary Books, Inc.), p. 10.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 215-16.
[^3] "Compensation," Emerson's Essays, 3, quoted in Orson F. Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts (Salt Lake City, 1927), p. 269. The word banyan originally appeared as banion and has been changed to conform with the modern-day spelling.
[^4] Orson F. Whitney, Conference Report, April 1929, pp. 110-11.
