Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 6

When Young People Die

If we pause to reflect on our youthful days when we were getting our education, we may vividly recall a classmate or two who lost their lives. High school and college yearbooks usually contain thoughtful notations and photographs commemorating such circumstances. One of my closest friends—one of the most intelligent and worthy men that I have known—was a victim of enemy fire in World War II. To this day, I often think of him.

Throughout mankind's history on the earth, the disastrous deeds of war have claimed heroic youth among many casualties. Their call to arms in time of war brings them face to face with the real possibility of premature parting from loved ones. In some instances, that possibility has even become a premonition. Such was the situation with Alan Seeger. In sensing the imminence of his demise, he penned one of the greatest poems written during World War I, entitled "I Have a Rendezvous with Death":

I have a rendezvous with Death At some disputed barricade When Spring comes round with rustling shade And apple blossoms fill the air. I have a rendezvous with Death When Spring brings back blue days and fair.

It may be he shall take my hand And lead me into his dark land And close my eyes and quench my breath; It may be I shall pass him still. I have a rendezvous with Death On some scarred slope of battered hill, When Spring comes round again this year And the first meadow flowers appear.

God knows 'twere better to be deep Pillowed in silk and scented down, Where love throbs out in blissful sleep, Pulse nigh to pulse, and breath to breath, Where hushed awakenings are dear . . . But I've a rendezvous with Death At midnight in some flaming town, When Spring trips north again this year, And I to my pledged word am true, I shall not fail that rendezvous. [^1]

The poet and patriot, Alan Seeger, lost his life in 1916—on the Fourth of July.

Regardless of cause, in wartime or peace, when such vigorous and vibrant young men or women have been taken by trauma unforeseen and swift—often by unnatural means—the grief produced among survivors is sudden and unrelenting.

While speaking at the funeral of such a young man, the Prophet Joseph Smith also reflected upon the death of his oldest brother, Alvin, and his youngest brother, Don Carlos. He said: "It has been hard for me to . . . see these young men upon whom we have leaned for support and comfort taken from us in the midst of their youth. Yes, it has been hard to be reconciled to these things . . . yet I know we ought to be still and know it is of God, and be reconciled to His will; all is right." [^2]

But to the parents of a beloved young person who has passed through the gateway, death could loom as a span of sadness or it could become the gateway to other opportunity unforeseen. Parents meet that challenge in various ways. I know well a mother and father whose son was taken in a tragic automobile accident on the eve of his embarking on a full-time mission. The parents of nine children, they were of modest means and their resources were also being taxed by treatments for the mother, who was battling cancer. What did they do? They donated their son's entire missionary fund—more than five thousand dollars—to the general missionary fund of the Church. When I discussed this generous decision with them, they replied, "Our son had earned and saved this money for his mission. If he cannot go, his money can. We are donating it so that others can serve. His money will still go on a mission."

Now, more than a decade later, I observe that both parents are doing well. In addition to other important callings in the Church, the father has served a distinguished term as a stake president. The mother is living without evidence of recurrent cancer and is leading a normal, productive life. The eight surviving children are also blessed with material and spiritual sufficiency. All members of that family have been blessed by the great faith that prompted such an effective example of managing grief.

Turning adversity into opportunity captured the thoughts of Ralph Waldo Emerson, who wrote: "The death of a dear friend . . . which seemed nothing but privation, somewhat later assumes the aspect of a guide or genius; for it commonly operates revolutions in our way of life, terminates an epoch of infancy or of youth which was waiting to be closed, breaks up a wonted occupation, or a household, or style of living, and allows the formation of new ones more friendly to the growth of character. . . . And the man or woman who would have remained a sunny garden flower, with no room for its roots and too much sunshine for its head, by the falling of the walls and the neglect of the gardener, is made the banyan of the forest yielding shade and fruit to wide neighborhoods of men." [^3]

The realities of agency and occasional choice to do wrong need to be reckoned with in the passing of some of our youth. Even though their bodies may be mature, their heads are strong and sometimes puerile. Their behavior may be furtive or unfortunate. When those deeds result in disobedience or demise, their parents and loved ones need special consoling.

That was the subject of Elder Orson F. Whitney'sconference address in April 1929. He said, "The prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them, and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or in the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path, but if it leads them at last, like the penitent prodigal, to a loving and forgiving Father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God.

"Who are these straying sheep—these wayward sons and daughters? They are children of the Covenant, heirs to the promise, and have received, if baptized, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which makes manifest the things of God." [^4]

Our young sons and daughters—precious youth of the noble birthright—if called through the gateway by whatever cause, will yet participate in the glorious gifts provided by the atonement of Jesus Christ.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Cited by Spencer W. Kimball in Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), p. 98.
[^2] William Shakespeare, As You Like It, act 2, scene 1.
[^3] This is the title of a pamphlet published by William Penn in 1669. John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992), p. 282.
[^4] Orson F. Whitney, Conference Report, April 1929, pp. 110-11.
