Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 8

Factors of Choice in Longevity

The greatest gift from God to immortal man is eternal life. His greatest gift to mortal man is life itself. Next to that is his gift of agency. That includes freedom to choose the right—or the wrong. Many are the funerals that I have attended of former friends and classmates who made a deliberate choice earlier in life not to obey the Word of Wisdom. They died of diseases associated with the use of tobacco or alcohol, or both. The probabilities are that they would have lived longer if they had made different choices. Without initially realizing the consequences of their choices, their lives were shortened thereby.

If our Creator had forced us to be obedient, or careful, or righteous, the fundamental law of agency would be null and void. Spiritual growth and self-mastery would have been impossible.

In the beginning the Creator explained to Moses: "Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him." (Moses 4:3.) "It is given unto [thy children] to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves." (Moses 6:56.)

Many people opt to append the adjective free to describe agency. But the expression "free agency" is not scriptural terminology. Scripture refers only to "moral agency." The Lord said that "every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:78; emphasis added.)

Moral agency goes hand in hand with moral accountability. Decisions of a moral nature are based on faith in the Lord, the giver of moral law. The Word of Wisdom is part of that divine code of moral law. It is spiritual in nature. Obedience to it carries physical rewards as well.

Incidentally, I have often wondered if God's children would be just as obedient to that revelation if it were not known to be beneficial to one's health. When Abraham and Isaac were commanded to enact their sacrificial scene, did they first ask if God's test was certain to be beneficial to Isaac's health? No! They obeyed because of their faith in God and their desire to obey, regardless of risk.

Our faith and obedience will be rewarded with divine protection as we navigate through the turbulent waters of life. We are reminded of God's presence during trials in this verse from "How Firm a Foundation":

When through the deep waters I call thee to go The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erflow For I will be with thee, thy troubles to bless, And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress. [^1]

The Lord made this remarkable promise regarding choice and longevity: "He that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed." (D&C 42:48.) President Spencer W. Kimball added this commentary: "If one is not 'appointed unto death' and if sufficient faith is developed, life can be spared. But if there is not enough faith many die before their time. It is evident that even the righteous will not always be healed and even those of great faith will die when it is according to the purpose of God. Joseph Smith died in his thirties as did the Savior. Solemn prayers were answered negatively." [^2]

Many times I am asked by brethren in the Church what special regimen I would recommend to prolong their mortal lives. I usually respond with this quotation from the oath and covenant of the priesthood: "Whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." (D&C 84:33.) I know of no better choice in preparing for a full and useful life. I have seen this promise realized time and time again.

What about the sisters? They are entitled to the same blessings as the brethren when they keep the commandments of God: "The body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness." (Romans 8:10.) Regardless of gender, physical and spiritual blessings come to those who avoid strong drink and harmful substances, including tobacco. Faithful men and women respect their bodies as holy temples with proper nutrition and care, appropriate exercise, rest as the Lord has recommended, chastity, and moral fidelity. Longevity is likewise enhanced for those who choose to honor their parents.

What about Suicide?

Perhaps no topic touches on the importance of choice in longevity as directly as does that of suicide. [^3] The act of taking one's own life is truly a tragedy because it creates so many victims. Family and countless friends are left to bear feelings of undeserved misery and guilt. The commandment "Thou shalt not kill" is written in nine verses of scripture. [^4] Not one of them grants self-exclusion. The rational mind knows it is wrong.

Unfortunately, forces of stress and depression incite behavior that is not always rational. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Persons subject to great stresses may lose control of themselves and become mentally clouded to the point that they are no longer accountable for their acts. Such are not to be condemned for taking their own lives. It should also be remembered that judgment is the Lord's; he knows the thoughts, intents, and abilities of men; and he in his infinite wisdom will make all things right in due course." [^5]

We know that the good done and the desires of the heart will also be weighed when final judgment is rendered. Alma taught: "The plan of restoration is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ, that the soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

"And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good." (Alma 41:2-3.)

How grateful we can be that the infinite atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ applies so broadly. "His blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." (Mosiah 3:11.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith offered this remarkable insight regarding judgment: "While one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as His offspring. . . . He is a wise Lawgiver, and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, 'according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil,' or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. . . . We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several des[s]erts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right." [^6]

Elder M. Russell Ballard, who studied this topic extensively, wrote, "I draw an important conclusion from the words of the Prophet [Joseph Smith]: Suicide is a sin—a very grievous one, yet the Lord will not judge the person who commits that sin strictly by the act itself. The Lord will look at that person's circumstances and the degree of his accountability at the time of the act." [^7]

Repentance operates in the spirit world as well as on earth. President Joseph F. Smith saw in vision the work of salvation proceeding among those who have passed from this sphere of mortality. He wrote: "The faithful elders [and sisters [^8]] of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead.

"The dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God,

"And after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation." (D&C 138:57-59.)

Suicide is a choice—a grievous choice—that abbreviates longevity. Its victims include those who suffer because of that choice. They need and deserve the reassurance of the gospel and the knowledge that life for their loved one continues. Immortality of the soul applies to all, as does the privilege of repentance and forgiveness.

What about Euthanasia?

In recent times, the topic of euthanasia, or mercy killing, has received increasing public attention. I mention it here only to condemn it. The same commandment cited previously, "Thou shalt not kill," does not except the halt, the lame, the elderly, or the terminally ill. Merciful as it may seem superficially, the choice to take an innocent life cannot be reposed with any person or panel of specialists. No human can create life; no human can qualify to take it away under the guise of pity or piety. [^9] Society must not create a board of "expert exterminators."

Only "the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne" (D&C 88:13), may be empowered to extinguish the light of mortal life from those who are ill.

Medical knowledge should help the sick to endure to the end, but never to create that end.

Prolongation of Life by Medical Means

We live in a modern medical era of sophisticated life-support systems, intensive-care units, and expert physicians skilled in the care of those who are critically ill. One of my distinguished friends and medical colleagues, Dr. Benson B. Roe, wrote: "An adversarial stance against death is, of course, an asset to the physician's role in combatting disease and 'saving lives.' One would hardly want physicians to be cavalier about people dying, or even to be less than completely dedicated to avoiding premature death. Medical science takes justifiable pride in making lives longer, safer, and more comfortable.

"It is, however, unrealistic and, I believe, irresponsible for our profession to carry this . . . philosophy beyond the expectations of salvaging a meaningful existence for a significant period of time." [^10]

Dr. Roe's statement alludes to the question of propriety in extending special technical capabilities (including mechanical life-support systems) to those who are terminally ill. I agree. If a patient is indeed terminally ill with no hope for recovery, there is no need to feel an obligation to seek or to continue such support. Each individual is destined to die. Death is part of life. It should be accorded the dignity it deserves. Medical care for the dying patient should mercifully offer reasonable palliation and relief from discomfort.

In my many years of experience caring for those who are critically ill, this question of prolongation of life was usually resolved without much anguish. Quiet and calm conversations between physicians and families were very helpful. If the patient had a reasonable chance—even a remote chance—for real recovery, the decision was usually made to try for that objective. If, on the other hand, recovery was not realistically possible, rarely did any participant in such a discussion wish for means to be employed that were deemed to be unreasonable.

Consultation with the Lord in prayer is a vital part of all important decision making. Those who are able to attend the temple will find the House of the Lord to be a sacred setting in which such matters may be prayerfully pondered. Counsel with members of the family, local church leaders, or trusted friends is very helpful.

Sometimes such decisions require immediate action. How useful it is under those circumstances to have reviewed these possibilities with the family in advance of an emergency. A living will or discussions with dependents beforehand can be a thoughtful gesture of preparation for stressful times that may lie ahead.

Large as those decisions may loom at the moment, the consequences are less time-sensitive when viewed from an eternal perspective. More important than the length of life is the quality of life. And more important than worldly accomplishment is fidelity to God, family, and country. Fidelity to God includes ordinances made and covenants obeyed that qualify one for that greatest gift of eternal life, regardless of another hour, day, or week of life-support on a mechanical respirator.

More and more families are providing opportunity for their loved one who is terminally ill to pass through life's exit gateway in comfortable surroundings at home. These choices are shaped to the individual circumstance. They pertain to propriety as well as longevity.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Russell M. Nelson, "Life after Life," Ensign, May 1987, pp. 8-10.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 326; emphasis added.
[^3] The bracketed phrase has been added because President Smith wrote that sisters will also be accorded the privilege of ministering and preaching in the world of spirits as are the elders referred to in this revelation. See Gospel Doctrine, p. 461.
[^4] Gospel Doctrine, p. 440.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 312.
[^6] 6. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 218.
[^7] 7. M. Russell Ballard, "Suicide: Some Things We Know, and Some We Do Not," Ensign, October 1987, p. 8.
[^8] 8. On another occasion, President Smith said that the good, faithful sisters of this dispensation will also participate in the missionary cause. See Gospel Doctrine, p. 461.
[^9] 9. Note that I do not refer to societal demands for criminal justice—a topic unrelated to euthanasia.
[^10] 10. Benson B. Roe, "Physician Attitudes about Death," The Pharos, Winter 1991, p. 32.
