Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 9

Life after Death

Each time I attend a funeral, I see tears of sadness occasioned by separation from a loved one. Especially am I touched by the weeping of children in demonstration of their sweet special love and pure grief. How I long to comfort them! Often they ask questions pertaining to the whereabouts of their dear one. There seem to be more questions than answers. How thankful we are that the Lord has revealed important information to satisfy our yearnings to know more about the future—act three of our drama of life.

Job also asked the ultimate question: "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14.) The answer is a resounding yes! That gift was provided by the Savior and Redeemer of mankind. His atonement literally made the resurrection a reality. He pronounced a promise: "Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also." (John 14:19.) Without the infinite atonement of Christ, "this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more." (2 Nephi 9:7.)

The resurrection of Jesus Christ crowned his mission to do the will of his Father. One of the best-attested facts in history is that of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. In one conference address, I took occasion to recount many of the well-documented testimonies of those who had witnessed the risen Redeemer. [^1] The total number is substantial.

A Book of Mormon prophet made this statement: "If Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection.

"But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ." (Mosiah 16:7-8.)

The keys of the resurrection repose securely with our Lord and Master. He said: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:25-26.)

That marvelous prospect is a gift from our Redeemer to each of us.

Paradise

Obvious is the fact that elements of the physical body decompose and return to the earth. Less obvious is the fact that "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

"And then . . . the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow." (Alma 40:11-12.)

A verse of Old Testament scripture capsulizes thesetwo concepts: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Ecclesiastes 12:7.)

Of course no one knows exactly where the spirit world is located. At the funeral of patriarch James Adams, the Prophet Joseph Smith said that "Brother Adams has gone to open up a more effectual door for the dead. The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith." [^2]

Other prophets and Church leaders have also stated that the spirit world is on or near the earth. Its location may be less important than its actuality. All who pass through the gateway of death go immediately into the spirit world. This was true of Jesus and the penitent thief who also expired on a cruel cross. Prior to their passing, Jesus said unto him, "To day shalt thou be with me inparadise." (Luke 23:43.)

There each spirit continues to live and is busily engaged. Shortly before the end of his mortal life, President Joseph F. Smith announced in general conference his remarkable vision of the redemption of the dead. Revealed to him was information regarding activity in the spirit world: "I beheld that the faithful elders [and sisters] of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are . . . in the great world of the spirits of the dead." (D&C 138:57.) [^3]

President Smith explained: "The righteous spirit that departs from this earth is assigned its place in the Paradise of God; it has its privileges and honors which are in point of excellency, far above and beyond human comprehension; and in this sphere of action, enjoying this partial reward for its righteous conduct on the earth, it continues its labors, and in this respect is very different from the state of the body from which it is released. For while the body sleeps and decays, the spirit receives a new birth; to it the portals of life are opened. It is born again into the presence of God." [^4]

We know that those spirits are capable of choice, of repentance, and of preparation for the day of resurrection. They remain "in paradise, until the time of their resurrection." (Alma 40:14.) Then "the spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form." (Alma 11:43.)

Resurrection

Yes, compounds derived from dust—elements of the earth—are combined to make each living cell in our bodies. This is one of the marvels of our creation. Likewise, it will be one of the marvels of our resurrection. The miracle of the resurrection is matched only by the miracle of our creation in the first place.

No one knows precisely how two germ cells unite to make one. Nor do we know how that resulting cell multiplies and divides to make others—some to become eyes that see, ears that hear, or fingers that feel glorious things about us. Each cell contains chromosomes with thousands of genes, chemically ensuring the identity and independence of each individual. Our bodies undergo constant rebuilding according to genetic recipes that are uniquely ours. Each time we take a bath, we lose not only dirt but also cells dead and dying, as they are replaced by a newer crop. This process of regeneration and renewal is but prelude to the promised phenomenon and future fact of our resurrection.

In faith, Job answered his own question: "For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." (Job 19:25-26.)

Job's prophecy foretells a reunion of the eternal spirit with the recreated body. The spirit will come from its temporary home in paradise. The body will be resurrected. Scripture so explains: "O how great the plan of our God! . . . The paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect." (2 Nephi 9:13.)

We know that those who reside in the world of departed spirits will have opportunity to learn of the gospel of Jesus Christ. "Marvel not at this," John recorded, "for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:28-29.)

Such long-range vision was also provided by the apostle Paul, who taught the Corinthians, while citing the example of the resurrected Lord, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:19-22.)

Near the end of his life, President Joseph F. Smith was allowed to receive that remarkable vision regarding the redemption of the dead. He wrote: "Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 138:17.)

The Book of Mormon prophet Alma revealed considerable detail about life after physical death. He wrote: "Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this tem-poral death.

"The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

"Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." (Alma 11:42-45.)

Alma's explanation provides reassurance especially comforting to families of those who died because of traumatic disruption of their bodies. He taught: "The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23.)

Knowledge of the resurrection of the dead presents to the informed mind enlightened concepts of hope, love, and joy. The appreciation of that glorious state almost defies description. John the Revelator wrote of his vision of the possibility of our eventual reunion with the Savior of the world: "I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

"And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away." (Revelation 21:3-4.)

When those who weep for the loss of a loved one are fully able to comprehend these concepts, their tears of separation may literally be turned to tears of anticipation. Joyful reunions await those who prepare for them.

Judgment

The Redeemer explained that his gospel and his atonement provided not only for our resurrection, but also for our eventual judgment.

"I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

"And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—

"And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works." (3 Nephi 27:13-15.)

Judgment will be facilitated by our own "bright recollection" and "perfect remembrance" of life's deeds. To that will be added the modulating influence in consideration of the innermost desires of our hearts. (See Alma 11:43; 5:18.)

Three Degrees of Glory

Eventual judgment will be followed by assignment to glory, of which there are different degrees. The Savior alluded to that concept when he said: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:2-3.)

His apostle Paul explained: "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead." (1 Corinthians 15:41-42.)

That brief outline was dressed in greater detail by the Lord as he revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the truths contained in the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. (See D&C 76:64-81.) There we learn of the telestial, terrestrial, and celestial degrees of glory. As it pertains to celestial glory, the Lord revealed that there are gradations within that kingdom. (See D&C 131:1-2.) The Prophet added this comment: "In the resurrection, some are raised to be angels, others are raised to become Gods." [^5]

Immortality and Eternal Life

The Lord clearly declared his own mission in mortality when he stated: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) His infinite atonement provided resurrection from the dead and immortal life to all mankind. His gift of the possibility of eternal life is conditional. It is predicated upon repentance and qualification through the keeping of covenants made in connection with the sacred ordinances of the temple. It means a whole new way of living on earth to prepare for eternal life in celestial realms above.

"Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

The glory of individual immortality and eternal life is the real reason for the creation of the earth and all that dwells upon it. And when an individual is found worthy, "then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdomprepared for you from the foundation of the world." (Matthew 25:34.)

Those who die after the age of accountability and before covenants could be made in the temple may be accorded the privilege of temple ordinances performed for them vicariously. We are to seek out our own kindredand do their work for them in the true "spirit of Elijah." (2 Kings 2:15.)

As I meet with Saints throughout the world, I am asked some interesting questions. Occasionally someone wants to know if his or her favorite activities will be available in the celestial glory, such as skiing, golf, surfing, tennis, mountain climbing, or other recreation that seems so important to them now. I give the best answer I know: "I don't know."

But I do know that the "same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy." (D&C 130:2.)

Moreover, I know that husband and wife—faithful to covenants made in the temple—are heirs to this promise:

"If a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; . . . and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths . . . to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." (D&C 132:19.)

Passage through the gateway of death is required in order to permit these glorious blessings to be realized.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 56.
[^2] Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 458-59.
[^3] A. Karl Larson, and Katharine Miles Larson, eds., Diary of Charles Lowell Walker 1 (Logan: Utah State University Press, 1980), pp. 465-66. Note: Charles Lowell Walker wrote the words to the hymn "Dearest Children, God Is Near You," Hymns, no. 96.
[^4] Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses 4:135-36.
[^5] Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 17:142.
