Russell M. Nelson, Gateway We Call Death (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995)

Chapter 11

Resolutions for the Living

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." [^1] That objective includes immortality and eternal life with him as his faithful sons and daughters. Meanwhile, we struggle along through act two of life's three-act drama. Each of us has obtained a physical body. Each of us endures trial and tribulation. Each of us prepares for future exigencies with life insurance, wills, trusts, and all that may be needed to organize business affairs. Time is both fleeting and precious.

We who tarry here have a few vanishing moments remaining to prepare to meet God. Unfinished business is our worst business. Perpetual procrastination must yield to perceptive preparation. The prophet Amulek testified: "This life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors."

Then he added: "Do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

"Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:32-34.)

Complete repentance brings complete forgiveness. The Lord gave this promise to the penitent sinner: "None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live." (Ezekiel 33:16.)

Though we can do little to postpone physical death,we can prevent the possibility of "spiritual death, yea, a second death, . . . cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness." (Helaman 14:18.)

Today we have a little more time to bless others—time to be kinder, more compassionate, quicker to thank and slower to scold, more generous in sharing, more gracious in caring. Since happiness is the object of our existence, taking time to smell the roses is advisable. Joy is a journey, not a destination.

We travel along life's highway with family and friends, but let us not forget our forebears. The more we know about our ancestors, the more we know about ourselves. Today while we are able, we may turn our hearts to parents and predecessors and bless them with our love—and labor. Those we call dead are not dead at all. They are alive—on the other side of the veil. Family ties can continue beyond death because of ordinances performed in the temple. While our kindred wait for us, for what do we wait? Where do we begin? Important advice was given by President Boyd K. Packer, who said: "I came to see that any one of us by himself can care about them, all of them, and love them." [^2] President Packer thus identified the true starting point in this great vicarious work.

Some among us still have perceived neither the spirit of Elijah nor its power. Yet we are bound by this warning: "Now, my dearly beloved brethren and sisters," saith the Lord, "let me assure you that these are principles in relation to the dead and the living that cannot be lightly passed over, as pertaining to our salvation. For their salvation is necessary and essential to our salvation, as . . . they without us cannot be made perfect—neither can we without our dead be made perfect." (D&C 128:15.)

This doctrine and its ordinances are laden with love and are intended to perpetuate the sweetest of life's relationships—in families forever. Just as Jesus gave his lifevicariously for each of us, we can serve vicariously for our kindred.

For our beloved ancestors, perhaps we cannot do everything, but we can do something. Meanwhile, we may keep ourselves free from the bondage of sin, worthy and able to endure to the end. Then, when our turn comes to pass through the gateway, we can say as did Paul: "The time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." (2 Timothy 4:6-7.)

We need not look upon death as an enemy. The anticipation of its arrival need not hold us hostage. With full understanding and preparation, faith supplants fear. Hope displaces despair. The Lord said, "Fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full." (D&C 101:36.) May we be reminded of his tender affection for us: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14:21.)

With the security of his love, we find strength to endure. If we harbor feelings of guilt or hopelessness, we can change. We may generate renewed hope. Moroni said, "How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope? And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise." (Moroni 7:40-41.)

The gospel of Jesus Christ provides hope for all in this wailing world. "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy." (D&C 128:19.)

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints invite all to come unto Christ and be sanctified in him. He said, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:25-26.)

Such conviction includes enduring conversion. A prophet so explained: "Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

The happiness found in this life is only a sample of the everlasting joy that awaits us later. If any of us mourn for lost loved ones today, we can be comforted and know that in due time "God shall wipe away all tears . . . and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." (Revelation 21:4.)

Each of us is well known to the Lord. With his holy help, our deeds and desires will qualify us to receive blessings promised to the faithful: everlasting joy, glory, immortality, and eternal lives.

As one of the "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23), I testify that he lives! I also testify that the veil of death is thin. I know by experiences too sacred to print that those who have gone before are not strangers to leaders of the Church. To us and to you, our loved ones may be just as close as the room nearby, separated only by the gateway to immortality and eternal life. Together we are soothed by the caress of our Savior's love. "Peace I leave with you," he said. "My peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.) He promised: "I will not leave you comfortless." (John 14:18.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 255.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 238-39.
