Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Preface

"And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom." (D&C 88:118.) With the hope that the words in this volume will edify, uplift, and instruct those who read them, we have compiled carefully selected presentations from the 1985, 1986, and 1987 Brigham Young University Women's Conferences. Included are talks that we believe perceptively and affirmatively address vital issues in the lives of all thoughtful Latter-day Saints. The authors of the essays examine the issues honestly and openly, neither afraid of hard questions nor satisfied with easy answers. We hope readers of this volume will find new understanding and angles of vision and, most of all, peace, hope, and comfort in confronting the daily struggles and joys of life.

The first section, "Developing Spirituality," focuses explicitly on our identity as women of faith and women of God. Camilla Eyring Kimball examines the totality of commitment required to be a woman of faith and gently and humorously illustrates the process of becoming such through examples from her own life. Patricia Terry Holland cautions us to love each other and avoid judgments despite apparent differences in talents, experience, and opportunity. In a scriptural examination of spiritual gifts, Elder Dallin H. Oaks challenges us to seek for those gifts we lack to strengthen us and our ability to serve. The final essay of the section, by Carolyn J. Rasmus, reflects on her conversion to the gospel and the legacy she will leave future generations.

"Coping with Hard Realities," the second section, raises questions about the nature of pain and suffering and the reasons for them and offers strategies for understanding and dealing with them. In the keynote essay to the section, Francine R. Bennion uses her vast knowledge of the scriptures to explore explanations for suffering and how we can come to terms with it. Deanne Francis discusses the stages of grief and, with great compassion, relates experiences that define what is helpful and what is hurtful to those in pain. Stephen J. Bahr analyzes another type of stress, the economic dislocation that accompanies divorce, and surveys the effects on women of changes in divorce laws. In the final essay of this section, Anne L. Horton examines the effects of personal violence and challenges us to eliminate any vestiges of violence from our own lives and to understand and assist those who suffer abuse.

The third section, "Inspiration from the Past," asks us to consider how women of the past influence women of today through the continuing relevance of their experience and example. Carol Cornwall Madsen examines the development of personal faith and commitment by Elizabeth Ann Whitney and places her experiences and those of her contemporary Mormon sisters into the broader context of women's religious experiences in nineteenth-century America. Harriet Horne Arrington and Leonard J. Arrington then focus on the life-long commitment to community service demonstrated by Alice Merrill Horne, the "first lady of Utah arts," who labored tirelessly for the cultural enrichment and welfare of Utah.

The essays in section four, "Women in an International Church," are appeals to increase our awareness of the culturally diverse lives and values of members of the Church beyond the boundaries of the United States. Betty Ventura graphically illustrates difficulties in transferring the gospel message across cultures but also notes lessons American Mormons can learn from those of other cultural traditions. Using the life of his daughter Heidi as a foil, Val D. MacMurray discusses typical experiences and expectations of young women in third-world countries and challenges us to become involved in broadening the disadvantaged lives they live. In the concluding essay of this section, John P. Hawkins reflects on insights obtained from his research in Guatemala: that in transmitting the gospel around the world, we must express truth in the specific cultural idiom of each nation rather than requiring worldwide conformity to American culture, whose practices may be misunderstood by those we wish to interest in the gospel.

The final section, "Individuality and Community," raises questions about identity, diversity, and mutual support in the quest for Christlike lives. Karen Lynn Davidson considers the positive and negative effects of peer pressure, and Louise Plummer offers a humorous look at the need for individuality.

This volume is one in a series of collected talks on a variety of topics from the BYU Women's Conferences. We hope that the publication of these addresses will further the continuing quest for both greater understanding of life and increased religious conviction.

Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen
