Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Seeking Spirituality

If "the glory of God is intelligence, or in other words light and truth" (D&C 93:36), then it is our responsibility to gather truth of all sorts, not just truths of theology, but of everything.

—Camilla Eyring Kimball

Women of Faith

Camilla Eyring Kimball [^1]

When I was young I anticipated birthdays, seeing them as a mark of advancement and as opening the door to new opportunities. Then in middle age I dreaded birthdays, because they represented the closing of some doors and the approach of debilitating old age. But as I got older still—to the "My, you're looking wonderful!" stage—I started to look forward to birthdays again. There is even a temptation to exaggerate a little, because each birthday shows something of an achievement—showing that I have managed to hang on through one more cycle of the seasons. I celebrated my ninetieth birthday just a few months ago. That was quite a surprise to me, because for a whole year I had been saying I was already ninety.

Except for a little pride in surviving, I can say from experience that old age is not a status to envy, because there's not much future in it. Unfortunately, old age is a time of aches and pains, and a time of unwanted dependency on others after a lifetime of being self-sufficient. It is a time of gradually slowing down. And there is a frustrating sense that there are a thousand things still undone and not enough time remaining. But on the other hand, old age does allow one time for reflecting with some satisfaction on the joys and accomplishments of a lifetime.

There are some advantages to old age, though. Now that my memory has faded a bit, I find I can enjoy reading a book the second time. I enjoyed rereading the biography of my husband and, as I read along, I kept wondering how it would all turn out!

But more seriously, there is a measure of satisfaction that as we get older we keep coming closer and closer to "enduring to the end" by being faithful to the important values in life.

What are those values which are so important to hold onto until the very end? Christ told us what is most fundamental:

"Behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

"He said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou?

"And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.

"And he said unto him, Thou has answered right: this do, and thou shalt live." (Luke 10:25-28.)

A woman of faith, then, is one whose heart and soul, mind and strength are committed to the pursuit of true values. First, in her heart and soul, a faithful woman acknowledges God's role in all things. Then, with her mind she seeks to understand the divine plan for this world. And finally, with the strength of her hands, she undertakes to carry out the fundamental tasks of mankind, which are to keep God's commandments and give unselfish service to His children.

First, faith. "Without faith it is impossible to please [God]: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Hebrews 11:6.)

I am not able to get around as much as I once did, and as a result I have looked at more television than I ever did in my younger years. In watching television I like best of all the programs that tell me about nature. Television is my substitute for travel. Through the marvel of the magic box I can be transported in an instant anywhere. I can travel through a telescope to outer space or through a microscope to the recesses of the human brain.

Whether it is bees or polar bears, whales or forests, I am fascinated by the fantastic variety and intricate interdependency of the various forms of life. I marvel at God's creation in its infinite complexity. I am much too unlettered to begin understanding the grand design of God, but like one who stands before a great tapestry, I can drink in its beauty and stand admiring its intricacy without knowing exactly how the artist achieved the effect. I know God's hand is in nature. I do not know just how God created the world, but I am persuaded that He did it, and I stand in awe and wonder at the majesty of His creation. My heart is full of gratitude toward a loving Father.

Second, when we have obtained faith in the Great Creator, we are inclined to want to know what it is that would please God. He has said that He wants us to love Him with all our mind.

I believe that to love God with our mind means to pursue understanding of His world. We are to develop the talents God has given us. There are many kinds of talents, many gifts—faith and healing, music and art, leadership and followership, and intellect, the capacity for learning. Though they are all valuable gifts, it is the last that I would emphasize here partly because of the university setting and partly because of my personal inclinations. Though we may have other gifts as well, all of us gathered here share the marvelous ability to acquire knowledge. We are taught that we should "seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

I love to study; I love to learn. At one time I learned for the sheer pleasure of learning. Now I do it more for the purpose of understanding God's great creation and my role in it. As a result, I don't read much fiction any more. In the past few months I have read a book of essays that gave me new insights into gospel principles. I finished the Book of Mormon again, which ends on a stirring challenge to be "perfect in Christ." (Moroni 10:33.) A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, by LeGrand Richards, got me thinking about the urgent preparations we need to make against the troubles of the last days. And I have read several biographies. When I read biographies, I am looking to see how God's plan works itself out in the lives of men and women. And as I read the scriptures, I stand amazed at how I can fall so far short of living all the commandments and yet know that God loves me anyway.

If "the glory of God is intelligence, or in other words light and truth" (D&C 93:36), then it is our responsibility to gather truth of all sorts, not just truths of theology, but of everything. So long as we do not become vain in our learning, it is all to the good.

There are various ways of learning—reading, discussing, and experiencing. I wish I could be in the classroom again. Books are good, but there is something special about the interchange of ideas in the classroom. I look forward each week to Sunday School and Relief Society for the stimulation I get there. And I have found that participation in community affairs gives me new and important insights.

I have always wanted desperately to increase my education. In 1912, at age seventeen, I came to Provo as a refugee from the Mexican Revolution, to finish high school and earn a teaching certificate. One day I received a telegram from my father asking why I had not written a letter. The reason was that I did not have two cents for a stamp. But I could not give up school. Being a student and becoming a teacher were both my pleasure and my need.

Many of the people who came to BYU in those days were here at considerable sacrifice. Education was hard to come by and recognized as a precious commodity. But that is still true. Many students here today have chosen a hard road, but they are coming into possession of a fund of knowledge beyond the dreams of most people in the world. It carries with it great power for good or ill.

As a young teacher, I planned to alternate working and going to school until I had completed a graduate degree in dietetics. As it turned out, I met Spencer Kimball and married instead. That kept me from finishing my specific educational goal, but it did not stop me from being curious, nor did it stop my learning, because regular schooling is just one of the ways of becoming educated.

Reading books has opened a thousand doors for me. I worked through the Women's Club in Arizona to help establish a public library in the little farming town where we lived in order to open those same doors for others. We also benefited from having a college nearby, which provided some community education classes. And I was always active in Church teaching. As a Japanese proverb says, "To teach is to learn." I enjoyed the challenge to understanding that is a prerequisite to effective teaching.

I always did my best to encourage my brothers and sisters and my children to take advantage of educational opportunities. If there was a price to be paid, in money or effort, I considered it well worth the price.

I have found from my own experience in taking courses at the institute of religion and at the University of Utah after we moved to Salt Lake City that there is joy in learning, that it helps keep us young in spirit, and that, whatever the subject—religion or Spanish or typing or literature—it enlarges our capacity for service.

Learning is not just for one set of people or for one time of life. It is a basic activity for all mankind. We are on earth to learn—first of all the principles of salvation, and then the secrets of the world, to subdue it and make it fruitful, and to delight the mind. The Lord fosters beauty, and there is beauty in all knowledge, not just in music and painting, but in biology and geology and mathematics, too.

I know well the limits of my understanding. I make no pretension to great knowledge in any field, but I offer no apology. In comparison to our Heavenly Father, even the most learned person knows nothing. The process of education, aside from its pleasure, disciplines the mind and makes it our useful servant.

There is some risk in education, of course. It can in a sense become our master rather than our servant. If I may paraphrase another scripture: we have learned by experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little knowledge, as they suppose, to begin to lord it over others. Learning is one of the great sources of pride. Nephi cried out, "O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts . . . wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell!" (2 Nephi 28:15; italics added.) And he wrote also:

"O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish.

"But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Nephi 9:28-29; italics added.)

Nephi is not criticizing learning. On the contrary, he exalts learning as a good thing. He points out that learning has its risks. But on the other hand, ignorance has its risks, too—just a different set.

Though at the time I did not often think of my learning as a religious activity, it clearly was, in the sense that I came to value the inherent goodness in people, to appreciate the world around me, to see the fruits of unselfish cooperation, to increase my sense of self-worth, and to feel I had a capacity to be of service to others.

The third thing a woman of faith will do is to give service to others. Once we have faith in God and have developed the talents and gifts God has given us, and then ask what to do with those abilities, we are told, "Seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given . . . All these gifts come from God, for the benefit of the children of God." (D&C 46:8, 26.)

Recent First Presidency messages in the Ensign have reminded me of my responsibility to strengthen others by my expression of love and confidence and have reminded me of my responsibility to help bring about Zion. Zion will come about only through sacrifice and consecration of our best efforts. If we bring our best gifts, cultivated and polished by faithful effort, together we can build a society where harmony prevails because we have put aside selfishness. I hope that over the years I may have grown a bit less selfish. At least I have tried. And I am reminded to keep on trying by the words of the prophets.

If we examine others' lives, we learn how they have coped with problems and we can take courage in our own difficulties. Whether it is in some great way or in a seemingly insignificant way, each can make a contribution to the whole community.

But we do not know in advance just what part we may be called on to play. Esther was queen of Persia. Her husband, the king, did not know she was a Jew. And when a decree had gone out that all the Jews should be killed, her uncle, Mordecai, appealed to her to step forward and plead with the king for her people. She pointed out to Mordecai that to do so would endanger her own life. He replied, "Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esther 4:14.) The question for us is what part we have to play in the great cause. Every bit player is important to the outcome. Let us be ready for our stage entrance.

When I recently reread my husband's life story, I had fun reliving some of the great experiences we have had, and laughing at our foibles, but I also relived the sorrows. I asked myself how that man ever kept on, through all he suffered, until I was reminded that what has motivated him all these years is a fierce loyalty to the Lord and to whatever calling the Lord has given him. He has done his best to bring about Zion. Perhaps he was come for such a time as this.

I would like to express my gratitude for the love and support I have received from my husband. Today is his ninetieth birthday [March 28, 1985]. He has served a long and honorable probation. Many people can say by faith that he is a great and good man. I say on the basis of the longest and closest personal experience that there is no finer person in the world. He is the soul of kindness and the embodiment of commitment to do right. He comes wonderfully close to perfection in my opinion.

It is the greatest sorrow of his life, and therefore the greatest sorrow of mine, that he cannot be out among the Saints testifying of Christ and teaching the right path. There is an aching frustration after a long and active life at being so limited in what he can do. He said the other day, with a spark of the old sense of humor, "Resurrection will feel so good after all this."

With all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, with all our strength we will love and serve the Lord.

Women of faith will know that the Lord lives and will follow that knowledge, whatever the cost. My great-grandmother Catherine Smith, an English servant girl, was baptized to express her faith in Christ, knowing full well that it might mean the loss of her employment.

Women of faith will learn so that they might be of service. Ellis Shipp went to school to become a doctor, to help meet the needs of her community. In turn, other women cared for her children, so that she could improve her talents.

Women of faith will serve in many ways. While her husband was serving a mission, Caroline Romney Eyring took in boarders, rented her own bed, and slept on the floor rather than let her husband know her financial troubles. And she kept the secret from him that their baby, born after he left, was deaf.

The great women of the scriptures and of our own day give us innumerable examples of spiritual commitment, of the development of talents, and of willing service in a great cause. By learning we fit ourselves to contribute to the kingdom. Together we can build what no one can build alone.

I sincerely pray that the Lord will help us all to grow older gracefully, still vital and contributing and growing. I pray that He will help us develop that faith in Him that serves as the drive spring to good works. I pray that He will help us improve our talents, to equip ourselves for work in His cause. And I pray that we can fulfill our destiny as children of God, striving to be like Him, loving and serving His other children, and building Zion.

I do so in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

Women of Faith Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Patricia Terry Holland, educator, musician, and homemaker, served as first counselor in the Young Women General Presidency. She studied music and voice with a member of the faculty of the Juilliard School of Music in New York and also attended Dixie College and Brigham Young University. She and her husband, President Jeffrey R. Holland of BYU, have three children.
