Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Many Things . . . One Thing

Patricia Terry Holland [^1]

From my varied experience of listening to and speaking with many of our sisters, both younger and older, I know something of the struggles and the pain and the anxiety that concern women of our time. Every era has its problems. My limitations surely won't allow me to address every problem, anticipate every question, or meet every need, but I promise you two things. First, I promise you my love. You are my sisters and my friends. And second, I promise you my honesty. It's important to me that you know I speak from the honesty of my heart.

Our theme this year is unity of faith and diversity of works. That obviously suggests the unity and diversity among many women, but it also has an application within each individual woman—her unity and her diversity. For a moment may I speak of woman and see what significance it might have for women.

To do so, I must begin by being just a little autobiographical. Just after my release from the general presidency of the Young Women in April 1986, I had the opportunity of spending a week in Israel. It had been a very difficult and demanding two years for me. Being a good mother, with the ample amount of time needed to succeed at that task, had always been my first priority; so I had tried to be a full-time mother to a grade-schooler, a high-schooler beginning to date, and a son preparing for his mission. I had also tried to be a full-time wife to a staggeringly busy university president with all of the twenty-four-hours-a-day campus responsibility that can be required of both of us at a place like Brigham Young University. And I had tried to be as much of a full-time counselor in that general presidency as one living fifty miles from the office could be. Sister Ardeth Kapp and the others were wonderfully patient with me. I will never be able to thank Ardeth enough. But in an important period of forming principles and starting programs for the Young Women, I worried that I wasn't doing enough—and I tried to run a little faster.

Toward the end of my two-year term, my health was going downhill. I was losing weight steadily and couldn't seem to do anything to halt that. Furthermore, I wasn't sleeping well. My husband and children were trying to bandage me together even as I was trying to do the same for them. We were exhausted. And yet, I kept wondering what I might have done to manage it all better. The Brethren, always compassionate, were watching and at the end of the two-year term extended a loving release. As grateful as my family and I were for the conclusion of my term of service, I nevertheless felt a loss of association—and, I confess, some loss of identity—with these women whom I had come to love so much. Who was I and where was I in this welter of demands? Should life be as hard as all this? How successful had I been in my several and competing assignments? Or had I muffed them all? The days after my release were about as difficult as the weeks before it. I didn't have any reserve to call on. My tank was on empty, and I wasn't sure there was a filling station anywhere in sight.

It was just a few weeks later that my husband had the assignment in Jerusalem to which I have referred, and the Brethren traveling on the assignment requested that I accompany him. "Come on," he said. "You can recuperate in the Savior's land of living water and bread of life." As weary as I was, I packed my bags, believing—or, at the very least, hoping—that the time there would be a healing respite.

On a pristinely clear and beautifully bright day, I sat overlooking the sea of Galilee and reread Luke 10:38. But instead of the words there on the page, I thought I saw with my mind and heard with my heart these words: "Pat, Pat, thou art careful and troubled about many things." Then the power of pure and personal revelation seized me as I read, "But one thing [only one thing] is truly needful."

In Israel in May the sun is so bright that you feel as if you are sitting on top of the world. I had just visited the spot in Bethoron where the "sun stood still" for Joshua, and indeed on that day it seemed so for me as well. As I sat pondering my problems, I felt that same sun's healing rays like warm liquid pouring into my heart—relaxing, calming, and comforting my troubled soul. I found myself lifted to a higher view of my life.

Spirit to spirit, our loving Father in Heaven seemed to be whispering to me, "You don't have to worry over so many things. The one thing that is needful—the only thing that is truly needful—is to keep your eyes toward the sun—my Son."

"Learn of me," he seemed to say, "and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me." (D&C 19:23.) Suddenly I did have peace. I knew, as surely as I know you sit before me, that my life had always been in His hands—from the very beginning! And so are the lives of all of you, of every woman who wants to do right and grows in capacity and tries to give all she can. The sea lying peacefully before my very eyes had been tempest tossed and dangerous many, many times. All I needed to do was to renew my faith, get a firm grasp of His hand, and together we could walk on the water.

I had, for a few months, been pushed to my extremity, but that is always God's opportunity. I had learned so much, and yet now I was learning even more. The Son was enlightening my world. We all at one time or another find ourselves in the midst of a turbulent sea. There are times when we, too, would like to cry out, "Master, carest thou not that we perish?" I suppose it is for this very purpose that so many of us are drawn together today as women of faith, seeking solace and sisterly strength to carry us safely to drier and firmer ground.

I would like to pose a question for each of us to ponder. How do we as women make that quantum leap from being troubled and worried, including worries about legitimate concerns, to being women of even greater faith? One frame of mind surely seems to negate the other. Faith and fear cannot long coexist. While you think of faith and walking hand in hand with God, I would like to examine why I believe there are so many worries—"troubles," Luke 10 calls them—and to note some of the things we are legitimately worried about.

I have served as a Relief Society president in four different wards. Two of these wards were for single women, and two were traditional wards with many young mothers. As I sat in counsel with my single sisters, my heart often ached as they described to me their feelings of loneliness and disappointment. They felt that their lives had no meaning or purpose in a church that rightly puts so much emphasis on marriage and family life. Most painful of all was the occasional suggestion that their singleness was their own fault—or worse yet, a selfish desire. They were anxiously seeking for peace and purpose, something of real value to which they could give their lives.

Yet at the very same time, it seemed to me that the young mothers had easily as many concerns as they described to me the struggles of trying to raise children in an increasingly difficult world, of never having enough time or means or freedom to feel like a person of value because they were always stretched to the ragged edge of survival. And there were so few tangible evidences that what they were doing was really going to be successful. There was no one to give them a raise in pay, and beyond their husbands (who may or may not have remembered to do it), no one to compliment them on a job well done. And they were always tired! The one thing I remember so vividly with these young mothers was that they were always so tired.

Then there were those women who through no fault of their own found themselves the sole provider for their families financially, spiritually, emotionally, and in every other way. I could not even comprehend the challenges they faced. Obviously, in some ways theirs was the most demanding circumstance of all.

The perspective I have gained over these many years of listening to the worries of women is that no one woman or group of women—single, married, divorced, or widowed, homemakers or professionals—has cornered the full market on concerns. There seems to be plenty of challenges to go around. And, I hasten to add, marvelous blessings as well. In this, too, we are united in our diversity. Every one of us does have privileges and blessings, and we do have fears and trials. Some of these fears, anxieties, and worries have been pointed out to me from those of you who met with us at this conference last year. A partial list taken from the evaluation sheets you filled out one year ago notes concerns ranging from loneliness to raising children to inactive husbands to physical health and self-esteem.

The complete, longer list is staggering! It seems bold to say, but common sense suggests, that never before in the history of the world have women, including Latter-day Saint women, been faced with greater complexity in their concerns.

In addressing these concerns I am very appreciative of the added awareness that the women's movement has given to a gospel principle we have had since Mother Eve and before—that of free agency, the right to choose.

But one of the most unfortunate side effects we have faced in this matter of agency is, because of the increasing diversity of life-styles for women of today, we seem even more uncertain and less secure with each other. We are getting not closer but further away from that sense of community and sisterhood that has sustained us and given us unique strength for generations. There seems to be an increase in our competitiveness and a decrease in our generosity with one another.

Those who have the time and energy to can their fruit and vegetables develop a great skill that will serve them well in time of need—and in our uncertain economic times, that could be almost any day of the week. But they shouldn't look down their noses at those who buy their peaches, or who don't like zucchini in any of the thirty-five ways there are to disguise it, or who have simply made a conscious choice to use their time and energy in some other purposeful way.

And where am I in all of this? For three-fourths of my life I was threatened to the core because I hated to sew. Now I can sew; if absolutely forced to, I will sew—but I hate it. Imagine my burden over the last twenty-five or thirty years, faking it in Relief Society sessions and trying to smile when six little girls walk into church all pinafored and laced and ribboned and petticoated—identical, hand sewn—all trooping ahead of their mother, who has the same immaculate outfit. Competitive? I wanted to tear their pleats out.

I don't necessarily consider it virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy—but I'm honest in my antipathy toward sewing. If even one sister out there is weeping tears of relief, then I consider my public shame at least a partial blow against stereotyping. I have grown up a little since those days in at least two ways—I now genuinely admire a mother who can do that for her children, and I have ceased feeling guilty that sewing is not particularly rewarding to me.

We simply cannot call ourselves Christian and continue to judge one another—or ourselves—so harshly. No Mason jar of Bing cherries is worth a confrontation that robs us of our compassion and our sisterhood.

Obviously the Lord has created us with different personalities, as well as differing degrees of energy, interest, health, talent, and opportunity. So long as we are committed to righteousness and living a life of faithful devotion, we should celebrate these divine differences, knowing they are a gift from God. We must not feel so frightened; we must not be so threatened and insecure; we must not need to find exact replicas of ourselves in order to feel validated as women of worth. There are many things over which we can be divided, but one thing is needful for our unity—the empathy and compassion of the living Son of God.

I was married in 1963, the very year Betty Friedan published her society-shaking book, The Feminine Mystique, so as an adult woman I can look back with only childhood memories of the gentler forties and fifties. But it must have been much more comfortable to have a pattern already prepared for you and neighbors on either side whose lives gave you role models for your own; however, it must have been even that much more painful for those who, through no fault of their own, were single then, or who had to work, or who struggled with a broken family. Now, with our increasingly complex world, even that earlier model is torn, and we seem to be even less sure of who we are and where we are going.

Surely, there has not been another time in history in which women have questioned their self-worth as harshly and critically as in the second half of the twentieth century. Many women are searching, almost frantically, as never before, for a sense of personal purpose and meaning—and many LDS women are searching, too, for eternal insight and meaning—in their femaleness.

If I were Satan and wanted to destroy a society, I think I too would stage a full-blown blitz on its women. I would keep them so distraught and distracted that they would never find the calming strength and serenity for which their sex has always been known. He has effectively done that, catching us in the crunch of trying to be superhuman instead of realistically striving to reach our individual purpose and unique God-given potential within such diversity. He tauntingly teases us that if we don't have it all—fame, fortune, families, and fun, and have it every minute all the time—we have been short-changed; we are second-class citizens in the race of life. You'd have to be deaf, dumb, and blind not to get these messages in today's world, and as a sex we are struggling, our families are struggling, and our society struggles. Drugs, teenage pregnancies, divorce, family violence, and suicide are some of the ever-increasing side effects of our collective life in the express lane.

As a result, we are experiencing new and undiagnosed stress-related illnesses. The Epstein-Barr syndrome, for one, has come into our popular medical jargon as the malady of the eighties. Its symptoms are low-grade fevers, aching joints, and other flulike symptoms—but it isn't the flu. It carries with it overwhelming exhaustion, muscular weakness, and physical debilitations—but it isn't the dreaded AIDS. Its victims are often confused and forgetful; but, no, it isn't Alzheimer's. Many feel suicidal, but this disease lacks the traditional characteristics of clinical depression. And yes, it can strike men, but three times out of four it doesn't. This illness is primarily a woman's disease, and those most vulnerable are the so-called "fast-track" women in high-stress, conflicting roles. (Newsweek, 27 Oct. 1986.)

When I recently mentioned this to the young women in our BYU student body, I was flooded with telephone calls and letters saying, "I have it! I have it! I must have Epstein-Barr!" Well, whether they do or do not, I can't say. But the body and its immune system are affected by stress. Those calls and letters tell me that too many are struggling and suffering; too many are running faster than they have strength, expecting too much of themselves. We must have the courage to be imperfect while striving for perfection. We must not allow our own guilt or the feminist books, the talk-show hosts or the whole media culture to sell us a bill of goods—or rather, a bill of no goods.

I believe we can become so sidetracked in our compulsive search for identity and self-esteem and self-awareness that we really believe it can be found in having perfect figures or academic degrees or professional status or even absolute motherly success. Yet in so searching externally, we can be torn from our true internal, eternal selves. We often worry so much about pleasing and performing for others that we lose our own uniqueness—that full and relaxed acceptance of ourselves as persons of worth and individuality. We become so frightened and insecure that we cannot be generous toward the diversity and the individuality and, yes, the problems, of our neighbors. Too many women with these anxieties watch helplessly as their lives unravel from the very core that centers and sustains them. Too many are like a ship at sea without sail or rudder, tossed to and fro (as the Apostle Paul said) until more and more are genuinely, rail-grabbingly seasick.

Where is the sureness that allows us to sail our ship whatever winds may blow—with the master seaman's triumphant cry, "Steady as she goes"? Where is the inner stillness we so cherish and for which our sex traditionally has been known?

I believe we can find it—the steady footing and the stilling of the soul—by turning away from the fragmentation of physical preoccupations, or superwoman accomplishments, or endless popularity contests and returning instead to the wholeness of our soul, that unity in our very being that balances the demanding and inevitable diversity of life.

One woman who is not of our faith but whose writings I love is Anne Morrow Lindbergh. In commenting on the female despair and general torment of our times, she writes: "The Feminists did not look . . . far [enough] ahead; they laid down no rules of conduct. For them it was enough to demand the privileges. . . . And [so] woman today is still searching. We are aware of our hunger and needs, but still ignorant of what will satisfy them. With our garnered free time, we are more apt to drain our creative springs than to refill them. With our pitchers, we attempt . . . to water a field, [instead of ] a garden. We throw ourselves indiscriminately into committees and causes. Not knowing how to free the spirit, we try to muffle its demands in distractions. Instead of stilling the center, the axis of the wheel, we add more centrifugal activities to our lives—which tend to throw us [yet more] off balance.

"Mechanically we have gained, in the last generation, but spiritually we have . . . lost. . . .

"[For women] the problem is [still] how to feed the soul." (Gift from the Sea, 20th anniversary edition, with an afterword by the author [New York: Vintage Books, 1978], pp. 52 and 51, respectively.)

I have pondered long and hard about the feeding of our inner self, of the "one thing needful" amidst too many troublesome things. It is no coincidence that we speak of "feeding the spirit" just as we would speak of feeding the body. We need constant nourishment for both. The root word hale (as in "hale and hearty") is the common root to words like whole, health, heal, and holy. President Ezra Taft Benson recently said on this campus, "There is no question that the health of the body affects the spirit, or the Lord would never have revealed the Word of Wisdom. God has never given any temporal commandments—and that which affects our stature affects our soul." We need so much for body, mind, and spirit to come together, to unite in one healthy, stable soul.

Surely God is well balanced, so perhaps we are just that much closer to Him when we are. In any case, I like the link between hale, whole, health, heal, and holy. Our unity of soul within diversity of circumstance—our "stilling of the center"—is worth the effort of this conference and anything else that may encourage it.

As I noted previously, I believe we make too many external quests seeking peace or fulfillment. Only rarely do we consider the glorious possibility within us, within our own souls. We seem never to remember that divine promise, "The kingdom of God is within you." (Luke 17:21.) Perhaps we forget that the Kingdom of God is within us because too much attention is given to the Kingdom of Women outside us, this outer shell, this human body of ours, and the frail, too-flimsy world in which it moves. So, as women of faith, we should make an inward quest.

In my contribution to this effort, may I share with you an expanded version of an analogy that I shared with the students at the beginning of their winter semester. It is my own analogy of something I read years ago, a process that helped me then and helps me still—in my examination of inner strength and spiritual growth.

The analogy is of a soul—a human soul, with all of its splendor—being placed in a beautifully carved but very tightly locked box. Reigning in majesty and illuminating our soul in this innermost box is our Lord and our Redeemer, Jesus Christ, the living Son of the living God. This box is then placed—and locked—inside another larger one, and so on until five beautifully carved but very securely locked boxes await the woman who is skillful and wise enough to open them. In order for her to have free communication with the Lord she must find the key to these boxes and unlock their contents. Success will then reveal to her the beauty and divinity of her own soul, her gifts and her grace as a daughter of God.

For me, prayer is the key to the first box. We kneel to ask help for the tasks and then arise to find that the first lock is now open. But this ought not to seem just a convenient and contrived miracle. No, if we are to search for real light and eternal certainties, we have to pray as the ancients prayed. We are women now, not children, and are expected to pray with maturity. The words most often used to describe urgent, prayerful labor are wrestle, plead, cry, and hunger. In some sense, prayer may be the hardest work we will ever be engaged in, and perhaps it should be. We sing, "Prayer is the soul's sincere desire," our most basic declaration that we have no other God before us. It is our most pivotal protection against overinvolvement in worldly things and becoming so absorbed with possessions and privilege and honors and status that we no longer desire to undertake the search for our soul.

For those who, like Enos, pray in faith and gain entrance to a new dimension of their divinity, they are led to box number two. Here our prayers alone do not seem to be sufficient. We must turn to the scriptures for God's long-recorded teachings about our soul. We must learn. Surely every woman in this Church is under divine obligation to learn and grow and develop. We are God's diverse array of unburnished talents, and we must not bury these gifts nor hide our light. If the glory of God is intelligence, then learning stretches us toward Him, especially learning from the scriptures. There He uses many metaphors for divine influence, such as "living water" and "the bread of life." I have discovered that if my own progress stalls, it stalls from malnutrition, born of not eating and drinking daily from His holy writ. There have been challenges in my life that would have completely destroyed me, would have precluded any spiritual progression at all, had I not had a copy of the scriptures by my bed and a small set in my purse so that I could partake of them day and night at a moment's notice. Meeting God in scripture has been like a divine intravenous feeding for me—a celestial IV that my son once described as an "angelical" cord. So box two is opened spirit to spirit through the scriptures. I have discovered that by opening them I have opened it. There I can have, again and again, an exhilarating encounter with God.

At the beginning of such success in emancipating the soul, however, Lucifer becomes more anxious, especially as we approach box number three. He knows something is coming, one very important and fundamental principle. He knows that we are about to learn that to truly find ourselves we must lose ourselves, so he begins to block our increased efforts to love—love God, love our neighbor, and love ourselves. Remember, the Lord has asked above all else that we love. Everything else we do is secondary, and in fulfilling the two great commandments, we can often measure how much we love the Lord by how well we truly love our neighbor. I firmly believe that if we did nothing else but faithfully practice love for our neighbor, we would have found our ability and success in accomplishing all else. Yet Satan's skillful deception has been to obscure this chance for near success. He has, especially in the last decade, enticed the world to engage so much of their energies in the pursuit of romantic love or thing-love or excessive self-love. In so doing we can forget that appropriate self-love and self-esteem are the promised reward for putting other things first. "Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it." (Luke 17:33.) Box three opens only with the key of charity.

Real growth and genuine insight are coming now. But the lid to box four seems nearly impossible to penetrate, for we are climbing, too, in this story, and the way inward is also the way upward. Unfortunately the faint-hearted and fearful often turn back here—the going seems too difficult, the lock too secure. This is a time for self-evaluation. To see ourselves as we really are often brings pain, but it is only through true humility that we will come to know God. "Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart." (Matthew 11:29.) We must be patient with ourselves as we overcome weaknesses, and we must remember to rejoice over all that is good in us. This will strengthen the inner woman and leave her less dependent on outward acclaim. When the soul reaches the stage where it pays less attention to praise, it then also cares very little when the public disapproves. Comparing and competition and jealousy and envy begin to have no meaning now. Just imagine the powerful spirit that would exist in our female society if we finally arrived at the point where, like our Savior, our real desire was to be counted as the least among our sisters. The rewards here are of such profound strength and quiet triumph of faith that we are carried into an even brighter sphere. So the fourth box, unlike the others, is broken open, as a heart and contrite spirit are broken. Or better yet, it bursts open as a flower blooms and the earth is reborn. We are reborn, too, in humility and repentance and renewal. We are born of water and of fire. We are born of the Spirit of God.

To share with you my feelings of opening the fifth box, I must compare the beauty of our souls with the holiness of our temples. There, in a setting not of this world, in a place where fashions and position and professions go unrecognized, we have our chance to meet God face to face. For those who, like the brother of Jared, have the courage and faith to break through the veil into that sacred center of existence, we will find the brightness of the final box brighter than the noonday sun. There we will find peace and serenity and stillness that will anchor our soul forever, for there we will find God. Wholeness. Holiness. That is what it says over the entrance to the fifth box: "Holiness to the Lord." "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?" (1 Corinthians 3:16.) I testify that you are holy—that divinity is abiding within you waiting to be uncovered—to be unleashed and magnified and demonstrated.

I believe that if any woman is to find her own personal identity and value for herself, her family, her society, and her God, she will have to uncover her own soul and set it free. Then it can and should range throughout all eternity, having great influence and doing much good.

As I conclude, I pray for a special spirit to be with me so that I might articulate what I have recently been feeling about this whole matter of identity—the eternal identity of our womanhood. These thoughts are my own, and I take full responsibility for them. Above all, I do not want them to be misunderstood nor to give offense.

I have heard it said by some that the reason women in the Church struggle somewhat to know themselves is that they don't have a divine female role model. But we do believe we have a Mother in Heaven. May I quote from President Spencer W. Kimball in a general conference address: "When we sing that doctrinal hymn . . .'O My Father,' we get a sense of the ultimate in maternal modesty, of the restrained, queenly elegance of our heavenly mother, and, knowing how profoundly our mortal mothers have shaped us here, do we suppose her influence on us as individuals to be less?" (Ensign, May 1978, p. 4.)

I have never questioned why our Mother in Heaven seems veiled to us, for I believe the Lord has His reasons for revealing as little as He has on that subject. Furthermore, I believe we know much more about our eternal nature than we think we do; and it is our sacred obligation to identify it and to teach it to our young sisters and daughters, and in so doing, strengthen their faith and help them through the counterfeit confusions of these difficult latter days. Let me point out some examples.

The Lord has not placed us in this lone and dreary world without a blueprint for living. In Doctrine and Covenants 52:14 we read, "And again, I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived." (Italics added.) He certainly includes us as women in that promise. He has given us patterns in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price; and He has given us patterns in the temple ceremony. As we study these patterns we must continually ask, "Why does the Lord choose to say these particular words and present it in just this way?" We know He uses metaphors and symbols and parables and allegories to teach us of His eternal ways. For example, we all have recognized the relationship between Abraham and Isaac that so parallels God's anguish over the sacrifice of His son, Jesus Christ. But, as women, do we stretch ourselves and also ask about Sarah's travail in this experience as well? We could, and if we did, I believe we would learn. We need to search, and we need always to look for deeper meaning. We should look for parallels and symbols. We should look for themes and motifs just as we would in a Bach or a Mozart composition, and we should look for patterns—repeated patterns—in the gospel. One obvious pattern is that both the Bible and the Book of Mormon start off with family, including family conflict. I have always believed that symbolized something eternal about all of us as "family" far more than the story of just those particular parents or those particular children. Surely all of us—married or single, with children and without—see something of Adam and Eve and something of Cain and Abel every day of our lives. With or without marriage or with or without children, surely we have some of the feelings of Lehi, Sariah, Laman, Nephi, Ruth, Naomi, Esther, the sons of Helaman, and the daughters of Ishmael.

Those are types and shadows for us, prefigurations of our own mortal joys and sorrows, just as Joseph and Mary are, in a sense, types and shadows of parental devotion as they nurtured the Son of God Himself, with Mary playing the principal mortal role. These all seem to me to be symbols of higher principles and truths, symbols carefully chosen to show us the way, whether we are married or single, young or old, with family or without.

And obviously the temple is highly symbolic. May I share an experience I had there a few months ago? It has to do with the careful choice of words and symbols. I have chosen my own words carefully so that nothing I say will be improperly shared outside the temple. My only quotations are taken from published scripture.

Maybe it was coincidence, but as someone has said, "Coincidence is a small miracle in which God chooses to remain anonymous." In any case, as I waited in the temple chapel, I sat next to a very elderly man who unexpectedly but sweetly turned to me and said, "If you want a clear picture of the Creation, read Abraham, chapter 4." As I started to turn to Abraham, I just happened to brush past Moses 3:5: "For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth." Another message of prefiguration again—a spiritual pattern giving meaning to mortal creations. I then read Abraham 4 carefully and took the opportunity of going to an initiatory session. I left there with greater revelatory light on something I'd always known in my heart to be so—that men and women are joint heirs of the blessings of the priesthood and, even though men bear the greater burden of administering it, women are not without their priesthood-related responsibilities also.

Then as I attended the endowment session, I asked myself if I were the Lord and could give my children on earth only a simplified but powerfully symbolic example of their roles and missions, how much would I give and where would I start? I listened to every word. I watched for patterns and prototypes.

I quote to you from Abraham 4:27: "So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them." (Italics added.) They formed male, and they formed female—in the image of the Gods, in Their own image.

Then in a poignant exchange with God, Adam states that he will call the woman "Eve." And why does he call her Eve? "Because she was the mother of all living." (Genesis 3:20; Moses 4:26.)

As I tenderly acknowledge the very real pain that many single women, or married women who have not borne children, feel about any discussion of motherhood, could we consider this one possibility about our eternal female identity—our unity in our diversity. Eve was given the identity of the mother of all living—years, decades, perhaps centuries before she had ever borne a child. It would appear that her motherhood preceded her maternity just as surely as the perfection of the Garden preceded the struggles of mortality. I believe mother is one of those very carefully chosen words, one of those words rich with meaning after meaning after meaning. We must not, at all costs, let that word divide us. I believe with all my heart that it is first and foremost a statement about our nature, not a head count of our children. I have only three children and have wept that I could not have eight. (Some of you have eight and weep that you can't have three.) And I know that some of you without any have wept, too. And sometimes, too many have simply been angry over the very subject itself. For the sake of our eternal motherhood I plead that this not be so. Some women give birth and raise children but never "mother" them. Others, whom I love with all my heart, "mother" all their lives but have never given birth. Therefore, we must understand that however we accomplish it, parenthood is the highest of callings, the holiest of assignments. And all of us are Eve's daughters, married or single, maternal or barren, every one of us. We are created in the image of the Gods to become Gods and Goddesses. And we can provide something of that divine pattern, that maternal prototype, for each other and for those who come after us. Whatever our circumstance, we can reach out, touch, hold, lift, and nurture—but we cannot do it in isolation. We need a community of sisters stilling the soul and binding the wounds of fragmentation.

I know that God loves us individually and collectively—as women—and that He has a personal mission, an individual purpose for every one of us. As I learned on my Galilean hillside, I testify that if our desires are righteous, God overrules for our good, and Heavenly Parents will tenderly attend to our needs. In our diversity and individuality, my prayer is that we will be united—united in seeking our specific, foreordained mission, united in asking, not "What can the Kingdom do for me?" but "What can I do for the Kingdom? How do I fulfill the measure of my creation? In my circumstances and my challenges and with my faith, where is my full realization of the godly image in which I was created?"

With faith in God, His prophets, His Church, and ourselves—faith in our own divine creation—may we be peaceful and let go of our cares and troubles over so many things. May we believe—nothing doubting—in the light that shines, even in a dark place.

Your presence here today (in all your diversity) is evidence that you are women of faith. We have gathered today in the warmth and beauty of the renewing sun (Son) of spring, just as the multitudes gathered at His feet in Galilee. We are His disciples. He accepts us as we are, even as we are growing toward what we must become. Rest in that love. Bathe and luxuriate in it. Let it relax, calm, and comfort you. Let us keep our face to the Son and come unto Him. "Listen to my words," He counseled us. "Walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me." (D&C 19:23.)

Many Things . . . One Thing Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dallin H. Oaks, "Spiritual Gifts," Ensign, Sept. 1986, pp. 68-72. Copyright 1986 by Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.
