Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

The Faithful Heritage of a Convert

Carolyn J. Rasmus [^1]

Fourteen years and four weeks ago this very hour, I was baptized at a stake center only four blocks from here. I could not have imagined and cannot now comprehend the life-changing effects of that act.

The first speaker on the first morning of this conference was Sister Camilla Eyring Kimball, our beloved "first lady" of the Church, a faithful sister, ninety years young and with ninety years of experience in the Church. She was followed by a panel that included the auxiliary general presidents—Dwan J. Young, Ardeth G. Kapp, and Barbara W. Winder. Two days later I am the first speaker of the morning—a convert of only fourteen years, a Mia Maid in the reckoning of Church life.

As I have focused on the difference of years of members in the Church, I began to realize that that was only one aspect of the diversity represented by the members of the Church—a diverse church made up of people with unique and different backgrounds. We represent a diversity in age, experiences, talents, family and personal situations, languages spoken and understood, education, marital status, and church callings. But more important than our diversity are the things that bind us together and unite us. For all of our diversity, we are united by our bond of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in our commitment to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We are people of faith. It is the thing which sets us apart from the world. It is what makes us brothers and sisters in the fullest sense of the word. Faith is the unifying factor that created a common bond between me and Sister Kimball, and Sisters Young, Kapp, and Winder. It is what unites us with people around the world, with our next door neighbors or with the person seated beside or behind or in front of you. We are sisters and brothers of a common faith. It is our faith, I believe, that not only brings us together but which will in the end be the only thing that really matters.

I began preparing for my talk by going to two of my favorite sources: the scriptures and the Oxford English Dictionary. What I have come to share today is not a neatly wrapped package but ideas that have come to me as I've thought and read and struggled with the title, "The Faithful Heritage of a Convert." These are offerings, given in the hope that they might trigger your own thoughts and ideas that will have personal meaning.

The dictionary tells us that heritage is something transmitted by or acquired from a predecessor. At that first conference session our hearts and spirits were touched as our faithful leader sisters shared with us that kind of a heritage as they related faith-promoting stories of their pioneer ancestors. I have no such direct heritage. Many others of you do not either, for now nearly half the total adult membership of the Church is composed of first-generation members.

But in an eternal sense, we all share a common heritage, which extends far beyond the days of handcarts and covered wagons. The scriptures tell us of our more important and common heritage, a heritage which comes from the fact that we are all sisters and brothers whose heavenly parents love us-we are literal offspring of God. George Q. Cannon tells us that as His children "there is not an attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though they may be dormant or in embryo." (George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], 1:1.) We are also taught of our infinite worth and are told we have a divine and individual mission.

In the process of my conversion, knowledge of this heritage was reawakened in me. My spirit responded to what I believe I had known long ago when you and I were together in the presence of Heavenly Father. In addition to that eternal heritage, I—like many of you—inherited some other things in the process of conversion: among those things I include new scriptures and new knowledge and insights.

This triple combination, with my name imprinted on the cover, was given to me on the last day of class by a group of students who inscribed this message:

"Dear Miss Rasmus,

"You have shared with us things that are important and close to you. In return, we would like to give you something that means a great deal to us. And, we want you to know that we give it to you with a lot of love and respect.

"Sincerely,

"Your fans,

"BYU Summer School, Second Session, 1970."

It was to become a gift that made a difference. I was touched that a group of students cared enough about me that they wanted to give me a gift, though I could not begin to comprehend what it was they had really shared.

It is more difficult to identify specific new knowledge or insights gained as a result of the conversion process. Much of what I learned and am learning is, I believe, a literal reawakening of things known before, knowledge brought to this life from another. After I'd been at BYU for more than a year, several women who lived in Provo arranged an all-day hiking expedition on a beautiful fall day in October. I was eager to leave my studies and head for the mountains.

But as it neared 10:00 A.M.. they began looking for a comfortable place to sit down. I didn't have any idea it was general conference. I didn't even know what general conference was. I certainly didn't know my fellow hikers were equipped with a transistor radio. I was without question a captive audience, and although I said nothing to any of the hiking group, when I returned home that evening I wrote on my daily calendar, "Everything sounds so right." It was, I believe now, a time of reawakening to truths learned long ago in a very different setting.

One of the things I became conscious of early was the reality of the still, small voice—a power that communicated to me thoughts and ideas I could not conceive in my finite mind. These stories illustrate what I mean. I made the decision to go to BYU because of my professional acquaintance with Dr. Leona Holbrook. We were kindred spirits from the moment we met and, quite frankly, I would have gone to study wherever she taught. When I first told her of my interest in enrolling at BYU, she suggested I visit the campus before making a final decision. She knew of my smoking habit and that I dearly loved wine. (I used to have a friend bring my favorite vintage by the case from her home in Minnesota.) Leona merely said to me, "BYU is a unique place. Visit before you make your decision." And so more than a year before I became a student, I visited BYU and recorded this after a two-day visit: "My stop at BYU only served to convince me that I made the right decision. Having been there made me realize I'll even be able to give up my much-loved wine for what I'll receive in return."

Other experiences followed that helped me become increasingly aware of what I now know was the light of Christ. Having decided to fast for the first time in my life, I was unsettled and unable to concentrate on studying for a statistics test. Finally, I knelt down to pray. I have no recollection of the prayer, but these thoughts came into my mind, and I felt impressed to record them. On a scrap piece of paper I wrote:

"October 12, 1970, 8:45 A.M. Go now, my child, for there is much work to be done. I send my Spirit to be with you to enable you to work and think clearly, to accomplish all that lies before you this day. Go and know that I am with you in all things, and later return to me, coming to me with real intent of prayer. Know that I am the Lord, that all things are possible to them who call upon my name. Take comfort in these words. Fill your heart with joy and gladness, not sorrow and despair. Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Know me as Comforter and Savior."

I also had the impression, months before my baptism, that I should begin paying tithing. As members, we all know about the gray envelopes imprinted with the bishop's name. But, what do you do with tithing monies if you don't know the procedure? Each paycheck for three months, I took 10 percent of my meager student wages and put the cash in a white envelope, which I carefully hid in my underwear drawer. When Bishop Mayfield interviewed me relative to my worthiness to be baptized, I proudly produced evidence of my belief in the law of tithing.

Only two weeks before I joined the Church I sat in a sacrament meeting. As I passed the tray of bread from the person on one side of me to the other, these words came pounding into my head: "How much longer can you pass by the bread of life? Know, believe, do. Know that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that through him my church has been restored in these latter days. Know and believe, then do . . . be baptized into my church." Such thoughts are unsettling to say the least. I thought, and continue to think, about those words—"know, believe, do."

There is much knowledge in the world—both secular and spiritual. We are told of the importance of gaining knowledge, but that is only the first step. During this women's conference Sister Naomi Randall, author of the words to "I Am a Child of God," told us about President Kimball's contribution to the lyrics of that familiar song. He asked her to change the word know to do—"teach me all that I must do to live with him someday."

Her story triggered my thoughts back to the time those words came into my mind—"know, believe, do"—and I came to a new insight. In preparation for this women's conference, I read the book The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, a compilation of excerpts from President Kimball's many talks and addresses. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982.) In the section on faith, he makes repeated reference to one scripture. "If any man will do [the Father's] will he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17; italics added.)

Initially, my interest in the Church came as a result of what I observed in the lives of others—how people interacted with each other and how they treated me. Quite frankly, I was not interested in what people knew. If anyone had asked me, "Do you want to know more?" I would have answered, "No." But I could not ignore what I saw people doing.

I will never forget going (I think "being taken" is probably more correct) to the ground-breaking service for the Provo Temple. It occurred less than a month after my arrival in Provo. I did not know the significance of that event, but what I saw and felt touched me deeply. I listened intently as a father quietly and patiently responded to the incessant questioning of his young family. He was kind and gentle as he held them and talked with them. And then that hillside of people began singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning." They all knew all the words without a hymnbook, and I felt the Spirit of God.

A woman I remember meeting only once left a homemade pie and a note on our doorstep. She wanted to welcome my mother who was coming to visit from Ohio. I knew nothing at that time about visiting teachers or that she was mine. But I remember well my feelings that she had done this for me, that she knew who I was and that she cared enough about me to take time to do something special.

Only after my baptism would I know that the Kocherhans family always made it a point to sit near me every sacrament meeting. "Because," said the father of the family and the priesthood bearer who baptized me, "we wanted you to feel our spirit and of our love for you." And, oh, how I did. I was not anxious to "know of the doctrine," but I could not ignore what people were doing. Likewise, I later became aware that many ward members had fasted and prayed in my behalf.

It is interesting to me that the first book of the New Testament, after the four gospels, is entitled "The Acts of the Apostles." It is not the "lectures" or "sermons" of the Apostles, but the "acts." In the process of studying what the Apostles did, we learn the doctrine—we come to know what they believed and why they did what they did.

We can read about how to ride a bicycle. We might even be able to explain it to others, but we really only know how to ride a bicycle after we have actually done it. I do not want to have surgery performed by physicians who know only what is written in the textbook. I want to make sure they have actually performed the surgery. Then I will believe they know what they are about.

And so it was with me. I am convinced that one of the major, and certainly the initial, factors in my conversion came as a result of what I saw people doing—their actions were evidence for me that they knew something I wanted to learn more about.

But John 7:17 tells us that we can know the doctrine if we will do His will. I believe I came to know the law of tithing by paying tithing—by doing it. The knowledge that scripture study and prayer and fasting can bring understanding and insight came to have meaning to me only after I did them.

We are inheritors of a gospel that is action oriented. There is nothing passive about phrases like "awake and arouse your faculties," "experiment upon my words," "exercise a particle of faith," or words such as "desired, pondered, believed." (Alma 32:27; 1 Nephi 11:1.) This is a gospel of action, of doing. No wonder President Kimball had as his motto, "DO IT."

In a First Presidency Message in 1975, President Kimball encouraged us to "read and understand and apply [or do] the principles and inspired counsel found in the [scriptures]." He promised us that if we did so, "we shall discover that our personal acts of righteousness will also bring personal revelation or inspiration . . . into our own lives." (Ensign, Sept. 1975, p. 4; italics in original.) It is he who also reminded us that "if [we] will do [God's] will, [we] shall know of the doctrine." (John 7:17.)

Sometimes we know something but do nothing about it. In fact, there is often a discrepancy between what we say we know and what we do. I am convinced, from personal experience, that it is this discrepancy that creates inner strife and turmoil—a literal wrenching of our souls. Oh, that we might learn to act with integrity, having the moral courage to make our actions (our doing) consistent with our knowledge of right and wrong, to be able to say with Job, "Till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me." (Job 27:5.)

I had another thought as I read the dictionary definition of heritage. It said, "Heritage may imply anything passed on to heirs or succeeding generations." I had always thought of heritage from the perspective of what I might receive from others. As I read that definition, I began to think about what I could pass on to others. We sometimes forget that our heritage is being created by us right now. Granted, we can build upon the past, but our heritage, that which we will someday give to others, is in process now—we are literally creating our heritage, whether we are twelve or eighteen, forty or eighty.

I began thinking about what I would pass on, what I would leave for others that might be meaningful—something others might build upon. I don't have a magic list. I don't think my list is even complete, but on this thirtieth day of March, 1985, I want to leave as a heritage to others four things: a message of hope and optimism, my commitment to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, my faith in Jesus Christ as our Savior, and my belief in the principles of the restored gospel.

First, a message of hope and optimism. If we read only the daily news of the world, we would have our attention focused on crime, immorality, dishonesty, corruption, and abuse of every kind. If we focused only on the social ills of our day, we would be overcome with feelings of gloom and despair. But we know so much more. This is a glorious gospel and we, of all people, have cause to rejoice, for we have been given the knowledge to be able to view things in an eternal perspective. Without such perspective, it would be easy to lose our way in what Elder Maxwell calls this "secular dispensation of despair." (Neal A. Maxwell, The Smallest Part [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973], p. 16.) Elder Maxwell calls our attention to the young servant of Elisha who feared for the future until the Lord opened his eyes so that he could see what Elisha saw.

"And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?

"And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.

"And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha." (2 Kings 6:15-17.)

When we are feeling overwhelmed and we doubt that as individuals we could ever make any difference, we need to be reminded of Elisha and of the fact that we are not alone. We are told that we are agents, on the Lord's errand; to "be not weary in well-doing, for [we] are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great." (D&C 64:33.) We learn from modern-day scripture that the Lord has "given the heavenly hosts and . . . angels charge concerning [us]." (D&C 84:42.)

I also hope to share with others my commitment to building and defending the kingdom of God. I believe we learn what commitment is really about in the holy temple of God. We come to understand what it means to obey and sacrifice and consecrate our time and talents. In this day and in this land we are not presently called upon to make physical sacrifices—we are not driven from our homes, we have not been called to pull handcarts or to leave our homes and establish new communities. But ultimately to understand the principle of commitment, our knowledge of this principle will, like all others, need to be translated into action. In 1970, President Harold B. Lee said:

"We have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this Church and the world in this dispensation. The gospel was restored to prepare a people ready to receive Him. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your social views, it may interfere with some of your social life, but if you listen to these things as if from the mouth of the Lord Himself with patience and faith, the promise is, 'the gates of Hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good and his name's glory.' (D&C 21:6.)" ("Uphold the Hands of the President of the Church," Improvement Era, Dec. 1970, p. 126.) I believe we will be "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine" (Ephesians 4:14) unless we are covenanted and committed before we are confronted with difficult choices and hard times.

I want to commit to trying to live in such a way that others might know by what I do that when I raise my arm to the square to sustain the General Authorities and officers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I am anxious and ready to respond to their counsel and direction.

I want to commit to trying to live with my eye and mind single to his glory and purposes. (See D&C 88:67-68.) I find it easy to commit to such a thing in the quiet and solitude and aloneness of my room, but I want to learn to be able to have such focus in busy and rushed and difficult situations.

Finally, I leave for you and others a testimony of my faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. When we are feeling discouraged or put upon, left out or neglected, overwhelmed, unloved, ignored, or sorely tempted, we need to have brought to our minds that He "suffer[ed] pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. . . . that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.)

I believe we will come to know that truth as we try, as His agents and a covenanted people, to "bear one another's burdens . . . and are willing to mourn with those that mourn . . . and comfort those that stand in need of comfort" (Mosiah 18:8-9), as we strive to "lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." (D&C 81:5.) I believe with President Kimball that "God does notice us, and he watches over us. But it is usually through another person that he meets our needs." ("Small Acts of Service," Ensign, Dec. 1974, p. 5.)

I would leave my testimony of the boy prophet Joseph Smith and especially of the process that led to that great theophany. The boy had identified the problem (there were many sects and denominations), and he had searched the scriptures. Then he went to the Lord in humble prayer to inquire of Him. (Which church should I join?) And he modeled for us the attribute of patience as he spent the next ten years waiting and studying and preparing—all of which were necessary before the Church could be established and the work go forward.

I have great faith in the literal promises of Him who is our exemplar of the perfect life. But lest we become discouraged in the pursuit of perfection, we should take comfort in President Kimball's encouragement that "working toward perfection is not a one-time decision, but a process to be pursued throughout one's lifetime." (Ensign, Nov. 1978, p. 6.) In my own life I find I make periodic progress forward and then slip back into old habits and doubts. Sometimes I'm not pleased with what I do when compared with what I know. It takes courage to see ourselves as less than perfect.

Finally, I have faith that our Heavenly Father wants us to return to Him. We agreed to come here so that we might be tried and tested and proven, but we came here with the full expectation that we could succeed, and with the help of the Savior we would, if we endured to the end.

And someday, when he's proven me, I'll see him face to face, But just for here and now I walk by faith. (Janice Kapp Perry, "I Walk by Faith," 1985.)

The Faithful Heritage of a Convert Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Carolyn J. Rasmus is the administrative assistant to the Young Women General Presidency and has held numerous callings in ward and stake Young Women organizations. She received an Ed.D. in physical education with minors in child development and learning disabilities from Brigham Young University, where she is also professor of physical education-sports. Sister Rasmus was the executive assistant to the president of BYU and was also chair of the faculty advisory council for a time.
