Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

The Many Facets of Grief

Deanne Francis [^1]

I heard a weak cry as the doctor quickly clamped the cord and placed the tiny, unfinished baby into the open isolette. The respiratory therapist and I dried and stimulated the baby girl, gave her oxygen, and watched as she struggled to breathe. Her chest caved in nearly to her backbone with each inhalation, and a pushing groan accompanied each exhalation. She lay limp and slightly blue as we tried to help her breathe with a bag and mask, finally resorting to placing a tube in her trachea.

At the door of the delivery room, an anxious father paled as he watched the things we were doing to his daughter. This was not what he had in mind when he had contemplated his impending fatherhood. From the delivery room, I heard the mother cry in anguish, "Is she all right; is she going to live?" I looked down at the baby and wished I could offer the mother more hope. This baby, only slightly bigger than a pound of butter, was born over three months too soon. While we had saved other babies that small, the odds were against her.

When the neonatologist arrived, I went to talk to the parents, whose names were Dave and Sue. Explaining the situation briefly, I invited them both to come down to the intensive care nursery to visit their daughter as soon as possible. We pushed the isolette close to the delivery table on our way to the nursery so that Sue could reach in and gently stroke the baby's hand, no bigger than her own thumbnail.

They named their baby Ashley. We taped her name over the front of the isolette and hung up the pink booties they bought. Over the next few days we watched Dave and Sue undergo the emotional roller coaster parents ride with a sick newborn. One day the news was encouraging; the next, we had a crisis. We listened as Dave and Sue searched to find answers for the premature birth, became angry that this had happened to them, bargained with God for Ashley's life, and became impatient with the staff over insignificant things.

Twelve days after the baby's birth, I knelt on the floor in front of Sue with a box of Kleenex between us as she held her tiny daughter for what would be the first and last time. This would not be one of our success stories. Ashley was dying, and there was nothing we could do but allow this family some time together.

Many people have asked me how nurses handle situations like this. I don't know about anyone else, but after twenty-four years, I still cry—every time.

Birth and Death

Nurses are very frequently present at both birth and death, and they spend a good deal of time endeavoring to instill dignity and comfort into both of these events. Birth is usually a joyous occasion and obviously is much more easily handled than death. But when these two events happen in close proximity, the grief is particularly acute since the death of a baby seems so incomprehensible. It is the difficult job of those of us who work with sick newborns in an intensive care nursery to manage birth, anticipatory grief, and sometimes death, within hours or days of each other.

In fact, nurses probably witness death more often than any other group of people except soldiers in wartime. It is necessary to accept death and particularly the grief process which affects both the dying and those who will be left behind.

Death, like birth, is a fact of life. For some it is sudden, for some a lengthy and painful process. For some it comes almost before life has begun, for others in the bloom of adulthood, and for others in the infirmity of old age. But it comes. Some fight it and struggle against it to the last moment. Some pray for death as a release. All of us are, in fact, dying. It's just that some are dying faster than others. Fortunately, we do not choose the timing and circumstances of our own or a loved one's death. For what would we choose? When would be a good time? Gratefully, that is the Lord's prerogative.

The Universal Nature of Grief

I suppose that anyone asked to discuss the process of grief wonders what qualifications one must have to speak on that particular subject. In contemplating this, I concluded that anyone who has lived long enough is qualified to discuss death with some feeling and insight, since we all experience a loss of some type sooner or later.

My own experience with grief is not unique. My husband and I have had to cope with the loss of all four of our parents. My father had to return home from serving as a mission president with a very severe brain disease that accounted for his suicide a year later at age fifty. My mother, at age sixty-two, developed a similar but unrelated brain disease that claimed her in just twelve weeks. I have had five miscarriages and one child born with a serious birth defect. These are not unusual experiences, and I relate them briefly to point out the universality of sad experiences. They are all part of mortality, and everyone can relate similar experiences that elicited a grief response. We each deal with these difficult aspects of mortality in individual and unique ways which involve choice and accountability.

All of us agreed to come here and to accept our earthly life with all its joys, happiness, and peace, as well as its grief, illness, loss, and death. But when actually faced with the loss of a loved one, with loss of a body part or function, or with divorce or separation, some of us respond by losing faith, placing bitter blame, or sinking into paralyzing depression. In doing so, we discover that we may have been giving only lip service to accepting the conditions of mortality.

What Shall I Say?

It is so hard to know what to say or how to help a person immersed in grief. Last year, my husband and I took our daughter with us to the viewing of one of her friends who had been killed in a car accident along with both his parents and one brother. "I want to go because I feel so bad," she said, "but what shall I say to his sisters?" I could only advise her that caring enough to go and saying anything she felt in her heart was better than staying away and saying nothing.

What is the best help to offer a bereaved and grieving friend? What can be said to parents who have just had a baby born with a birth defect? All their plans and hopes and dreams for that child must be revised. What support can be given when a child is going to live with a severe defect that will be more difficult than death? What can a husband do to help a beloved wife who is dying? How will an athlete deal with the loss of a leg? Each of these people will go through a grief process that can be modified and resolved more completely with adequate support. The ways in which human beings deal with impending death depends upon sex, age, wisdom, circumstances, culture, personality, and faith. Those left behind also respond in different ways. There is choice involved in our reaction to death and to dying—the same as in all other areas of life. In choosing how we will deal with bereavement, though, we need to understand the elements common to those who pass through it.

Elements of Grief

Although grief involves phases, there is no "correct" order or time span for each of them. Grief is very personal and individual. It helps, however, to know these phases and to recognize them in ourselves and others as we face a loss of some kind or as we try to help someone else face a loss. We also need to recognize that the feelings and suffering involved in each of these phases need not be permanent and that they can be modified in a positive manner in many ways.

Shock and denial. Inasmuch as grief is personal, let us imagine that you have just lost the person closest to you or have just been told you have terminal cancer. After the initial waves of shock and numbness have passed, you will then hear yourself say, "Oh no, this can't be happening to me," or, "There must be a mistake. It can't be true."

It is difficult to comprehend the enormity of what has happened. Friends and neighbors rally around, and visitors are many. Condolence calls are difficult for both parties, but they are made out of love and concern. You must be able to allow other people to help. They will offer, and it will help if you make suggestions about what things could be done.

Accepting assistance from understanding professionals can often be of great benefit at this point. Doctors, nurses, bishops, funeral directors, members of Hospice, or medical social workers are usually good counselors, having encountered this aspect of grief so many times. The support available through self-help groups is typically underestimated and ignored. If you can find someone who has been through your particular experience and has become a stronger person as a result, talking with that person will give you great insight.

It is during this stage that preparations for burial must be made. Planning a viewing, writing an obituary, and asking people to participate in a funeral are difficult, but all these things have great therapeutic value. It is the beginning of being able to say goodbye. It brings the support of friends and provides a goal or objective to work toward. It also provides for a last, loving tribute and declaration of love.

Following all these customary procedures, the thing that usually happens is the support group leaves. The Relief Society sisters, the family, and your friends all go back home and leave you with your grief and your loneliness, except in rare instances. There are a few remarkable people who know when they are needed most. I will be forever grateful to Bill and Lou Homer, who did not go home and forget. For thirteen years after my father died, they called my mother almost every Friday and took her somewhere with them. This practice probably would have continued for many more years if my mother had not died.

Anger. After the "not me" stage has passed, your next thought may be, "Why me?" "What have I done wrong to deserve this?" You may begin to search for a place to lay the blame, and you will be angry. You may be angry at the need for nurses and doctors to care for your baby. You may be angry at doctors and nurses who couldn't save your loved one. Perhaps your anger will be directed at the one who caused the accident or toward the God who "allowed it to happen." You may even be angry at the one who has died for "deserting" you.

If you direct this anger at your mate, it can cause tremendous marital strife. "If only you hadn't gone jogging yesterday, this baby would not have been born prematurely." "You should never have let her drive the car out on the freeway." If you can talk about your grief, share your feelings, and understand each other's deep mourning, you will come through the process with a stronger marriage and a deeper love. Even if there is real fault, enlarging your mate's guilt will not improve the situation. It is no wonder that the divorce rate is high among couples who have had a baby in intensive care. The stress is incredible.

Guilt. Few survivors of tragedies escape without some feelings of guilt, some real and some imagined, so don't be surprised if you begin laying some blame at your own feet. "If only I had taken him to the doctor sooner. . . ." "I shouldn't have put him in a nursing home." "I should have said, 'I love you.'"

You will find that like everyone else, you have 20/20 hindsight. Unfortunately, your foresight is not nearly so good. When guilt begins to gnaw and twist your soul, ask yourself this question: "If I had this person back, could I be sure I'd never make another mistake?" If you are the one dying, ask yourself, "If I could live a little longer, could I guarantee I'd live perfectly?" Most of us cannot be sure that we would behave any better or be any more considerate or loving if given another chance.

I can tell you from experience that there is a tremendous amount of guilt connected with suicide. If you are the one left behind, you will ask yourself, as I did, "What did we do to make him want to take his own life?" I learned that no one can control the behavior of another person. I also learned through watching my father's brain disease progress that he was unable to control his own behavior. How grateful I am that a wiser One than I will be the judge of these things.

Depression. When the numbness and shock wear off, when the rage has exhausted itself and the questions still are unanswered, despair tends to take over. If you are the one dying, you may begin to bargain, usually with God. "Heavenly Father, if I can only be spared, I will pay a full tithing and live a perfect life." In the case where someone you love has died, you may finally be able to say, "This dreadful thing has really happened to me. What do I do now?"

This is the time when you will need support the most. It will help to talk and to stay active. Your discussions may be rambling and repetitive, so you will need a very caring friend who knows how to listen in a nonjudgmental way without offering platitudes or too much good advice, no matter how well-meaning. You will also need someone who will not allow you to become so steeped in your own misery that you do nothing but vegetate and dwell on your loss. You may resent this person's trying to keep you involved in the things you have always loved, but if you can rouse yourself to participate in life's activities one day at a time, you will find that it will get easier and more enjoyable. You may also find that you have gone backwards into one of the previous stages and must repeat the process of progression. Just when you thought you had conquered your anger, for example, you will wake one morning to find yourself filled with resentment all over again. Simply recognizing that regression is not unusual may make it easier to bear.

Acceptance. When you have reached this stage, you will have come to terms with your grief and your loss and will have achieved some measure of peace. You will be able to face the issue squarely and say, "I'm ready to go," or "I'm ready to accept this loss, as hard as it is, and go on with my life." Unfortunately, some never reach this stage but become arrested in one of the other stages where bitterness, anger, and depression can go on for a lifetime.

In my opinion, and in the opinion of many researchers, it is faith that is the most powerful tool in helping a person reach a calm acceptance of death and dying. Faith gives strength from a higher power than we mere mortals can provide. Prayer and the scriptures do provide answers. They provide comfort and solace. Faith in God and the plan of salvation provides hope and assurance that death is also a beginning, a birth, rather than the end.

Taking Advice from Those Who Have Been There

With permission, I use the suggestions and comments that were given to me by five remarkable people who have had to face overwhelming bereavement, death, and pain. The things that happened to these people are not unique; they are things that could happen to any or all of us. The uniqueness is the courageous and positive manner in which these individuals met their test. That's what mortality is, after all—a test. The kind of tests we face here are not important. The way in which we choose to face them and what we become because of them are important eternally.

Janna. A nurse friend of mine went to check on her baby and discovered that he was dead—a victim of crib death. Several months later, looking back, she commented that husbands and wives tend to grieve differently. "Men," she said, "may need to cry but find it difficult." She also noted that among those who suffer loss there is a tendency to try to meet society's expectations of how we are supposed to act. Always we hear the admonitions, "Be brave" or "Don't cry." Crying is healing in process. It's like cleansing a wound so it will heal. "Crying helps get the sad and the mad out of you. Crying is like gentle melting." [^2]

The nicest thing we may be able to do for a grieving friend is to allow tears. My friend also suggested that in expressing sorrow over the loss of a child, it is better not to make the comment, "It is good that you have other children" or "Well, you will always be able to have other children." That child was an individual, loved for his own particular personality and qualities, and no other child can compensate for the loss of that individual.

Kay. Another friend of mine was left a widow with six small children. Her loss and sadness were immense, but she gathered her children around her and said, "We are not going to fall apart. We will carry on the same as if Dad were here. We will be a family."

She spoke with each child individually and listened to each one's feelings about the loss of their father. She was able to put aside her own grief long enough to help each of her children face the issue squarely. In doing so, it meant she had to face the issue also, and that included going back to work as an attorney to support her family. She has done this with vigor and humor, and I salute her. She realized that children, too, go through the grief process and have needs in their sorrow that should not be overlooked. Helping children with grief is not easy. "The best care we can give you is not to protect you from pain but to support you through it." [^3]

Katy. While serving as a Relief Society president, I had the privilege of helping to care for a young wife and mother as she slowly wasted away with cancer. She had chosen to stay home rather than be hospitalized, and more than anything she wanted to die with dignity. We talked of many things in the hours I was with her, and those hours will always be precious to me. I well remember many of her comments. "Take the time to do the things that are important," she said. When I asked her what she considered important, she said, "I would like to look at one more oak tree, and go out with a friend for a milkshake." We arranged for her to do these things.

She commented that euphemisms do not help. "Everything will be all right" is meaningless to a person who knows she is dying. Everything is not all right. One day she listened patiently when a visitor spent a great deal of time saying, in effect, "You've got it bad, but so-and-so has got it worse." Then followed a long discussion of someone else's illness. When the visitor left, Katy said, "Do you think I should feel compensated because other people have had worse experiences?" Probably such comments are not helpful.

Gayle and Brent. My closest friend lost her mother during heart surgery. Both she and her husband commented that they appreciated anyone and everyone who called or came by and offered well-meaning words. They agreed that saying nothing about the person who has died is worse than putting your foot in your mouth and that visitors who avoided the subject of their beloved mother caused more pain than anything that might have been said.

My friend said that she could think of little else at the time, and she most appreciated those who shared memories with her about her mother and her life. Those shared memories become treasures to remember. Dietrich Bonhoeffer said, "We must not wallow in our memories or surrender to them, just as we don't gaze all the time at a valuable present. But get it out from time to time, and for the rest hide it away as a treasure we know is there all the time. Treated this way, the past can give us lasting joy and inspiration." [^4]

Michelle. Finally, I offer the insight of the young woman whose parents and two brothers were killed in a car accident. She and her two sisters were the only ones who remained in her immediate family. "I am sure," she said, "that there is an explanation and a reason for this." That says a great deal. We, with our limited knowledge, may not understand the reasons for things happening the way they do or at the time they do. With our finite understanding of time, it is difficult for us to truly judge when a person's time here on earth is finished. I think Michelle understood that we must find purpose and acceptance in the difficult trials of life and realize that the great eternal plan has beauty we cannot see now.

Enduring in Faith

Mary V. Hill, in concluding her book Angel Children: Those Who Die Before Accountability, observed that after the death of her son, she became a different person:

"I believe that I have deeper faith in and love for our Father in Heaven and His Son Jesus Christ than ever before. I feel that my soul has been tried in the refiner's fire and has emerged more purified. I know now that my faith is built upon rock, because it did not crash around me in the strength of the storm as it would have done had it been built upon sand. I have watched my husband, my children, my parents, my brothers and sisters, and my friends all grow in their understanding of the gospel and the meaning of life and death on this earth since little Stephen was born. Who then can say that little Stephen's illness, his brief life of three and a half months, and his death were useless, meaningless tragedies? I believe with all my heart that his life here was a mission to teach us great truths, a sacred trust for us to cherish and share with others." [^5]

Dave and Sue had a great advantage over some of the other anguished parents I have watched in our intensive care nursery. They understood and truly lived the gospel. In all their activities, they had relied on the Lord for guidance and help, and He had not deserted them, nor did He as their baby died. They cried and dressed her in a pink doll's dress, took a picture to remember, and invited grandparents and other relatives to join them for a special family night. They prayed for Ashley and for the strength to endure a parting. Underlying their grief was the tremendous faith that they would see and hold their daughter again. This family went through all the stages and facets of grief, but they emerged from the process as stronger, wiser, and more resilient people. To be determined to do this constitutes faithful endurance.

There is spiritual and practical help for those who face death, divorce, amputation, or the loss of a loved one. Love, assurance, and acceptance are God's gift to all who earnestly seek Him after the anguish has passed. We are expected to endure to the end, whenever that is. "We hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things"—but not without help, comfort, and guidance. (Articles of Faith 1:13.) By sharing these things and experiencing these things we gain wisdom and peace.

In the Gospel of John, there is great solace and comfort:

"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

"In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." (John 14:2.)

The Many Facets of Grief Notes

Other References

Buntin, Kathleen Rawlings. The Living Half. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984.

Dunn, Paul H., and Richard M. Eyre. The Birth That We Call Death. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1976.

Hill, Norman C. When the Road Gets Rough. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986.

Jensen, Amy Hillyard. Healing Grief. Evanston, Ill.: Medic Publishing Co., 1980.

---
Notas:
[^1] Establish mandatory wage withholding if support payments are a month delinquent. Stephen J. Bahr, the director of the Family and Demographic Research Institute and a professor of sociology at Brigham Young University, earned his Ph.D. from Washington State University. He has served as president of the Utah Council on Family Relations and as associate editor of the Journal of Marriage and the Family and the Journal of Family Issues. His Church callings have included stake high councilor, Scoutmaster, Sunday School teacher, and stake physical activities specialist.
[^2] Impose liens against real and personal property for amounts of overdue support.
[^3] Withhold state income tax refunds if a parent is delinquent in child support payments.
[^4] Make available information regarding the amount of overdue support to any consumer credit bureau.
[^5] Establish expedited processes within the state judicial system for obtaining and enforcing child support orders.
