Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Women of Faith in a Violent World

Anne L. Horton [^1]

So often the view of the world of religious women is a negative one—one of reaction, victimization and mindless submission. Yet, for the Latter-day Saint woman, faith is equated with responsibility and purpose. Ours is a vibrant history boasting a feminine heritage of courage, of flexibility amid change, and of determination. For us, what we think—what we know in our hearts—demands subsequent action. Prayer and performance go hand in hand in a proactive commitment to eliminate injustice and pain in our families.

The topic I have been asked to address is family violence. My assumption is that you, as women of faith, not only wish to recognize and understand it, but also desire to do something about it. Therefore, my challenge to you is to stop abuse in your family today and in society in your lifetime. Five years ago I would have had the initial burden of convincing you there was a problem, especially here in Zion. Today, however, most of you are familiar with an active and horror-filled media and share an honest concern for your LDS community and perhaps even for yourself and your children. Yet, the attitudes of society are still causing us considerable problems.

Violence will not stop in the home until it stops in the mind. Currently the new laws defining child abuse and neglect and spousal abuse are not congruent with our prevailing attitudes toward discipline. Thus, conflicting values result. Parents want to respond to the current value placed on raising responsible and law-abiding children, yet, at the same time, they are attempting to uphold the "new" belief that corporal punishment is no longer acceptable. The "belt," slapping, or shaking some sense into an errant child are no longer legal alternatives, yet they have not been replaced in most parental repertoires of child-rearing techniques.

Many of you know family violence is common, but do you realize how close it is to you? Have you been a victim personally? In this audience, statistically one in four of you is a direct victim. [^2] You have been sexually or physically abused by someone—not by your choice. It has made a tremendous impact on your life, and you know who you are. The majority of you, however, are still observers. When you came in, you probably saw yourselves not as directly involved but as an information consumer. Yet, LDS women are all directly involved. As leaders, as teachers, as sisters, we share a common concern, a commitment to provide love and safety in the home.

Let's take a moment to look at this. First of all, the major problem is not sexual. Incest and family violence are not expressions of intimacy just because they involve our personal parts and people whom we love. Nor is it just a female concern. For every female victim there is a male perpetrator or abuser who is risking his personal and professional reputation, his family, and his eternal salvation. While it may appear that the victim is most visibly "at risk," the male family member is certainly destined to suffer as well.

Child and spouse abuse are expressions of power, perversion, force, and violence. They are criminal acts. Home is meant to be safe; violence committed there, especially by somebody understood to be a guardian (husband, father, older brother, uncle), is a special betrayal. Someone has physically violated the victims in a way that has destroyed their trust and robbed them of a feeling of personal safety. Fear and shame are constant companions for victims, and this pain, suffering, and feeling of being invaded and robbed of security does not usually go away without help. [^3] Thus, all future relationships may be damaged until this trust is restored.

Yet, many of us still want to blame the victim, especially if it's a woman. Why? We want to say she set herself up. She must have done something to ask for it. We look at the way a victim was dressed. We want to know what she said or did to place herself in this position.

Why do we do this? We do it because we personally want to feel safe. We want to believe in cause and effect. For if we truly believe battering could happen to anyone, it makes us horribly vulnerable. We too have to share the fear that it could happen to us or our children. If we continue to soothe ourselves and say a woman got what was coming to her, if she is guilty of something and we are not, then we believe it won't happen to us. We will be safe. Sisters, this is not the way to protect ourselves.

No child ever knowingly (that is, with knowledge) asked to be physically harmed or sexually abused. Of course, all of us want to be loved, held, comforted, and fussed over by our family. It feels good to be protected and touched by someone we love. Those are good, natural feelings. And to get those strokes of attention and approval, children will at times do whatever will assure them of acceptance. But no four-, six-, or ten-year-old girl sleeping in her own bed, lying amidst stuffed toys and a frilly quilt, ever invited sexual intercourse with her father or other family members. No young wife, unable to quiet a fussing child, asked to be hit across the face or burned or kicked in the stomach.

In your cul de sac or your block, someone is in pain. We are all at risk. Righteousness is not enough to protect us. Virtue is not being taken away. As victims of physical violence, we are not sinful. We did not "ask for" or cause the abuse. It is the perpetrator who is at fault. Family violence consists of human, physical acts—wrong and painful. Hitting a spouse or child is not acceptable. Beatings are not justifiable. Righteousness has clearly left the heart of the abuser, but the victim did not select the act anymore than did a smallpox victim or arthritis victim or the gunshot victim in a 7-Eleven robbery. Yet many victims of abuse feel responsible. The difference is in our attitude toward this problem. We can't deny that these acts happen just because we don't understand them. Our lack of awareness today is irresponsible and unresponsive to human injustice. Child abuse and wife abuse are not only morally wrong; they are also criminal acts.

Our pioneer women suffered many physical hardships. The difference with incest and beating is that the physical event may have been brief and the physical scars have healed, but the psychological pain continues. Abuse victims need help. Why do we recoil from thinking about this problem? Why do these sisters feel so isolated? So judged? So guilty? Why can't they move on and grow spiritually? Why don't we help them?

The greatest problem today is one of denial. We must raise our awareness of this issue. Physical and sexual abuse and assault are not rare. They are not a statement about the woman's character. They do not happen only to poor or minority families. In a recent study in Los Angeles and also in a statistical survey regarding child abuse and neglect in LDS families conducted here in Utah Valley, LDS families had a high incidence of these violent crimes—equal to or greater than the incidence in non-LDS families. [^4]

In the United States, we have one violent crime every twenty-four seconds, one forcible rape every six minutes. We need to focus on this major problem with our eyes open. For instance, every two hours a woman dies as the direct result of some form of domestic violence. One out of three LDS women has been physically or sexually abused or both. If you aren't the direct victim, statistically someone very close to you is—our women of faith, or approximately one million LDS women. [^5]

If you are not or have not been a victim, loved ones and friends who are victims need your support and love. They need you to be aware of their struggle to rebuild self-esteem and regain balance in their lives. They need a loving hand and warm heart as they face this challenge, not a cold shoulder. You can be an instrument of healing—a sister in time of need—merciful and loving, not judgmental and unkind.

So today we are at a crossroads, trying to restore law and order, a sense of social discipline, rules and regulations, yet maintain our personal rights as individuals. The focus on individual rights in the sixties and women's rights in the seventies is an acknowledgment that certain forms of inhumanity will no longer be tolerated.

The right to personal safety is a constitutional right not to be confused with feminist values. It has been said that a civilization will be judged by the quality of its mercy. At this point in our civilization, physical and sexual abuse of women and children will no longer be tolerated. We have now made a legal statement. It is time for personal follow-through!

Today, domestic violence is against the law. Yet, acknowledging family violence has not stopped it. We have new rules against it. Practically daily we see bills introduced to tighten the laws—add more years to child abuse sentences, make the penalties stiffer. The problem is not that the laws are too lax; it is that people's attitudes do not truly reflect the law.

How do Americans feel about violence? The economic truth appears to be that they are fascinated by it. Millions of dollars are required to make excessively brutal movies with the expectation of a waiting public audience. Who can deny this high level of social acceptance if so many are willing to pay $4.50 to be entertained by brutality and pain? It truly attracts and repels at the same time. In LDS families, we define abuse on one level, and we define discipline on another. How many of us have hit, slapped, poked, pinched, screamed, thrown car keys, pulled hair, or shoved someone? How many of us have ever been guilty of hitting a bit harder than we intended? How many of us are still doing that today? When we do it, it is defined as "normal"; yet, in others we see the mote more clearly. A recent study of Mormon families revealed that what we do ourselves and see as acceptable behavior and what we would report in others as child abuse were remarkably similar. How narrow the threshold of violence is! [^6]

Violence is taught. It is passed from one generation to another. To stop child and spouse abuse, we must no longer allow it. Hitting is wrong. Yet, we define abuse differently for different people. Forty years ago, when I was a child, Mr. Sommers, my next-door neighbor, a banker, was known for his temper and was proud of whacking his kids soundly "when they needed it." He was outraged when an officer stopped by to discuss a complaint from a neighbor about his son Richie's stitches. Today, Mr. Sommers would have been arrested. Today, parents must seek new methods of discipline. Hitting hurts; hitting can kill. It is not amusing to threaten to hurt someone. It is not funny when someone says he will kill you or beat you to keep you in line, because some do.

Recently, my daughter reminded Brother White to send his daughter to the sports fireside that evening. "Don't worry," he advised her, "I'll whip her all the way there." I'm sure Brother White meant to be reassuring, but my daughter, truly a believer in nonviolence, said sweetly, "Brother White, you mustn't hit Tanya; even Robbie Bosco isn't reason enough for that!"

Certainly, violence can be explained, but it can no longer be condoned or taken lightly. Attitudes block the spirit of the law, and it is these attitudes that determine what is reported, what is prosecuted, what penalties are exacted.

An important attitude, and one I wish to leave with you, is our notion of what is a woman's issue. I have always been put off by the idea of being linked with the women's movement. Feminism, in the LDS community particularly, has so many poor connotations. I have always enjoyed being a woman. I have a dear, though rather sexist, husband and seven pretty terrific children. I fix meals, do not change my own tires or oil (though I know I could), worry about my figure, and am thinking of applying a little Loving Care. Yet, the dilemma before us is one of creating change. Are those of us critically involved in this struggle concerning abuse towards families part of a movement to help victims? Are we part of a movement to stop spouse abuse and family violence?

In my own life, I do not feel repressed or compromised because I know I have a choice. Many women, however, don't know that. For many, alternatives are few. Choices seem nonexistent. These victims are afraid to leave and afraid to stay. Some would rather die than face the stigma of abuse—and they may.

I want to remind us all that historically the battered women's movement came out of the women's movement as did the movement against rape. If it had not been for the years of civil rights and antiwar struggles, and if it had not been for the years of struggle by women to articulate the oppression of women in this society, we would still be unaware of such a thing as a battered woman. Women and children would, of course, continue to be beaten and killed. This reevaluation of society was necessary groundwork so that we might change, might articulate that abusive behavior was not individual or aberrant but rather social and political. Cultures, rituals, and customs determine our level of tolerance toward violence. We know in treating violence that the hardest families to reach and change are those that come from cultures supporting wife abuse.

For instance, working with Cuban refugees, I found language barriers, high levels of frustration and stress, unemployment, mental illness, and culture shock; the major obstacle, however, was their inability to understand that it was not right to hit women. In their minds, women were not very valuable, and it was okay to hit them. In the LDS culture, however, women and children have a high social and eternal value. Our Heavenly Father and our Church leaders cherish us and demand our protection. Human rights are a human concern, not a women's issue.

Historically, men have had the legal and social right to control the behavior of their wives and chastise their behavior when appropriate, but appropriate to whom? Although neither the historic nor the legal right of men to treat their wives as property still exists, the social right to beat women is maintained. No analysis of individual pathology or mental illness can adequately explain why millions of women are beaten each year and why this behavior is still socially approved by many. Our religious leaders are spearheading the need to change. President Gordon B. Hinckley, in counsel to priesthood holders, stated: "Perhaps [child abuse] has always been with us but has not received the attention it presently receives. I am glad there is a hue and cry going up against this terrible evil, too much of which is found among our own." [^7]

The great American dream of constitutional equality is slow in evolving. What was seen as protective at one time can be defined as oppressive today. (A man's telling his wife to stay home when beasts were roaming the land is considerably different from insisting today that his wife never leave the house.)

At a legal, moral, and social level, we have made a policy statement: no more hitting. Therefore, begin your protest against abuse in your own home. Do you still allow hitting at your house? Do you use physical force yourself? Have you tried to stop it? Today, violence cannot be tolerated in our laws, in our homes, in our minds, or in our attitudes.

An important day came for me five years ago. I sat down with my family and explained to them how I felt. I told them that we must never have any physical abuse—even low level abuse—in our home, no matter what, from that day forward. What that meant on a practical level was that no one would throw a hairbrush in anger or pull the milk carton out of someone else's hands or shove a person in an effort to beat him or her to the bathroom. I also asked them not to raise their voices or have the music at an intense level. Today, at our house, there is no more physical abuse. Even with teenage daughters, hitting is not an option.

If you aren't against violence, you are unwittingly supporting it. Today take an inventory of your attitudes and your behaviors. If you have a problem with abuse at home, that is the place to start. You can be a woman of courage and change. You do have a choice, and choosing to remain a victim or allowing your children to be victims will have eternal as well as temporal consequences. The Lord has always expected us to do our part. Seek help, and do it immediately. Identify who is at risk, and work toward prevention. Invite specialists to your ward to address this subject directly and explain its dangers and solutions. Send welfare representatives to conferences and training sessions in this area.

Next, be open to your neighbor's pain. Don't close your eyes, but look with sensitivity, new knowledge, and a desire to change, not blame. Investigate treatment options in your community. Offer parenting skills and periodic relief and support to troubled families. An hour or two of your time to an exhausted mother may make the difference between her feeling overwhelmed and alone, as opposed to feeling loved and on top of things again. Do not refuse to look at the problem because it seems too much to take on!

Any Church leader who says he doesn't have any abusive families in his ward is deceiving himself. In research we are often accused of asking only the questions that invite the answers we want. Religious leaders do this as well. Certainly violence in the family has confused the sacred and the secret for too long. Every member of these families is a victim and will pass the pain to a new generation if we do not make responsible changes, ask responsible questions, and offer responsible alternatives.

Be a proactive partner in solving one of the leading problems in this country today. As a teacher, researcher, wife, mother, and LDS woman of faith, I have set a goal to make home a safe place for everyone. If my neighbor is being beaten, I am not safe. Safety is a right in this country, not a privilege, and your attitude plus my attitude will be our assurance for the future.

Today you must stop abuse in your own home, and together we can stop violence in our lifetime.

Women of Faith in a Violent World Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Anne L. Horton, assistant professor of social work at Brigham Young University, holds a Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin and a master of social work degree from George Williams College. She is involved in research and clinical practice in the area of family violence. She has written a book entitled Abuse and Religion: When Praying Isn't Enough. She has served as a Young Women teacher in her ward.
[^2] Murray A. Straus, "Wife-Beating! How Common and Why?" Victimology 2 (1977-Winter 1978): 443-58; Diana E. Russell, "The Incidence and Prevalence of Intrafamilial and Extrafamilial Sexual Abuse of Female Children," Child Abuse and Neglect 7 (1983): 133-46.
[^3] Ginny Nicarthy, Getting Free: A Handbook for Women in Abusive Relationships (Seattle: Seal Press, 1982).
[^4] Anne L. Horton, "A Statistical Survey Regarding Child Abuse and Neglect in LDS Families." Prepared as unpublished report, 1985.
[^5] Marilyn Sherman, "The Economic Roots of Family Violence," Current Consumer and Lifestudies, Jan. 1986.
[^6] Linda Bradley, "A Study of Physical Discipline Practices in Relationship to the Legal Definition of Child Abuse: A Study of 100 Utah Valley Families' Discipline and Reporting Practices," unpublished master of social work research project, Brigham Young University, 1986.
[^7] In Conference Report, Apr. 1985, p. 66.
