Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Inspiration from the Past

"I rejoice that we can enjoy the privilege of associating together to converse on things of the Kingdom, to comfort and edify each other."

—Elizabeth Ann Whitney

A Legacy of Faith

Carol Cornwall Madsen [^1]

When Elizabeth Ann Whitney was appointed in 1842 by Emma Smith to be her counselor in the newly organized Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, Elizabeth Ann and the organization she would serve entered the mainstream of an American female religious tradition that had been undergoing dramatic changes for half a century. Since the late 1700s, women had found new avenues of spiritual expression through benevolent associations, like the Relief Society, and had been newly entrusted with custodial responsibility for the prevailing religious and moral values of American society, assignments women came to share with the clergy.

With only a few exceptions, women's participation in American religion, until the nineteenth century, had been largely passive. Following the admonition of the Apostle Paul, women were enjoined to be silent in the churches and were allowed no teaching or ecclesiastical role. Anne Hutchinson, one of the earliest religious nonconformists in American history, was exiled from the Puritan colonies for attempting to assert the preeminence of the biblical teachings of Titus, who exhorted women to instruct one another. Quakerism marked another notable exception, endorsing women's service in the ministry in a prophetic or teaching capacity. But the practice was not acceptable throughout the colonies. When Quakeress Mary Dyer attempted to teach religion in the Puritan towns of New England, she was banished and eventually hanged. Though women's religious sentiments were valued and sometimes quoted in Sunday sermons, women as public religious teachers in colonial America were considered heretics. [^2]

In 1830 another significant exception to the Pauline decree of silence occurred when the Lord, by revelation to Emma Smith through the Prophet Joseph, as recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 25, empowered her to "expound scriptures, and to exhort the church," according to the spirit that would be given to her. (V. 7.) She was also ordained on that occasion to be "an elect lady," which Joseph Smith later interpreted as meaning "one who presides." When the Relief Society was organized in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith read from that 1830 revelation to Emma "and stated that she was ordain'd at the time the Revelation was given, to expound the scriptures to all; and to teach the female part of the community and that not she alone, but others, [could] attain to the same blessings." [^3] Though the privilege was used primarily within the women's organizations of the Church rather than in the general congregation, this practice was a marked departure from traditional concepts of female religious participation.

Like many of her contemporaries, Elizabeth Ann "found" religion during the period of the Second Great Awakening, which swept the New England states and upper New York and moved westward and southward during the early decades of the nineteenth century. Born the day after Christmas in 1800 in Derby, New Haven County, Connecticut, to Gibson and Polly Smith, Elizabeth Ann grew up in a community that had temporarily lost its religious moorings. The Smiths had similarly retreated from orthodox religion, and Elizabeth Ann was reared without religious instruction. She left Connecticut just as the revivalist fervor began to animate the New Haven community, beginning at Yale University, toward a broad spiritual renewal.

Accompanying a well-to-do maiden aunt to the frontier in Ohio when she was eighteen—an unlikely venture for two single women—Elizabeth Ann soon thereafter met Newel K. Whitney, a successful fur trader. In 1822 the two were married, settling in Kirtland, Ohio, where Whitney became a partner with Sidney Gilbert in a successful mercantile business. Naturally religious despite her lack of training, Elizabeth Ann was attracted to the Campbellites, a millennialist sect, which she and her husband joined. Soon disillusioned by the sect's lack of divine authority, the Whitneys sought spiritual help through prayer. One night, experiencing an overwhelming manifestation of the Spirit in which they were enveloped as though in a cloud, they were impressed with the words: "Prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming." [^4] Within months, Parley P. Pratt brought the message of the gospel to the Whitneys. Elizabeth Ann was the first to hear and believe and the first to be baptized.

In her receptivity, her search for spiritual reassurance, and her immediate response to the promptings of the Spirit, Elizabeth Ann followed a pattern that prevailed throughout those days of religious awakening. It was largely a feminine revivalist movement in America; women were converting in greater numbers than men, often leading husbands, family, and female friends into church membership or renewed commitment. [^5] No longer content with a silent piety, women sought an active religious role. Their profession of faith engendered a desire for communal religious activity. As one new Protestant convert said:

"I . . . never felt the power of the religion of Jesus until about two years ago. Since that period I have seen things in a new light. I have felt . . . that I am not my own; that my time, my talents, my influence, and my all belong to Him, who has bought me with his own blood. I feel that my life should be a life of active service, and that there is need of my labors in the vineyard of the Lord." [^6]

Women's religious enthusiasm found several forms of expression. One was to gather in weekly prayer meetings and special prayer circles to nourish their own newly born faith and to bring other women into the Christian fold. Another was to form religious and benevolent associations, communities of religiously motivated women who wanted to manifest in Christian service their revitalized faith. Throughout New England there developed a profusion of such societies, creating new means of religious participation for women.

The Relief Society came relatively late to this new phenomenon of female religious activity, and for Mormon women, as for their Protestant sisters, it provided a collective religious identity and a sense of empowerment within the ecclesiastical structure of the Church. During 1843, the second year of the Relief Society, counselor Elizabeth Ann Whitney found expanded opportunity for ecclesiastical service, especially in the absence of Emma Smith throughout the season. She conducted the meetings of the society, organized a visiting committee to search out the needy, directed the society's charitable activities, exhorted the members to faithfulness, and served as a model for her Mormon sisters, who found their faith magnified in good works. "I rejoice that we can enjoy the privilege of associating together to converse on things of the Kingdom, to comfort and edify each other," Elizabeth Ann told the Relief Society at a July meeting, and she urged the sisters to "free their minds as the Spirit of the Lord should direct[,] that all should make known the wants of the poor." The minutes reported that the sisters "express'd their minds one by one [and that] a union of sentiment seemed to prevail among them all in forwarding [the work of] the Temple and in relieving the wants of the poor." [^7]

The development of religious and charitable associations created a sense of sisterhood among thousands of women nowhere more intensely than among early Mormon women, who not only participated in the great benevolent impulse of the age through the Relief Society but shared the knowledge that they were in the vanguard of the restoration of religious truth.

Another dimension of women's faith expressed itself in the exercise of the charismatic gifts, that is, the demonstration of spiritual power promised to all who believed in Christ. These gifts were encouraged primarily in the millennialist and restorationist sects, which sought a return to the visible manifestations of the spirit of Christ. For Mormons, the Kirtland Temple provided the setting for a latter-day Pentecost, where many witnessed the outpourings of the Spirit, and at the first patriarchal blessing meeting held in the temple, Elizabeth Ann Whitney received the gift of "inspirational singing," as she called it. In a naturally clear and plaintive voice and in the gift of tongues, she sang songs of praise and rejoicing, demonstrating a gift of faith that never left her. "The sweet songstress of Zion," the Prophet Joseph called her, as she comforted him with her singing during the difficult days in Kirtland. A singular blessing given to Elizabeth Ann by Isaac Morley confirmed this special gift: "Thou hast been blest of the Lord by the gift of faith in singing the songs of Zion," he told her. "Thou hast edified and comforted those who have heard. This blessing [of faith] shall be increased in thy bosom by the power and spirit of knowledge." [^8] In 1854 Wilford Woodruff wrote in his journal of a visit by Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Eliza R. Snow:

"I read over several of the old sermons of Joseph that were not recorded anywhere except in my journal. We passed a pleasant evening together, and before they left they sang in tongues in the pure language which Adam and Eve spoke in the Garden of Eden. This gift was obtained in the Kirtland Temple through a promise of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He told Sister Whitney if she would rise upon her feet she should have the pure language. She did so, and immediately began to sing in tongues. It was nearer to heavenly music than anything I ever heard." [^9]

Not only Elizabeth Ann but many other men and women received and exercised the gifts of the Spirit for the spiritual edification of Church members.

Later on, in Nauvoo, Elizabeth Ann, along with several other women, was also "ordained and set apart under [Joseph's] hand to administer to the sick and comfort the sorrowful." [^10] At the same time, he also encouraged women to freely exercise the gifts of the Spirit to uplift, comfort, and bless one another. The sojourn at Winter Quarters seasoned this spiritual power. Together these women of faith met to enjoy what they repeatedly called "spiritual feasts," prophesying, praying, testifying, and blessing one another. [^11] Though men as religious leaders were the primary shapers and transmitters of the tenets of faith, through the exercise of spiritual gifts women became vehicles of the Spirit and by this means they too became transmitters of spiritual values and religious faith. [^12]

An aspect of the religious experience that captured the enthusiasm of Mormon women was the liturgical or priestly function, represented in temple worship, not commonly available to most religious women in nineteenth-century America. Elizabeth Ann Whitney was the second woman in this dispensation to receive the temple rites, Emma Smith being the first. As a member of what came to be known as the Holy Order, or Endowment Group, Elizabeth Ann and her husband joined a small number of early Saints who received all of the temple ordinances under Joseph Smith's direction before the Nauvoo Temple was completed. One of the significant honors of her life was to give birth in January 1844 to the first child born "heir to the Holy Priesthood and in the New and Everlasting Covenant in this dispensation," a girl whom the Prophet named Mary. [^13] When the Nauvoo Temple was completed late in 1845, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Mary Ann Young, and Vilate Kimball were the first to perform the initiatory rites, repeating the priesthood ordinances for each other and for other Mormon women whom they had previously received in the upper room of Joseph Smith's store as members of the Holy Order. Elizabeth Ann officiated every day thereafter as a "Priestess," a title accorded to all ordained women temple workers in that period. Besides Mary Ann Young and Vilate Kimball, she was joined in this service by Eliza R. Snow, Bathsheba W. Smith, Zina D. H. Young—all future general Relief Society presidents—and several other faithful women, who would continue their work as Priestesses in the Endowment House and the temples of Utah. When Eliza R. Snow preceded many of her sister temple workers to Utah, she sent a poem back to them that suggests the reverence with which they all considered their priestly calling. It ended: "All is well, is well in Zion; Zion is the pure in heart. Come along, ye holy women, And your blessings here impart." [^14] Bound together in a network of charismatic and priestly functions, these Mothers in Israel, another designation of spiritual power, created a unique female tradition within the rituals of Mormonism.

Mormon women of the past shared many of the collective religious experiences of their American sisters. On their own initiative women were able to break with the entrenched traditions and create a new spiritual space for themselves. Through organized benevolence, a renewed evocation of spiritual gifts, and, especially for Mormon women, an essential, assigned role in the performance of the saving ordinances of the gospel, women in their various religious settings claimed a vital participatory function. But for Elizabeth Ann Whitney and her Mormon sisters, conversion meant even more than an expanded religious role. For her, she wrote, it meant "a fresh revelation of the Spirit day by day." It meant "a most implicit faith in a divine power," a sustaining faith when one came "unequal to the contest of life's struggles," a "faith in God which has its foundation in the principles of eternal truth." [^15]For these women, who were pioneers not only of a new region but a new religion, the restoration of the gospel opened new avenues of religious participation and laid a foundation of purpose and meaning to their lives which they had not known before. Elizabeth Ann Whitney gratefully embraced every new principle and ordinance of the gospel as Joseph revealed them, amazed that she was among the first chosen to hear the restored message in this last dispensation of time. Her commitment to the principles of truth that she learned from the Prophet Joseph himself remained firm to the end. Of the rich heritage left by our Mormon sisters of the past to the women of the present, perhaps the most significant is their legacy of faith.

A Legacy of Faith Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Park, who taught her the theory and practice of teaching, arithmetic, grammar, and spelling and punctuation. [^14] Harriet Horne Arrington holds a B.A. from the University of Utah. She is chair of the women's art exhibits of the Utah chapter of the American Association of University Women. She has taught in the public schools and has served as a Relief Society and Primary president and in various other capacities in the Church organizations. Leonard J. Arrington received a Ph.D. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a D.Litt. from Utah State University. He was the first occupant of the Lemuel Redd Chair of Western History at Brigham Young University, a position he held for fifteen years. From 1972 to 1982 he was also LDS Church Historian and then was appointed director of the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at BYU. He has served in numerous Church positions over the years, including counselor in a stake presidency.
[^2] Joseph B. Toronto, son of Giuseppe Toronto, native of Sardinia, and Eleanor Jones, native of Wales, both early converts to Mormonism. Toronto had been a student at the University of Deseret from 1869 to 1875 and was regarded as a near genius in mathematics and ancient languages. He entered West Point in 1875 but resigned to accept an appointment at Deseret as instructor in ancient languages and history. He served there until 1889. Toronto taught Alice the history of civilization; ancient, medieval, and modern history; and bookkeeping. [^15] Laws of Utah, chap. 29, "The State Institute of Art, Approved March 9, 1899."
[^3] Joseph T. Kingsbury, a product of Utah schools and self-effort, was born near Uinta, Weber County, in 1853, but lived most of his youth in Salt Lake City, as did Alice Merrill. He studied at the University of Deseret from 1872 to 1875 and then attended Cornell for two years, studying the physical sciences. He went to the University of Deseret in 1878 and taught Alice physics, chemistry, geology, civil government, and geography. He was later president of the University of Utah from 1897 to 1916 and was also a close friend of Alice. [^16] Alice Merrill Horne, "Utah Art," Young Women's Journal, 20 (Dec.1909): 602.
[^4] Orson Howard, her fourth-grade teacher who had since received a degree from a Midwestern university, taught Alice zoology, physiology, botany, astronomy, rhetoric and history of the English language, English literature, and Chaucer and Shakespeare. [^17] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool, 1854-80), 8:79, 80, 83; 1:345.
[^5] Joshua H. Paul, born in Salt Lake City in 1863, had graduated from the University in 1879 with certificates in normal and natural science. He taught Alice writing, reading, grammar, and geography. He went on to become president of Brigham Young College in Logan from 1891 to 1894 and in 1894 became president of Utah State Agricultural College (now Utah State University). He later returned to the now University of Utah as professor of nature study. He and Alice worked together on several projects involving conservation and beautification. [^18] Journal of Discourses, 4:32.
[^6] Evan Stephens, a Welsh convert to Mormonism, eventually became director of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. He taught Alice vocal music and worked with her in the Junior Tabernacle Choir, in several operatic productions, and in other musical capacities. [^19] Journal of Discourses, 6:70; 10:358-59; 13:61; 14:38.
[^7] George M. Ottinger, a Mormon convert from Pennsylvania and an enthusiastic Utah artist, taught Alice freehand drawing and painting. Quite possibly Ottinger had more influence on Alice than any other teacher—at least it was he who reinforced her interest in art, already implanted by her grandmother Bathsheba in her more formative years. Born in Pennsylvania, Ottinger had begun to paint when he was nine. When the aunt and uncle who cared for him died, he lived for a time with friends and relatives until the age of seventeen, when he decided to go to sea. He circumnavigated the globe on a whaler, joined the California Gold Rush, took passage to China, put in at Honolulu, and then decided in 1853 to return to New York City to paint. He studied under Robert W. Weir of the Hudson River School and at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia. There he converted to Mormonism. He went to Utah in 1861, arriving just as the Salt Lake Theatre was about to open. He was engaged for four years painting scenery for the theater. Later he worked as a phototinter, established an art gallery, and did some painting. He was a teacher at the University of Deseret in the 1880s and helped Alice to create the Utah Art Institute. [^20] Manuscript History of Brigham Young, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, 23 Aug. 1848, p. 57.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, 9:244.
[^9] Daughters of Utah Pioneers of Millard County, Milestones of Millard (Fillmore, Utah, 1936), p. 35.
[^10] Zorah H. Jeppson, letter to Dr. Vern G. Swanson, 2 Oct. 1984, copy in possession of the writers.
[^11] Alice Merrill Horne, "Child of the Frontier," pp. 8-9, microfilm of typescript in possession of the writers. "Woodman," by G. P. Morris, 1830; "Bells" by Edgar Allan Poe, 1849; and "Excelsior" by Longfellow, 1841.
[^12] Farel C. Kimball, ed., Mary E. Woolley Chamberlain: Handmaiden of the Lord (Salt Lake City, Privately Printed, 1981), p. 99.
[^13] See, for example, Wallace Stegner, "The Power of Homely Detail," American Heritage 36 (Aug./Sept. 1985): 62-69.
[^14] On Park, see Ralph V. Chamberlin, Memories of John Rockey Park (Salt Lake City: The Emeritus Club, 1949).
[^15] See Chamberlin, University of Utah, p. 593.
