Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Alice Merrill Horne, Cultural Entrepreneur

Harriet Horne Arrington and Leonard J. Arrington [^1]

One of the remarkable women in nineteenth-century Utah was Alice Merrill Horne. Elected to the Utah legislature only two years after statehood, she was one of the few nineteenth-century women to serve in a state assembly anywhere in the nation. In 1899 she wrote and shepherded through the legislature the bill to create the Utah Art Institute, which was intended to "advance the interest of the fine arts, including literature and music, in all their phases within the state of Utah." [^2] As enacted, the bill provided for state-sponsored art exhibits and for the acquisition of prize-winning paintings to provide a state-owned collection of art. (The collection was later named after Mrs. Horne, the Alice Art Collection.) Annual exhibits were held in each of Utah's leading cities and at the colleges and universities in the state so they could be widely viewed. The collection, which still exists and continues to be augmented, was the first such state-sponsored collection in the nation. During the 1920s, when the Art Institute was not well funded, Alice decided that if the state was negligent, she herself would exhibit and encourage the public to purchase works of art. She held exhibits in banks, in hotels, and in ZCMI, Salt Lake City's leading department store. Over the next twenty years she sold several hundred paintings and placed at least forty collections of works by Utah artists. Believing that "in each home should hang a good picture," and that "no impressionable child should be denied the privilege of living with one good picture, " [^3] she held exhibitions in most of the grade schools and high schools in the state and started permanent collections that still hang in many of Utah's schoolrooms. In this sense Alice has often been referred to as the "First Lady of Utah Arts."

Alice also led crusades to save historic buildings and pioneer landmarks. She was author of two books, Devotees and Their Shrines: A Handbook of Art and Columbus Westward Ho. The latter is a play in dramatic form used in the public schools. The former work was used for lessons on art appreciation and landscape study by the Church's Relief Societies.

A longtime member of the general board of the Relief Society, Alice wrote some of their first lesson manuals, contributed articles to their magazine, and conducted seminars for local Relief Societies throughout the Mormon West. She was a Utah delegate to the International Congress of Women, held at Berlin, Germany, in 1904 and gave two addresses to that convention. She was instrumental in founding the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, an organization that now includes more than 22,000 members, and was its first secretary and second president. She was the first woman to be elected chairman of the Democratic Party in Salt Lake County and was historian and state regent of the Utah Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution. She was a leading figure in the establishment and operation of "clean milk depots" in Salt Lake City at, a time when the provision of pasteurized milk for babies was lacking. Similarly, she organized the Smokeless Fuel Federation and Women's Chamber of Commerce. She was one of a committee of three legislators that sponsored the relocation of the University of Utah to its present site on the hills overlooking Salt Lake City. Finally, in addition to all of this, she was the mother of six children, all of whom, except one who died at age seven months, were achievers and two of whom are still alive. Alice died in Salt Lake City in 1948 at the age of eighty.

The question that naturally occurs is how to account for this woman. She was the product of a plural household—her father had three wives. Were her accomplishments in some way related to her upbringing in a polygamous family? Her grandparents George A. Smith and Bathsheba W. Bigler Smith were pioneer leaders in the Great Basin. George A., an early colonizer, apostle of the Church, Church historian, and a close associate and first counselor of President Brigham Young, was also a leader in the territorial legislature. Bathsheba, a longtime member of the Relief Society General Board and general president of the Relief Society from 1901 to 1910, was also a director of the Deseret Hospital Association and matron of the Salt Lake Temple. So the government of the Church and Territory was part and parcel of Alice's home life. Was it, therefore, the advantage of family connection that propelled her forward? Her husband, a Salt Lake banker who adored her, was complaisant and supportive; should much of the credit for her accomplishments be given to him? The values that prompted her to participate so vigorously in many of these activities were tenaciously held by her church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Was it, therefore, her Mormonness that inspired her leadership? Where does one go for an explanation?

Although a good case could be made for each of these hypotheses, any single explanation would be simplistic. Obviously, her family, her teachers, her community, and her church each influenced her. More important, during the time she was growing up, there was close congruence between family, church, schools, and community. Brigham Young was president of the LDS Church, to which the vast majority of Utah's residents belonged (perhaps as high as 98 percent when Alice was born); he was also governor of the territory (part of the time de jure, part de facto); and, following his oft-expressed objective, all pioneer life was—or aimed to be—a seamless web. Politics, economics, education, recreation, worship, charity, and even art were aspects of religion, of church concern, and of ecclesiastical leadership. Everyone was expected to be engaged in building the kingdom of God; that is, in working toward commonly understood group goals. When the Saints first arrived in the Great Basin, Brigham declared:

"You are commencing anew. . . . Build cities, adorn your habitations, make gardens, orchards, and vineyards, and render the earth so pleasant that when you look upon your labours you may do so with pleasure, and that angels may delight to come and visit your beautiful locations. . . . Your work is to beautify the face of the earth, until it shall become like the garden of Eden." [^4]

Although it was important to settle as many communities as possible, immigrate as many converts as possible, and improve the level of living to the point that each family could enjoy a competence, the primary goal of their society, Young believed, should be the improvement of people by the nurture and maintenance of educational and cultural organizations. The Great Basin, he said, "is a good place to make [Latter-day] Saints." [^5] The Latter-day Saints "have been taken from the coal pits, from the iron-works, from the streets, from the kitchens and from the barns and factories and from hard service in the countries where they formerly lived." They belonged to "the poorest of the poor." [^6] "Here [in our mountain retreat] we can cultivate every science and art calculated to enlarge the mind, invigorate the body, cheer the heart, and ennoble the soul." [^7] In contradistinction to the society in which he grew up, here children and young people were encouraged to dance, to study music, to read novels, "and do anything else that will tend to expand their frames, add fire to their spirits, improve their minds, and make them feel free and untrammeled in body and mind. . . . Every sweet musical sound that can be made belongs to the Saints and is for the Saints, Every flower, shrub, and tree to beautify, and to gratify the taste and smell, and every sensation that gives to man joy and felicity are for the Saints who receive them from the Most High." [^8]

By the time Alice was in secondary school—that is, by 1880—a whole generation had been reared under the principles of cooperation, mutual sharing, earth improvement, social improvement, and mind improvement that Young and his associates had promoted. Survival in their hospitable environment came first, perhaps, but after-wards came beautification, learning, and wholesome recreation. In any event, it was the obligation of each individual to contribute his or her labor, talents, and genius to building the kingdom—that is, to improve society.

These values were emphasized at the so-called University of Deseret, the Church-run school that Alice attended as a teenager during the 1880s. Many of her classmates also achieved largely, and one must surely attribute much of their activity to the training and encouragement they received from the University faculty. Just how did that training impinge upon Alice Merrill Horne?

Alice Merrill was born in a log cabin on January 2, 1868, at Fillmore, Utah, the daughter of Clarence Merrill and Bathsheba Smith. (Fillmore is about 150 miles south of Salt Lake City. Because of its central location it was, for a period, the capital of Utah.) She was the third daughter and fourth child in a family of fourteen children. Shortly before Alice's birth, reportedly at the urging of her grandfather, George A. Smith, her father married additionally Julia Felshaw, a widow nine years older than he, by whom he had a son nine months after Alice was born and a daughter two years later. When Alice was eleven he also married Isabelle ("Belle") Harris, a very bright and spunky girl of eighteen, by whom he had two sons. Clarence was divorced by Belle four years later, when Alice was fifteen.

Because of these plural-family arrangements, Alice's father was not an ever-present dominating figure in her mother's home, although he apparently preferred to stay with Bathsheba as much as he could. Alice and her thirteen full brothers and sisters were given household and family responsibilities at an early age. She first went to school at the age of six, but it was a ward school, run by the bishop and whoever he could get to be the teacher (apparently Delilah Olsen), and operated three or four months each winter. Alice said she had pleasant memories of being whisked through the snow by sled to the little rock schoolhouse. The students had "nice home-made seats and desks, good maps, blackboards," and there was a village library. [^9]

That much of her training was in her mother's home was not necessarily a disadvantage. Her mother was full of energy and good humor, took an active part in ward plays, of which there was a constant succession, composed and recited humorous poems and songs, and assured an active social life for the family. A Utah pioneer of 1852, Alice's father was intelligent and had a pleasant personality. He ran Fillmore's telegraph office, taught school, directed the ward theatricals, and always had some income from various enterprises that he managed. His first plural wife, Julia Felshaw, had a dressmaking and hatmaking business in Fillmore. In 1876 Clarence bought a farm in Marysvale, some thirty-five miles south of Fillmore, and Alice and her siblings spent some of their summers there. In 1877, when Alice was nine, her mother also moved to Marysvale, where Clarence taught at the local school. The next year Clarence was elected superintendent of schools for Piute County. After that year, because of a drouth, he moved to Richfield, in Sevier County, where he managed the local cooperative general store. After four years there, in 1883 the family moved to Salt Lake City for Bathsheba and her children to be near her mother and for several of the children, including Julia's, who later moved to Salt Lake City, to attend the city's schools. They remained there until 1892, after which Clarence and some of the family returned to Fillmore.

When Alice was seven, her maternal grandfather, George A. Smith, died, leaving her grandmother, Bathsheba W. B. Smith, alone. The grandmother, who had lived briefly in Fillmore and had often visited with the Merrill family, invited one or more of the Merrill girls to live with her in Salt Lake City. Alice went to live with her the next year on a more or less permanent basis, although she returned to live with the Merrills each summer.

Because George A. Smith had been a member of the First Presidency of the Church and Church historian, Bathsheba's gable-roofed home was located on Brigham Street (now South Temple Street), just east of Main Street and across the street south from the Lion House and President's Office of Brigham Young. Upon Alice's arrival in Salt Lake City, therefore, her grandmother promptly took the eight-year-old across the street to Brigham Young's office, introduced Alice to him, and according to her daughter, Brigham charged Alice "to make her grandmother's happiness her first duty and to grow up and try to be like her." [^10] Bathsheba and Alice were often present for Brigham Young's daily "family home evenings," at least until his death in 1877, and thus Alice, for a year at least, had a chance to be a member of Young's large extended family. (Young's family met each evening after dinner in the Lion House parlor and had family prayer, after which they played games, put on skits, played musical instruments and sang, and otherwise enjoyed being together.)

Like most women in nineteenth-century America, Grandmother Bathsheba had little formal education, but she was intelligent, aware, and interested in events, both local and national. Her home enveloped Alice in what she called an "Arabian Nights atmosphere." There were many original paintings, colorful quilts and coverlets, lace curtains, blinds with hand-painted scenes. Her library included a variety of magazines and newspapers. The youthful Alice devoured Century, Godey's Lady's Book, Scribner's, Youth's Companion, Leslie's Illustrated News Magazine, Chamber's Encyclopedia, and other national publications, as well as such local publications as The Juvenile Instructor, The Woman's Exponent, and the Deseret News Weekly. Bathsheba had studied painting in Nauvoo, Illinois, when the Mormons were located there, and had painted portraits of both Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, as well as such genre scenes as fruit, landscapes, and children. She gave instruction to Alice and kindled an interest in art that remained with Alice throughout her life. Grandmother Bathsheba was also active in the Relief Society—she was a member of the "inner circle" that eventually became the general board of the Relief Society and later served as general president of the Relief Society of the Church. Thus, important women in the territory were often in Bathsheba's home—women influential in politics, ecclesiastical affairs, civic affairs, literature, education, and the visual, literary, and performing arts. Country girl that she was, Alice profited from this exposure during her growing-up years.

One of the inducements offered by Bathsheba to have Alice Merrill stay with her each winter was that she would see to it that the girl attended a good school. Perhaps the best in the territory was the Thirteenth Ward School, which was the school of the ward in which Bathsheba's home was located. We have no record of Alice's progress in that school until 1879, when she turned eleven. Under the leadership of John R. Park, president of the University of Deseret, the Thirteenth Ward School was incorporated as a training school, and existing records show Alice Merrill enrolled as a fourth-grade student during the school year 1879-80, with Orson Howard as a teacher. The twenty-seven-year-old Howard was a native of Mill Creek, Salt Lake County, had studied at the University of Deseret during the four preceding years, and was now principal of the Thirteenth Ward School. The year after this class, Howard went on to Grinnell College in Iowa and came back to the University of Deseret as a professor of natural science and English literature, and was one of Alice's instructors during her "college" years. The extent of personal instruction Alice had in the fourth-grade class is indicated by the fact that there were only seven students in the room—three in the fourth grade, two in the second, and two in the first grade.

Alice, who on the school records is often listed simply as "Allee Merrill," remembers: "We chose up sides, took opposite ends of the room, and vied in distinct rendition of alternative voices from 'Woodman, Spare That Tree,' 'The Bells,' and 'Excelsior.' The old walls would fairly ring as we recited those grand old poems." [^11]

Alice continued studies in the training school again in 1880 and 1881. Then in 1882, when she was fourteen, she enrolled for more advanced study, in what we would call today secondary education, but which was then the principal offering of the University of Deseret, a school with approximately 200 students. During her first year Alice studied grammar, arithmetic, orthography and punctuation, elocution, writing, reading, and geography. During her next year, 1884-85, she and five others were considered prepared to enroll in college or college preparatory courses. They took ancient, medieval, and modern history; physiology and hygiene; botany and zoology; rhetoric and English literature; and astronomy. During her second year of "college" she had courses in Chaucer and Shakespeare, history of civilization, physics, civil government, writing, freehand drawing and vocal music, and "normal," which was presumably a course in the theory and practice of teaching.

There is no record of Alice's being enrolled for the school year 1886-87; perhaps she was a student teacher in a grade school class. But we do know that she was associated with the University in extracurricular ways. She organized a Shakespeare Society, with fifteen young men and fifteen young women, who met regularly to study, memorize, and produce Shakespearean plays. She also participated in a choral group of persons of her age. And she organized in 1885 the Friendship Circle, consisting originally of six persons—three girls and three boys, who met each Saturday in her grandmother's parlor and discussed a variety of religious, cultural, political, and social topics. The group soon expanded to thirty, and after the members were married it was converted into a women's club; it continued to meet throughout Alice's lifetime.

With fifteen others from the University, Alice graduated in the class of 1887 and was asked to read the valedictory essay at the commencement exercises. Appropriately, her essay was entitled "Lady Macbeth and Ophelia."

There is no question that the University engaged in what today would be called "consciousness raising." We do not have Alice's essay at her graduation, but we do have the commencement talk four years later by Mary Elizabeth ("Mamie") Woolley. Among other things, Miss Woolley said:

"The young ladies of this institution stand on an equal plane with the young men and receive from them the respect which equals demand. Sex with us is no distinction. If there is anything to be performed and a lady is capable, the fact of her being 'fair' does not deter her. Her opinion is expressed and sanctioned, her testimony borne and sustained the same as that of her brethren." [^12]

This attitude, inculcated in Alice, remained with her throughout her life. An exemplification of this female assertiveness was told to us by LeConte Stewart, a ninety-six-year-old Utah artist whose paintings are currently going through a popular and critical revival. [^13] In 1916, having established a certain reputation as an artist, LeConte, then twenty-five, was called by the Church on a mission to paint murals for the Hawaii Temple. Knowing he would be there for at least two years, he invited his Utah sweetheart, Zipporah Layton, to go to Hawaii and marry him. Her bishop, however, said that was against all the rules; men on missions were not allowed to marry. Alice, who had exhibited and sold some of LeConte's first paintings, heard of this denial and promptly "marched" into the office of the president of the Church, Joseph F. Smith, and asked him to override the bishop. President Smith said, "You know very well I can't do that; I must enforce the rules." Alice, according to the account, "wagged her finger under his nose," and said, "Now, Joseph, I don't care what the rules are. You are the president, and you can bend the rules if you want to. You are going to allow Sister Layton to join Elder Stewart in Hawaii so they can marry." Taken aback by her assertiveness, President Smith meekly replied, "Well, Alice, if you insist!" In a few days, Zipporah was on her way to Hawaii, and she and LeConte began a marriage that lasted sixty-seven years. As this incident illustrates, Alice did not hesitate to use the force of her personality to get things done when the occasion was important enough to require it.

During her senior year, according to family remembrance, Alice was courted by three University students who were also associated with her in the Shakespeare Society. Two of them went on to law school at the University of Michigan, and she wrote to them for a period. But she finally decided to marry a young man four years older than she, who had gone to work for Utah State National Bank in Salt Lake and eventually became the bank's cashier. George Henry Horne, son of a plural family and also a loyal Mormon, had been in Alice's Shakespearean Club, in the same vocal group, and in the same Friendship Circle. Alice later said she was glad she had married him because he was so supportive of her—in looking after the household, in contributing to various causes in which she engaged, in driving her around the state in his car, and in giving her encouragement in her ecclesiastical, political, and cultural activities. He was, in short, a "modern" husband, which leads us to wonder if women's assertiveness of the 1880s produced other husbands of this disposition.

No doubt, part of the motivation for Alice's subsequent activities was the superintendence of the University by Dr. John R. Park. A native of Tiffin, Ohio, and possessor of an M.D. degree from New York University and Bellevue Hospital, Park had spent a winter as a teacher in the Salt Lake Valley, converted to Mormonism, and served five years as principal of the ward school in South Willow Creek (now Draper). Under his energetic and enlightened leadership, the South Willow Creek school soon gained a reputation as the best in the territory. Because of the training they received from Park, many young persons of promise began to make their mark in educational and professional circles in the territory. When Brigham Young and his associates decided to "refound" the University of Deseret in 1869, Park was appointed its president.

Starting from no campus, no faculty, no library, no museums, no lecture rooms, and no students, Park soon had the best of all these among the colleges in Utah and produced persons of eminence in many professions. Alice Merrill, who was often in his home because her sister married his housekeeper's son (Park was a bachelor), profited from close association with him and his faculty for many years. Indeed, she was one of Park's closest advisers, just as he was one of hers.

Alice enjoyed the daily assemblies of students and faculty at which there was a reading of the Bible and of various literary masterpieces, prayer by a student, brief talk by Dr. Park, short talk by another faculty, and then dismissal to class. Among her teachers—persons who also were close associates throughout her life—were the following:

After her graduation, Alice taught at the Washington School in Salt Lake City. She married George Henry Horne early in 1890 and gave birth to a daughter by the end of the year. In 1894 George was called to serve as a proselyting missionary for the Church in the Southern states. He remained two years. Meanwhile, Alice went back to teaching school in order to support herself, her daughter, and her husband on his mission. During the same period she continued to study art, this time under J. T. Harwood, Mary Teasdel, and John Hafen, all prominent Utah artists. Her second child was born the year after her husband's return from his mission.

Two years later Alice was nominated by the Democratic Party for the legislature and was elected for a two-year term. Thus began the personal career that caused her to be a leader in Utah's Democratic Party, in the Relief Society, in Utah art circles, and in many other community affairs. Those who knew her have testified of her creative leadership, her courage in tackling unfriendly persons and unpopular issues, and her contagious enthusiasm. She was also a lover of the beautiful and thought the kingdom the Latter-day Saints were building ought to be beautified with lovely art and architecture and with beautiful people. In tracing her life we have interviewed literally dozens of older artists who say that she was the one person who, through her sponsorship of exhibits and ardent promotion of their work, made it possible for them to earn money on their paintings through the 1920s and 1930s. They have testified that she was truly the first lady of Utah art. Clearly, Professor Ottinger and others at the University, together with other religious and family influences, had inspired her to devote her life to what she regarded as the development and appreciation of the good and the beautiful.

In an age in which individualism is spreading, social relations are atomizing, religious life is increasingly privatized, and the customary pattern of livelihood is for each individual to seek to maximize his or her personal income regardless of social consequences, it is nostalgic to contemplate Alice Merrill Horne, the exemplification of community spirit, a builder of social institutions, an advocate of using public resources to enhance public culture. The product of a commonwealth that emphasized collectivity, unity, order, and nationality, she labored for community good and encouraged in selfless ways the organic improvement of the cultural and social life of Utah.

Sources and References

Alice Merrill Horne wrote extensively about her life and intended to publish a personal history, but she died before that goal was realized. As the oldest living grandchild of Alice, Harriet had the opportunity of typing portions of that history.

Over the years, we have also interviewed all of Alice's living children, many of her grandchildren, one brother, one sister, nieces and nephews, and several persons who were close friends and associates of Alice. We have obtained transcripts of the courses she took at the University of Deseret from the Records Office of the University of Utah. We have also gone through newspapers, magazines, art publications, legislative journals, and other printed sources. Much material is at the Utah State Historical Society, University of Utah, LDS Church Library and Archives, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers Library, and Brigham Young University Archives. We have an extensive file on Alice, her life, her achievements, her writings, and her works of art, but we have cited only those sources that are particularly pertinent to this paper. We hope that a full-scale biography will be forthcoming.

General Utah histories include Richard D. Poll, ed., Utah's History (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978); and S. George Ellsworth, The New Utah's Heritage (Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books, 1985).

Mormon histories include James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976); and Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Experience: A History of the Latter-day Saints (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979). Brigham Young's life and influence are treated in Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985). The University of Deseret, which was converted into the University of Utah in 1892, is treated in Ralph V. Chamberlin, The University of Utah: A History of Its First Hundred Years, 1850 to 1950 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1960).

Brief biographies of Alice Merrill Horne can be found in: Robert S. Olpin, Dictionary of Utah Art (Salt Lake City: Salt Lake Art Center, 1980), pp. 126-28; Zorah H. Jeppson, "A Brief Biography of Alice Merrill Horne by Her Daughter," typescript in possession of the writers; Raye Price, "Utah's Leading Ladies of the Arts," Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Winter 1970): 65-85; Jill C. Mulvay, "Three Mormon Women in the Cultural Arts," Sunstone 1 (Spring 1976): 29-39; Leah D. Widtsoe, "The Story of a Gifted Lady," Relief Society Magazine 32 (Mar. 1945): 150-55.

Alice Merrill Horne, Cultural Entrepreneur Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Park, who taught her the theory and practice of teaching, arithmetic, grammar, and spelling and punctuation. [^14] Harriet Horne Arrington holds a B.A. from the University of Utah. She is chair of the women's art exhibits of the Utah chapter of the American Association of University Women. She has taught in the public schools and has served as a Relief Society and Primary president and in various other capacities in the Church organizations. Leonard J. Arrington received a Ph.D. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a D.Litt. from Utah State University. He was the first occupant of the Lemuel Redd Chair of Western History at Brigham Young University, a position he held for fifteen years. From 1972 to 1982 he was also LDS Church Historian and then was appointed director of the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at BYU. He has served in numerous Church positions over the years, including counselor in a stake presidency.
[^2] Joseph B. Toronto, son of Giuseppe Toronto, native of Sardinia, and Eleanor Jones, native of Wales, both early converts to Mormonism. Toronto had been a student at the University of Deseret from 1869 to 1875 and was regarded as a near genius in mathematics and ancient languages. He entered West Point in 1875 but resigned to accept an appointment at Deseret as instructor in ancient languages and history. He served there until 1889. Toronto taught Alice the history of civilization; ancient, medieval, and modern history; and bookkeeping. [^15] Laws of Utah, chap. 29, "The State Institute of Art, Approved March 9, 1899."
[^3] Joseph T. Kingsbury, a product of Utah schools and self-effort, was born near Uinta, Weber County, in 1853, but lived most of his youth in Salt Lake City, as did Alice Merrill. He studied at the University of Deseret from 1872 to 1875 and then attended Cornell for two years, studying the physical sciences. He went to the University of Deseret in 1878 and taught Alice physics, chemistry, geology, civil government, and geography. He was later president of the University of Utah from 1897 to 1916 and was also a close friend of Alice. [^16] Alice Merrill Horne, "Utah Art," Young Women's Journal, 20 (Dec.1909): 602.
[^4] Orson Howard, her fourth-grade teacher who had since received a degree from a Midwestern university, taught Alice zoology, physiology, botany, astronomy, rhetoric and history of the English language, English literature, and Chaucer and Shakespeare. [^17] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool, 1854-80), 8:79, 80, 83; 1:345.
[^5] Joshua H. Paul, born in Salt Lake City in 1863, had graduated from the University in 1879 with certificates in normal and natural science. He taught Alice writing, reading, grammar, and geography. He went on to become president of Brigham Young College in Logan from 1891 to 1894 and in 1894 became president of Utah State Agricultural College (now Utah State University). He later returned to the now University of Utah as professor of nature study. He and Alice worked together on several projects involving conservation and beautification. [^18] Journal of Discourses, 4:32.
[^6] Evan Stephens, a Welsh convert to Mormonism, eventually became director of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. He taught Alice vocal music and worked with her in the Junior Tabernacle Choir, in several operatic productions, and in other musical capacities. [^19] Journal of Discourses, 6:70; 10:358-59; 13:61; 14:38.
[^7] George M. Ottinger, a Mormon convert from Pennsylvania and an enthusiastic Utah artist, taught Alice freehand drawing and painting. Quite possibly Ottinger had more influence on Alice than any other teacher—at least it was he who reinforced her interest in art, already implanted by her grandmother Bathsheba in her more formative years. Born in Pennsylvania, Ottinger had begun to paint when he was nine. When the aunt and uncle who cared for him died, he lived for a time with friends and relatives until the age of seventeen, when he decided to go to sea. He circumnavigated the globe on a whaler, joined the California Gold Rush, took passage to China, put in at Honolulu, and then decided in 1853 to return to New York City to paint. He studied under Robert W. Weir of the Hudson River School and at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia. There he converted to Mormonism. He went to Utah in 1861, arriving just as the Salt Lake Theatre was about to open. He was engaged for four years painting scenery for the theater. Later he worked as a phototinter, established an art gallery, and did some painting. He was a teacher at the University of Deseret in the 1880s and helped Alice to create the Utah Art Institute. [^20] Manuscript History of Brigham Young, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, 23 Aug. 1848, p. 57.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, 9:244.
[^9] Daughters of Utah Pioneers of Millard County, Milestones of Millard (Fillmore, Utah, 1936), p. 35.
[^10] Zorah H. Jeppson, letter to Dr. Vern G. Swanson, 2 Oct. 1984, copy in possession of the writers.
[^11] Alice Merrill Horne, "Child of the Frontier," pp. 8-9, microfilm of typescript in possession of the writers. "Woodman," by G. P. Morris, 1830; "Bells" by Edgar Allan Poe, 1849; and "Excelsior" by Longfellow, 1841.
[^12] Farel C. Kimball, ed., Mary E. Woolley Chamberlain: Handmaiden of the Lord (Salt Lake City, Privately Printed, 1981), p. 99.
[^13] See, for example, Wallace Stegner, "The Power of Homely Detail," American Heritage 36 (Aug./Sept. 1985): 62-69.
