Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Third-World Heidis

Val D. MacMurray [^1]

I am honored to address you today on the topic of cultural differences and gospel unity. As executive director of the Thrasher Research Fund, most of my professional activity has to do with administering pediatric research grants that seek to improve the health of infants and children in third-world countries. My work takes me to research and demonstration projects in South America, Central America, Mexico, Asia, and Africa. They have not failed to impress me—indeed, they would impress anyone—with the desperate need mothers in those countries feel to make the world better and safer for their children.

I'd like to phrase those needs—and some of the opportunities the Church offers the world's children—in terms of my oldest daughter, Heidi, who in a few years may well sit in such a group as you but who celebrated her seventeenth birthday in March 1986.

Heidi is lucky to be born in the United States for many reasons, not the least of which is that being born female did not automatically jeopardize her survival. In many developing countries, girls receive less nutrition as babies. Girl babies are less likely to be taken to the hospital when they are ill, and they seldom receive equivalent education. These discrepancies last their entire lives. According to the International Labour Organization's current report, "Women are one-half the world's population, one-third of the official labour force and do nearly two-thirds of the world's workhours. They receive directly only one-tenth of the world's income and own less than one-hundredth of the world's property." [^2]

Heidi has two brothers and two sisters. If she had been born in Africa, she would probably have eight or nine siblings; and at least one, perhaps two or three, would have died in infancy of diarrhea or infection. Fifty thousand children die every day in the third world because of diarrhea alone. [^3] At least that many more are disabled because of disease, malnutrition, and lack of sanitation and health facilities. I think the only time Heidi has not had access to a flush toilet has been on mountain climbing expeditions, an interest she is developing with considerable skill, or in national parks where sanitary and fully equipped privies are usually available. She has never been hungry in her life for more than a few minutes unless she has been voluntarily fasting. In many places in Africa, if she had survived infancy, the chances of receiving adequate nourishment as a child and as a young woman are only fifty-fifty. [^4] Ten million children annually are stricken by nutritional blindness; half a million of them will be blind for the rest of their lives, even though enough vitamin A to protect a child for a year costs only four cents. [^5]

Heidi has never drunk contaminated water in her life. If she lived in an African city, she would have only a 50 percent chance of having dependable access to reasonably safe and clean water. In thirty-eight countries in rural areas, fully 91 percent of the people lack ready access to clean water. They often have to walk between five and ten kilometers and then have to carry the water home in basins or jerry cans. [^6]

If Heidi were to become ill, our family has literally hundreds of physicians and specialists to consult and the resources of several large, well-equipped and well-staffed local hospitals. When her children are born, she can assume that she will have competent obstetrical care. The developed countries of the Western world average one doctor per 300 to 700 people. In contrast, some countries in Africa have 35,000 to 45,000 people per doctor with the numbers soaring to double or triple that number per pharmacist. Even midwives average about 1 per 5,000. [^7]

Although there is a statistical possibility—less than 1 percent—that Heidi may die in childbirth, it is highly improbable. Maternal death rates in developed countries are 3 to 30 per 100,000 live births. In contrast, in most developing countries, the death rate is often more than 500 per 100,000 live births. In some parts of Africa, over a thousand of every hundred thousand women die in giving birth. [^8]

Nor is death the only hazard involved with pregnancy. In the developing world, women receive significantly fewer calories and much less protein than they need when they are pregnant and nursing. If Heidi were in Africa, there is a 50 percent chance she would be anemic. If she were pregnant, the chances would rise to 66 percent. [^9] Her children would probably be spaced eighteen months apart. Exhausted from fieldwork and lacking sufficient food, both she and the child would suffer. There would not be enough milk for the baby and, back in the fields soon after the birth, she might unintentionally malnourish her child because she is too tired to walk back and forth from fields to home to breastfeed it four or five times a day.

Her children would be frequently ill—up to 75 percent of the time, adding to her emotional and physical burdens in caring for them. Ten percent of the family income would go into seeking medical care, but she would routinely have to wait in a clinic three hours to see a health worker who very likely would not have the proper equipment and medicine to help her child. [^10] And that's not counting the time it would take to walk to the clinic and back again, carrying the child.

Although all too many American teenage women become pregnant unintentionally and out of wedlock, Heidi has received instruction about her own anatomy and sexual functioning. As her parents, we anticipate that Heidi, for both religious and practical reasons, will have healthy, wanted children. Over 50 percent of the girls in developing countries bear their first child while they are still teenagers. Experts have estimated that if these women could become mothers later, perhaps 30 percent more of the firstborn children would survive. [^11] Children born less than two years apart have about a 50 percent higher risk of dying in infancy or childhood. [^12]

As parents who seek to develop a healthy, loving relationship with each other, we want the same for Heidi and her future husband. With the view of marriage as a union of full partners, it is distressing to us that several thousand girls in Africa are married before they are fourteen and usually have six or seven children by the time they are twenty-five. Many women do not survive. Nor do their children.

Heidi has already had eleven years of school. She plans to attend college as a matter of course and will probably choose a major in the humanities since she excels at drama, art, and music, and enjoys literature. She has been in public schools for all of her education; but if she had been in Nigeria, the African country I have visited most frequently, public schooling would have been available to her for a maximum of only six years. Even then, only 42 percent of the children actually attend. Literacy runs between 25 and 30 percent in that nation. In developing nations as a whole, only six of ten children enroll in elementary school. Only three of the six will reach fourth grade, and only one will go as far as secondary school. In the field of education, being bom female is a definite disadvantage. Twice as many boys as girls receive education in third-world countries. [^13]

As an American teenager, Heidi has tremendous vitality and energy. As a child, she had the usual childhood illnesses, like measles and chicken pox. A vaccine for measles has already been developed that will protect her children. A vaccine for chicken pox is expected within a few years. She caught scarlet fever; but even so, none of her ailments were life threatening. What is more serious for Heidi is a chronic neurological condition that has developed within the last eight years. This condition is easy to control with medication, and Heidi leads an entirely normal life. But if she were in a third-world country, the medication would not be available, and she would suffer debilitating seizures. Also, she would have had only a 20 percent chance of receiving the 50 cents worth of vaccine that would have protected her against measles, tetanus, polio, pertussis, diphtheria, and tuberculosis. Malnutrition and infectious diseases work together in a deadly partnership to kill children. During the seasonal famines in Nigeria, measles can kill one child in four. During the Nigerian civil war, the death rate from measles doubled. [^14]

Heidi can look forward to a life expectancy of about seventy-eight years. As her parents, Maryann and I look forward to at least thirty-five more years. In Africa, if I followed the national statistics where life expectancy is forty-nine, both Maryann and I would be dead within five years. [^15]

As Heidi explores her future, she can choose from a multitude of professions and jobs that will utilize her tremendous ability to deal skillfully with people. She enjoys her work as a teacher's aide at a grade school as part of a released-time program through her own high school and also her work at ZCMI department store as a clerk on a schedule that varies between ten and twenty hours a week, depending on the season. She has access to a family car for her own transportation to and from these jobs and earns enough at $3.60 an hour to keep her car fueled, buy some of her own clothes, and pay for much of her recreation outside the family.

If she lived in Nigeria, the chances are 65 percent that she would be a farm laborer, working the fields with almost no tools, with few fertilizers or insecticides, and without access to hybrid seed. She would be doing between 70 and 80 percent of the work in the fields and producing 40 to 50 percent of the food, then preparing food for the men, feeding the children, cleaning, fetching firewood and water, and caring for the elderly and sick. The per capita income in that nation in 1982 was $860. [^16]

The implication of my comments is that Heidi is a pampered princess, privileged to survive and thrive while millions of children die or suffer from lessened productivity all their lives because of where they were born. From one perspective, this is true; however, we think not in terms of privileges but in terms of responsibility. Maryann and I hope we are teaching Heidi and her brothers and sisters that they have both the opportunity and the responsibility to use those advantages to assist in what her generation will view as great strides in improving life in the third world.

Even though literacy is only 50 percent at best, that is still up from 30 percent thirty years ago. Although 44 percent of the third world's women were illiterate in 1980 (709 million), the percentage is predicted to drop to 27.6 by the year 2000. However, that will then be 1 billion, 123 million women. The current life expectancy of forty-nine years is actually an increase of twelve.

Dr. William Foege, former director of the Centers for Disease Control and president of the American Public Health Association, reported at Thrasher's annual meeting in April 1985:

"For many years, I used to say that a child born in the third world today had a better life expectancy and a lower risk of infant mortality than my grandmother did when she was born a century ago in Europe. It crept up on me over the years that that was no longer true. It is now possible to say that a child born in most third-world countries today has a better life expectancy and a lower risk infant mortality than my mother did when she was born at the beginning of this century in the United States. And now it is actually true that there are some children born in third-world countries that have a better life expectancy than I did when I was born."

He continued with some encouraging statistics: in Colombia in 1984, immunization jumped from 40 to 60 percent because the country organized to protect its children through three special immunization days.

Thanks to the World Health Organization, about 50 percent of the children in third-world countries have had some contact with immunization programs, if only a single dose of vaccine.

The PanAmerican Health Organization has set the goal of eradicating polio from this hemisphere by 1990, and Rotary International has offered to supply all the polio vaccine any third-world country can use for the next twenty years, a $120 million commitment.

Smallpox was eradicated from the globe in 1979. [^17] October 26 each year marks another anniversary of the reporting of the last case of that deadly disease. I firmly believe that malaria, which currently afflicts more than 200 million people, will be eradicated in my lifetime.

What role can the Church play? What difference does being LDS make in the lives of third-world women? Let me just share a couple of vignettes with you. One is of Mary Ellen Edmunds, associate director of training at the Missionary Training Center near the BYU campus in Provo. Last year she was project director of a Thrasher-funded group teaching basic nutrition, sanitation, and water purification to families in Eket, Cross River State, Nigeria. Mary Ellen is a small woman, but she has a continent-sized heart. I've felt a lump rise into my throat as I've heard her tell about sitting in a Church meeting, holding a seven-year-old who weighed twenty-three pounds. You may know that the average American five-year-old weighs about forty pounds. She helped teach a family how to treat their children for worms; one of those little children was so ill from worm infestation that she thought he would die. She was gone from Nigeria for about three months, and when she returned, he ran to meet her. She had never seen him run before. He had never had the energy.

One of the women in that project is named Helen Bassey. Ann Laemmlen, the project director, commented after visiting Helen: "She looked like a million—hot, tired, dirty, and with only a wrap around her. Her head was uncovered, and she had obviously been working very hard. She was very happy to see me and laughed her Helen laugh as she told me she had been working very hard ever since morning. I asked, 'What have you been doing?' She laughed and took my hand and led me to one of the three rooms that made up their cooking area. Unbolting the door, she led me inside, and the sight left me speechless! The room had been thoroughly cleaned out, and all around us were dishes—clean, clean dishes! All morning long she had been working very hard to clean probably every dish she owns. It was in yesterday's workshop that we learned how to properly sanitize dishes. I was so thrilled I . . . hugged her and we laughed together, and she squealed in delight at how happy and surprised I was. She was so proud. She told me she had washed everything in hot soapy water and let everything drain dry in the sun. There on a sheet of zinc sat basins and plastic baskets and trays full of sparkling clean dishes. On the floor on the other side of the room were all of her pots and pans, from large to small, clean and shiny. All of them were covered by two pieces of blue plastic tarp, also cleaned. I doubt whether that room has ever seen anything like this in the history of its existence!" [^18]

One of the other women in the project is Cecilia Dickson Paul. In her late twenties, she has five living children; three others have died. Her husband is a farmer and handyman. Cecilia is different because she has had eight years of schooling, even though circumstances prevent her from using her education professionally. Her background, however, is making a significant difference in her family. Her hunger for knowledge made her the first in line to learn more about keeping her children healthy, and she has embraced the gospel, rejoicing in its outpouring of knowledge. Ann told of visiting Cecilia on the same day and seeing her pride at having been able to purify her drinking water and having up-to-date records on the children who were receiving treatment for worms.

Cecilia has a daughter who is about Heidi's age. Already, because of Cecilia's values and the gospel, Violet's life is different from that of other Nigerian girls her age. Her parents have shielded her from proposals of marriage that would curtail her education and future economic contributions to her family. They have urged her to plan for her future, to prepare herself with the tools and skills of an educated person to make a difference to her people. I think of the difference that the gospel has already made to Cecilia, how the Church becomes a pipeline not only to the restored truths of the gospel but to the secular truths of conquering disease, malnutrition, and poverty. Violet will live a different life from that of Cecilia because of the Church. Cecilia's grandchildren will also have different lives.

I hope that one of the reasons for that difference will be you. Sitting in this room, I am convinced, are women of compassion, vision, and, above all, competence, who will find ways to solve the problems of sharing information and resources across national boundaries, of communicating facts of life and death to women who are used to being ignored or hushed. Many of you either have served missions or will, bringing the gospel vision of women as cherished daughters of our Father in Heaven and as responsible cocreators of life. Whether you marry or not, you can nurture and enhance life for the world's children. And I hope for Heidi that she is among your number.

Third-World Heidis Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] John P. Hawkins received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago and is associate professor of anthropology at Brigham Young University. Formerly coordinator of Latin American studies in the Center for International and Area Studies at BYU, Professor Hawkins conducted three years of on-site research on family and church in Guatemala and Mexico. He and his family have also lived in Germany while researching the role of family and group dynamics in the United States Army. His Church callings have included bishop and stake high councilor.
[^2] Cited by Nancy Fyson, "A Woman's Place," CWDE Cartoonsheet 14: Women and Development (London: Centre for World Development Education, 1983).
[^3] Dr. Inyambo Nyumbu, "Water Supply and Sanitation," World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Aug.-Sept. 1985, p. 27.
[^4] Shushum Bhatia, "Status and Survival," World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Apr. 1985, p. 13.
[^5] "Vitamin A Saves Sight!" World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Nov. 1985, p. 17.
[^6] Dr. Fawzia H. Aboo-Baker, "Culture and Tradition," World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Aug.-Sept. 1985, p.20.
[^7] Alexander B. Morrison, "Perspectives on International Health: Are We Our Brother's Keeper?" Paper delivered at the first annual meeting of Collegium Aesculapium, Provo, Utah, July 1983, p. 5. Photocopy in my possession.
[^8] Deborah Maine, "Mothers in Peril: The Heavy Toll of Needless Deaths," People 12, no. 2 (1985): 6-8.
[^9] S. Hamilton, B. M. Popkin, and D. Spicer, "Maternal Nutrition Problems in Developing Countries," in Christopher Roessel and Michael Favin, eds., Maternal Nutrition: Information for Action Resource Guide (Geneva, Switzerland: World Federation of Public Health Associates, 1983), p. 2.
[^10] "Organizing Health Delivery," CARE Briefs on Development Issues, no. 4 [n.d.], p. 6.
[^11] "Short-Changed!" World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Apr. 1985, p. 18; "Facts about Fertility," People 12, no. 3 (1985): 2.
[^12] John Hobcroft, "Survey Throws New Light on Key Policy Issues," People 12, no. 3 (1985): 4.
[^13] Rebecca Cook, "Progress toward Equality," People 12, no. 2 (1985): 4.
[^14] Dr. L. A. Arevshatian, "African Immunization Year, 1986," World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Aug.-Sept. 1985, pp. 22-23; Dr. Mesfin Demisse, "Drought and Famine," World Health: The Magazine of the World Health Organization, Aug.-Sept. 1985, p. 25.
[^15] Patricia W. Blair, "Health Challenges in the Developing World," CARE Briefs on Development Issues, no. 4 [n.d.], p. 2.
[^16] "Western Africa," The World Bank Annual Report, 1984 (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1984), p. 84. Estimates for 1982 in U.S. dollars.
[^17] William O. Foege, address to the Thrasher Research Fund Annual Meeting, 15 Apr. 1985. Transcript in my possession.
[^18] Report to Thrasher Fund Executive Committee, 21 Feb. 1985, Thrasher files, Salt Lake City, Utah.
