Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Behavioral Differences Are Like Language Differences; or, "Oh Say, What Is Truth?" vs. "Do As I'm Doing"

John P. Hawkins [^1]

As we seek to become a worldwide church, we must increasingly understand the character of culture and of cultural differences, and we must consider carefully the bearing these have on the way we approach Church administrative procedures and customary Mormon ways of doing things. To help us understand an approach to culture and the nature of Church procedures, let me first give an example of the kinds of problems we face. Then I will tease out a definition of culture and an approach to behavior that will help us understand the episode I described. Finally, I will discuss the implications of the definition of culture and the approach to behavior for general Church process in the light of the LDS Church's goal of becoming a world church. This process will enable us to reflect on the question: what impact do cultural differences have on achieving a unity of the faith?

Mormon Life in Small-Town Guatemala

Some years ago, my wife, Carol Lee, and I spent two years in a small town in western Guatemala. Our task was to discover and understand the social life and culture of the people of the community, most of whom were Catholic. We attended our own Mormon services as we went about learning the nature of Catholic belief and practice. What we saw—the behavior system of the Mormons—was just about what one would expect to see in the United States, though on a smaller scale. The church building, for example, was small, but it too had a chapel, classrooms, piano, a kitchen with stove, oven, and refrigerator, and an outdoor basketball court. Attendance was modest—forty on a medium Sunday, sixty on a well-attended Sunday, thirty on a poorly attended Sunday. The ward records suggested that some four hundred Mormons had membership in the unit, but who they were and where they were were not always known. The same Sunday services were held as in the United States: priesthood meeting, Relief Society, Primary, Sunday School, and later sacrament meeting. On Tuesday nights the youth of the Church went to the chapel in the evening for Mutual activities. The local members expressed a warm testimony of the gospel. Most of them were good, faithful people, absolutely willing to do exactly what the gospel required of them. Indeed, most of them were willing to make any sacrifice, and many had given up friends and reduced their family associations and ties as part of the cost of joining the Church. Missionary work was slow, however, and the missionaries complained that the people of both the Spanish town and the Indian town were hard-hearted and unreceptive. While the Church was not exactly thriving, the members there were proud of their little ward and, indeed, had good reason to be proud.

As I learned more and more about the daily lives of the ordinary non-Mormon people, I slowly came to understand what they thought of the active Mormons in their midst. Our Guatemalan Mormons, it turned out, had a bit of a scandalous reputation. Two of the Mormon teenage women, I was told, were known to be unmarried mistresses of non-Mormon males in the community. Another young Mormon woman was reported to be having an affair with the elders and was famous for having sustained this activity for some years. Bear in mind that the active branch was small and that this reputation applied to three out of only four or five young women in the ward. In one form or another, our Catholic friends let us know they thought it was awful that the Mormons had so little concern for the reputation and morals of their young women. And they let us know that they themselves would not listen to the Mormon missionaries precisely because of the Mormon lack of concern for the morality of their youth. On the other hand, the missionaries thought they were being rejected because of the influence of Satan in hardening the hearts of the people against them.

The contrast between what the Mormons were trying to accomplish among themselves and what the non-Mormons thought of them could not have been more stark. What caused such opposing views?

When we interviewed the Mormons, we found a house of faith and a house of trust—trust in the leadership of the Church and in the revealed basis of the Church's programs. The manuals said to have a youth program and to hold it on a weekday evening. The North American missionaries who assisted the ward and advised the branch and ward leaders over the years had seen Mutual organized and implemented that way in the central stakes of the Church. Because the youth program was for the young and because the limited number of faithful adults was involved in staffing priesthood, Relief Society, and other ward leadership positions, the youth program was left to the single youth to staff and operate. They did a good job. The activities included dances in the ward building, games, and lessons. Who came? The single youth, of course, and the missionaries and their investigators. That was the procedure followed since the foundation of the branch, when the missionaries had complete charge and the program was being inculcated, until the time we were there, when the system had been turned over to the faithful local people. The North American mission presidents who visited the branch and even the native stake president who visited the ward approved. After all, the native stake president had been to general conference and had visited wards on the Wasatch Front. He knew how things were supposed to be, and the Guatemalans wanted to do it right. They were not about to be second-class citizens in the Church by running a program that deviated from the revealed procedures of their Salt Lake Valley example. So do it right they did. As a result, the cultural gulf, the differences in custom between these Guatemalan Saints and their Utah leaders was being reduced.

At the same time, the cultural gulf between these Guatemalan Saints and their non-Mormon Guatemalan neighbors was widening. Some of the Church procedures looked a little strange to the rest of the non-Mormon community and had done so even to these Mormons when they had been investigating. Yet these Mormons had testimonies and were willing to do anything to bring themselves closer to a gospel life. They gave up liquor. The men gave up adulterous relationships. They learned to read the scriptures. They enjoyed improved family lives in many cases and had numerous other confirmations that what they were about was a worthwhile change in their way of life. This was the material result of following God's principles as brought to them by the priesthood and organizational leadership of the Church. As a result of obeying these commandments, their lives were healthier, happier, and spiritually more satisfying. All of these things came to them through the program of the Church, so they were determined to follow the program. One needed to follow the prophets, and here in faraway Guatemala, the prophets spoke through their representatives, the missionaries, and through the manuals. If the program manuals and customary procedure of the Church said youth meetings were to be on a weekday evening, that is when they were held. The youth would go to the ward house on Tuesday evenings for their activities. The adults would not. After all, these were Mormon youth, committed to the values of the gospel, and there was no need to chaperone them as much as was needed among the non-Mormons. The members knew they were to become a separate and peculiar people. So, a separate and peculiar people they became. Let me tell you why and how they became peculiar, more peculiar than the leadership ever would have desired.

Why did much of this Mormon behavior look strange and peculiar to the non-Mormons? Non-Mormons interpreted the faithfully imported Mormon behavior within the Guatemalan symbolic dictionary and premises with which all Guatemalans were raised. Let me be specific. The present-day culture and society of Guatemala are the result of a colonial history. A primary goal of the colonial system was to establish control over others and to extract services from those below one in status. That goal continues to be sought. Since the beginning of the Spanish colony, men have been expected to seek control over others and especially over women. Indeed, men are expected to seek sexual favors from women. Moreover, women are expected to do the bidding of men. Since the families of each class and ethnic level want to maintain their own blood purity and must exercise control over their own domains, and since women are considered weak and susceptible to the wiles of men, any self-respecting family must necessarily chaperone very carefully its unmarried daughters. Obviously, any self-respecting man must constrain the behavior of his wife and suspect sexual overtures from other men toward his wife and daughters. Therefore, young, unmarried women, especially, and women of childbearing age, generally, must always be chaperoned and kept very close to the home or, ideally, kept within the house. Parents who do not keep their daughters chaperoned adequately are, in effect, inviting men to approach them for sexual favors. Since women are taught from a tender age to accede to the wishes of men, they will very likely succumb. Therefore, according to Guatemalan societal norms, those who do not chaperone their daughters closely must not care a whit about their daughters' morals or the family's reputation in the community.

This cultural logic was, of course, used to interpret the behavior of all in the community, including the Mormons. Since Mormons did not chaperone their daughters at youth activities—neither in the evening walk to the chapel, nor at the chapel, nor during the night walk home—Mormons must be a loose and immoral people. Mormon parents, for reasons the non-Mormons could not comprehend, obviously did not care about their children. This being the case, non-Mormons felt free to ask Mormon girls for a night out. The problem developed from the fact that if the young Mormon girls were asked enough, their earlier socialization to serve the wishes of men triumphed over the teachings of the gospel. This was the case for two of the girls, who were indeed sexually involved with non-Mormon men.

The third girl's reputation was besmirched for more subtle reasons. For numerous reasons, many people in Guatemala choose not to enter legal marriages sanctioned by either the state or the Catholic Church. The result is that socially acceptable common-law unions are publicly proclaimed and condoned by parents when they allow a young man to cross the threshold and take up residence in the house of their unmarried daughter. In the case of the Mormons, the missionaries had wanted a place to live, and the parents, being poor but faithful and trusting the missionaries, gave the missionaries residence even though an unmarried daughter still lived in the home. That was not too bad, for the non-Mormon people knew that Protestants allowed their ministry to marry. But there were always two of them—that was strange; and they kept changing every two or three months—that was appalling. In the minds of some, surely the wild tales of Mormon polygamy must be true if they allowed their ministers to behave like this!

Of course the missionary work went slowly! Could the Spirit really bear witness to the truthfulness of the message from a group whose behavior was saying that they did not care about the morals of their children?

Theory

What are the implications of this tale? They can be explained only in terms of a careful understanding of the nature of behavior and the definition of culture.

I define culture as a system of fundamental premises about the nature of the world and the human beings that populate it. These premises are lodged in the minds of the participants of the society. The premises are not explicit. Indeed, it is very difficult for the participants of the system to become aware of their own premises. But the premises drive their behavior. That is the deepest and most subtle aspect of the cross-cultural problem. Differences in premises between cultural systems are the most tricky to deal with, and I have not analyzed culture at this level.

Rather, I have focused on the level of customary behavior. I define behavior as any bodily movement. What is interesting to me as an anthropologist is patterned, or customary, bodily movement, precisely because any patterned bodily movement is likely to be meaningful. In other words, customs are meaningful: they send messages. Moreover, since customs send messages, they cannot be erased or substituted for other customs without changing the entire message system. One of the goals of the anthropologist is to discover the meanings of behavior. In the process, the goal is to come to understand—to read—the messages being communicated in the behavior. Remember, for example, that in Guatemalan society crossing the threshold means marriage. (It is a bit more complicated than that, but the implications are still the same.) Remember that being unchaperoned means having no moral values, whereas being chaperoned represents appropriate behavior. Patterned behavior almost always has meaning attached by contrast with other possible behavior patterns in the same situation, which would have other meanings. Behavior is a form of language and has a dictionary of alternatives: a certain performance has a meaning, and its nonperformance may well be an antonym. That is the case in every society. The dictionary of behavior cannot be altered; it is a framework within which one must live. Behavior is meaningful, just as spoken language is meaningful. Indeed, spoken language is a form of behavior. It is movement of the mouth, mouth behavior—that is, verbal behavior that has meaning.

What we most often forget, however, is that both verbal behavior and bodily behavior are almost entirely arbitrary. The arbitrariness is easy to see in verbal behavior. If I want to convey the meaning of "I go to town" to someone speaking Spanish, I will say, "Voy al pueblo." Everyone knows that "I go" and "voy" are arbitrary but patterned mouth movements intended to convey a meaning and that to convey the same meaning in the two meaning systems requires different behavior. In one meaning system you mouth-move "I go" if you intend to get the meaning across. In the other you mouth-move "voy." The same with "town" and "pueblo." Arbitrary mouth movements are behavior. Sometimes one can get amusing correspondences between closely similar mouth movements that have totally different meanings when used. For example, the mouth movement behavior of embarrassed in English is sufficiently similar to the mouth movement of embarasada (pregnant) that it causes no end of jollity when naive missionaries speak to local Latin Americans.

Precisely the same thing happens with other kinds of bodily movement. Each has a meaning. To an American, walking to the chapel unchaperoned means something like, "Her parents trust her; she is independent." But to a Latin American, it says something closer to, "Her parents do not care at all about her morals, and neither does she." We would not want our Latin American brothers and sisters to say such a thing in verbal behavior. It is neither the doctrine nor the intent of the Church to be or to appear to be immoral. Why do we allow them to say it in their bodily behavior?

The answer, I think, lies in a problem in our own American cultural system from which the leadership draws its deepest cultural roots. Culture, you will recall, is the system of fundamental premises by which the world and its people are interpreted and evaluated. In American culture, success is defined in terms of accomplishment, and accomplishment is measured in behavioral terms. In the Mormon-American culture, specifically, success is measured in behavioral terms called "activity." Through time we have come to establish a proper mode of doing all sorts of religious things and to codify these procedures in the handbooks. We then count the amount of this standardized activity for both the individual and the institution anywhere in the world.

That works quite well in one meaning system. But when we export worldwide the precise behavioral procedures needed to measure activity to another meaning system, the behavior, as we saw, may take on quite unexpected and unfortunate meanings to persons who are outside the increasingly unified world Mormon cultural-behavioral system. That is the problem.

The solution is to treat religious behavior exactly like language. Everyone in the Mormon Church leadership recognizes that we must move our mouths in a different pattern of behavior if we are to use language to communicate in the United States and in Latin America. We do not use Utah or American English to transmit our message when in Latin America or in China. Similarly, we must be prepared to behave in a particular way in Latin America, or anywhere else, differently than we do in the United States if we visitors or the local members are to communicate the same message. We as leaders and custodians of the institution that brings the gospel become uncomfortable, though, when we contemplate change in sacrament meeting or in the time or manner of the customary performance of other Church procedures. Yet, if we are unwilling to tolerate a considerable amount of behavioral variation in the procedures, the inevitable result will be that the customary procedures set up in Utah will force the local people of the foreign regions to convey an untruthful message to both the members and the surrounding community.

Let me use a linguistic analogy for what will happen if we become locked in a set of behavioral procedures and fail to recognize that behavioral procedures have arbitrary and differing meanings in each society. Suppose we want to convey the meaning of the scriptures around the world. But suppose we felt that chanting them in English was the only proper thing to do. Upon going to Guatemala, we would then have to teach the members to chant in English, and if they were to learn the meanings in the scriptures, they must in essence learn English. But if they learn English and speak in English, no one from the outside community will be able to learn the message till he or she learns English. That would absolutely isolate the converts. They would become an English-speaking religious enclave in Guatemala, unable to be understood by the rest of the Guatemalans. Indeed, they would become a peculiar people.

Similarly, when the behavioral procedures that work well because they communicate well in one meaning system are used to try to communicate in another meaning system, the result will be incomprehension, misinformation, and rejection by the non-Mormon local people. There will arise an inevitable tension because the faithful local people must chafe against the conflicts between the imported procedures and their own culture. To reduce the conflicts, the local members have two choices. On the one hand, they may drop out of the Church and melt back into the parent culture of the country. The result, from the Church's standpoint, is a great deal of inactivity. On the other hand, they may choose to isolate themselves from their parent culture and immerse themselves wholly in the new Mormon way of life, behaving as much as possible as a Utah or United States Mormon would. If they do that, they become better connected and increasingly similar to their worldwide Mormon community that is behaviorally communicating in the Utah-American variant of United States culture. But at the same time, they become isolated from and oddlooking to the non-Mormon men and women they would try to convert. That is precisely what happened in applying the North American approach to the youth program in Guatemala. The Guatemalan converts became one with their North American brothers and sisters in the procedural faith. They were pleased to find the improvements of the gospel in their lives, but they were taught to do it in a way that isolated them from proper communication with their countrymen, and they, thereby, violated the missionary premise of the Church. Adherence to a worldwide standardized form of behavior leads to failed communication, oddity, unacceptability, and isolation of the emerging Mormon convert community vis-Ã -vis their countrymen. Such isolation is both necessary and acceptable when it is induced by obedience to the basic commandments. But it is both unnecessary and counterproductive when it is based on obedience to the procedures and customs of the Church as it has developed in the Western United States.

Is there a possible solution? I believe there is, but in order to implement it, we must remember that the goal of the Church is to communicate a true message to those around us rather than to make the traveling world leaders culturally comfortable and assure them that they are indeed in the same Mormon church wherever they go. The purpose of behavior is to communicate. The first step, then, is to decide what needs to be communicated, what is the truth that is to be conveyed to others through our behavior. For example, we might decide that what we want to say in the Guatemalan community (or any other, for it is the truth) is that "Youth are important," and that "Mormons stand for personal morality and social development." To say this effectively in the Guatemalan behavioral language, we would decide to hold both youth meetings and Relief Society at the same time. Late afternoon on a weekday would do. The girls would then come with the adult women needed to provide proper chaperonage before, during, and after the activities judged by the local members (and not the missionaries) to be a proper way to develop the youth. Our desire to make a statement of strict adherence to morality would have been preserved because we would have conveyed the truth of our message in the behavior pattern of their own Guatemalan understanding.

Behavior says things. Because behavior says things, I believe that we, as Mormons, must abandon the adherence to precise patterned behavior as a definition of Mormonness. We all sing the hymn "Do What Is Right." I have no problem with that when it means keep the commandments. Honoring parents, respecting God, not killing or committing adultery, and refraining from stealing are understood and understandable in all cultures. We must, however, give up the attempt to "do what is right" in the sense of performing Church obligations and programs in a particular way around the whole earth. Procedural uniformity may make members comfortable when they travel about the Church, but it tends to make, many local Saints uncomfortable, it unnecessarily harms them when they are forced into isolation from their non-Mormon friends and kin, and it blocks the fullest understanding needed for missionary work. Rather, if we are to become a world church, we must march to a different tune. The hymn which I believe captures the task of the world church is "Oh Say, What Is Truth?" though not as the question posed by the hymn, but rather as a declaration of what we must do: say what is truth in the distinctive behavior and distinctive language of every region. If we always attempt to say what is truth, in whatever appropriate behavioral form that truth is best transmitted, then we will always be able to communicate with the nonmembers in the surrounding cultural system. They will always understand what we intended them to understand because we say the truth in the idiom of their behavior system "according to the language of their own understanding." If we try to standardize the behavior of Mormons and Mormon religious practice worldwide, we will always be forcing Mormons outside the western United States to be misunderstood by their compatriots, since the local meaning of the standardized performances will vary from place to place, even within the United States. The misunderstanding inevitably isolates the Mormons. We want Mormons to be a peculiar people, but we want them to be peculiar because their behavior truthfully conveys their principles.

Only when we abandon the proposition of procedural "do what is right" and begin to flexibly "say what is truth," will we move from a Utah-American church, with a scattering of isolated Americanized enclaves, to a world church. To make this transition we must abandon the attempt to define the proper form of Mormon behavior. That needs to be done uniquely for each culture, not once for the world. We must give the people of each culture the flexibility and the right to say what is truth according to the behavioral possibilities of their own behavioral dictionaries. Accordingly, there must be enormous trust in the regional leaders, who must be raised in the local culture. Those who travel to supervise the task must be flexible enough to hear the gospel message on drums in those areas where drums are "good," on guitars where guitars are "good," and on pianos and organs where drums and guitars are "bad." Not only will we get the message across better and faster and more acceptably, but we will save the not inconsiderable cost of shipping pianos to Guatemala and Zaire, where pianos are neither playable nor "good."

The moment we move in this direction, we see that the gospel is not a set of behavioral procedures to be followed to the letter. That is the Pharisaical tradition which Christ rebuked. Rather, the gospel is a set of principles, among them faith, morality, and responsibility to others through covenants. These principles are not present in all cultures, though I do believe that each of the world's cultures already understands some of the gospel principles very well, if not better than we do. (Genealogical concern for ancestors is an obvious example.) Our task is to take the principles to the various societies of the earth and let the people speak the principles in their behavior according to the meanings of behavior in that region. "Teach them correct principles and let them govern themselves" becomes the watchword of variety and openness in the emerging world church.

We are not divided by differences of behavior, any more than we are divided by differences of language. What is important and what unites us is the common adherence to the central principles, the core premises of morality and a covenanted responsibility to each other—the culture of the gospel. We must learn to ignore "do what is right" in the formalist sense and exert ourselves to "say what is truth" and glory in the knowledge that the proper way to say the truth will entail different behavior from region to region on this earth. Thus, we must become accepting and tolerant of behavioral difference among the brothers and sisters who would speak the truth in their different actions in every corner of the world.

Too often we see the cultural and performative differences among Mormons around the world as a manifestation of disunity that differing cultures impose on the gospel. For us, gospel unity implies all of us doing the same things in similar ways, often in imported cinderblock chapels. I believe the notion is wrong. If we are united, it will be because we are proclaiming the same message to our non-Mormon brothers and sisters. But if we are to tell them the message, it must be in their own language of verbal and behavioral meanings. That means that we who would be united can be united only if we are sending and receiving the same message. And to send the same message we must be both speaking and behaving differently in each culture area of the earth. Differences do not divide us. Gospel unity will come from the differences, by virtue of proclaiming the shared message through the diverse languages of our behavior. If we do not allow great behavioral flexibility, we will have accomplished the analog of having taught English to every foreigner who wants to believe the truths of the gospel, at which point they will be so isolated from their non-Mormon compatriots that they will be unable to share the gospel with them. Indeed, if we attempt to gain substantial behavioral similarity among Mormons of different cultural regions, the similarities of behavior will divide us, for, like it or not, the similarities of behavior will be conveying messages different from the message originally intended.

We must seek unity in the expression of truth by encouraging appropriate divergence of behavior, according to the differences in the meaning of particular behaviors in each region of the earth. That is the complicated task that looms before us in the next decades, as we attempt to be a world church. We must learn to grow comfortable with—and trusting of—local procedures that must be different from our own if we are to make the gospel intelligible to people of different behavioral systems. I believe that the perspective "say what is truth" according to the behavior and language of one's own understanding will facilitate an easier transition to a world church than "do as I'm doing; follow, follow me" and, in the end, I think we will be gratified by having kept the differences.

Behavioral Differences Are Like Language Differences Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] John P. Hawkins received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago and is associate professor of anthropology at Brigham Young University. Formerly coordinator of Latin American studies in the Center for International and Area Studies at BYU, Professor Hawkins conducted three years of on-site research on family and church in Guatemala and Mexico. He and his family have also lived in Germany while researching the role of family and group dynamics in the United States Army. His Church callings have included bishop and stake high councilor.
