Mary E. Stovall, Carol Cornwall Madsen, Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1988)

Individuality and Community

As we learn in studying about the Savior, the example of a single life well lived can be far more motivating, and ultimately rewarding, than all the easy accolades of our peers.

—Karen Lynn Davidson

Peer Pressure and the Truly Adult Woman

Karen Lynn Davidson [^1]

Sooner or later, in almost any discussion of social problems, someone will pin the blame for those problems on a villain familiar to all of us. That villain is peer pressure. Everyone nods knowingly. Oh yes, peer pressure!

We seem to be sure of two things about peer pressure. First, we know it's usually negative. Peer pressure means pressure to misbehave, try drugs, drive too fast, ignore the advice of parents. And second, we know it's mainly a problem for our young people, something we worry about for our children, not for ourselves. The day our second-grader comes home from school with that first filthy word, so carefully taught her by one of her advanced classmates, we want to sweep her up in our arms and run as fast as we can to an isolated cabin somewhere on a beautiful mountaintop, where we can make sure that everything she sees and hears is uplifting, wholesome, and beneficial. We feel angry with whoever taught her that bad word. How different life would be for that child if it weren't for those friends! We're forced to teach "just say no" as a rather wide-sweeping response, not just because her friends might suggest drugs some day, but because they might suggest all kinds of destructive, unacceptable things. We're almost convinced that for children, friends are a liability. Where is that insurance policy we can sign up for to make sure that each of our children goes through life with a group of wise, understanding, mature, stable, delightful, studious, law-abiding, sensitive friends?

But peer pressure is not a problem limited to young people. It is also part of our adult world. It's true that we're influenced by the scriptures, we're influenced by the counsel of our Church leaders, we're influenced by those responses that come to us after we've uttered a heartfelt prayer. But we adults are also influenced by our friends.

I believe the question of peer pressure in our lives deserves some thought. What control does peer pressure have over us? Could we be more selective about the way we respond to peer pressure and put it to better use in our lives? If you're like me, peer pressure can work two ways. In one instance it may keep us from doing what we should, but another time it may be exactly what we need to keep us on our toes. When our Father in Heaven answers our prayers or chooses to send a message to us, is it possible that He sometimes does so through the medium of peer pressure?

When I was a little girl I had some nursery rhyme phonograph records, and one of my favorite songs went like this:

There was a jolly miller once, Lived on the river Dee; He worked and sang from morn till night, No lark more blithe than he. And this the burden of his song Forever used to be, I care for everyone, everywhere And everyone cares for me.

Many years later, as a college student, I spotted this nursery rhyme in The Annotated Mother Goose. Much to my surprise, the original verse was quite different from the one I knew. This poem about the happy miller and the reason he was so full of joy had been censored on my phonograph record. The last four lines actually go like this:

And this the burden of his song Forever used to be, I care for nobody, no! not I, If nobody cares for me. (William S. Baring-Gould and Cecil Baring-Gould, The Annotated Mother Goose [New York: Bramhall House, 1962], p. 103.)

Which version of this nursery rhyme is more true to life—the positive version that says the miller is happy because he shares love with all around him, or the cynical version that says he is happy because he keeps to himself? Which is the key to happiness—involvement or isolation? Most of us would vote for involvement. For one thing, in the Latter-day Saint church we don't have a hermit tradition in any form. A life lived in seclusion just isn't our version of a holy life, though for some others it is. And besides, the miller apparently had a choice that just isn't open to most of us. Family and other responsibilities mean that we are interacting with others constantly. We observe them, and we measure our actions, our appearance, even our spirituality by what we observe. They give us messages, spoken and unspoken, about their measurement of us, and their opinions do count for us.

So peer pressure is there; we can't ignore it. Furthermore, to be completely out of touch with the day-to-day influences of other people is not a sign of good emotional health. But a preoccupation with the good opinion of society brings with it a serious disadvantage: it becomes a sufficient goal in and of itself. Perhaps, more than the dangers of peer pressure, it is the dangers of peer acceptance that we should be concerned with.

Each morning, to start the day, a small percentage of the members of our Church read a chapter from the scriptures or some other high-minded message to set the tone for the day and guide their aspirations, while a huge percentage of members of the Church read "Dear Abby"; she's there with advice every day, too. If you gauge your life according to her advice, you can't go too far wrong in public opinion. Abigail van Buren is a woman of great common sense and even compassion. But is her advice column a source of celestial counsel? According to her, the right to privacy can supersede another person's need for kindness; the value of peace in the family can be more important than making known one's views regarding standards of personal morality. In some cases, she may be right. But "Dear Abby" is the voice of today's standards, not the voice of eternal truth. These are two different measures of behavior.

It is admirable to stay out of jail, carry out one's duties, avoid social criticism, and live life as a responsible citizen. If we do these things, peer acceptance is ours. Other people don't scold us, punish us, or look down on us. We fit right in. But the danger of measuring our lives and characters only by Abby's standard is that we may come to think this standard, the standard of peer acceptance, is sufficient; we may never sense the potential that resides in our spiritual natures.

Many of you have read a story by Leo Tolstoy called "The Death of Ivan Ilyich." If you have not, put it next on your list. If you read it carefully, it will hit, almost with the impact of scripture. It tells the story of Ivan Ilyich, a well-to-do government official in Russia. One day he injures himself, and although this bruise does not at first seem to be serious, Ivan becomes more and more ill. Finally, it is clear that the doctors have done all they can. Ivan Ilyich lies on his deathbed, and he has plenty of time to think about how he has lived. "Dear Abby," had she known him, would have seen little in his life to criticize. But Ivan, now trapped in pain and panic from which he sees no release, begins to realize that he has been satisfied with a standard that was not a saintly one. " 'Maybe I did not live as I ought to have done,' it suddenly occurred to him. 'But how could that be, when I did everything properly?' " (Leo Tolstoy, The Death of Ivan Ilyich and Other Stories [New York: New American Library, 1960], p. 148.)

This is Tolstoy's message: "Doing everything properly" falls remarkably short of the standard set by Jesus Christ. Peer acceptance, which is often not based on His standards, gives us a false sense of adequacy and achievement. As adults, not many of us have someone pulling at our sleeve coaxing, "Don't be out of it. Try marijuana just this once." It is not peer pressure in this sense that we need to fear. It is social acceptance that we need to be careful of. If we seek nothing higher, it can paralyze our aspirations. We have weighed ourselves in the balance of common-sense civic virtue and found ourselves not wanting at all. For every fault we may see in ourselves, we can quickly think of someone far worse, and a few cliches about "being only human" exonerate us from a whole list of offenses; we wouldn't want to aim too high or be too hard on ourselves, after all!

But suppose we draw most of our friends and social activities from among other Latter-day Saints. Doesn't social acceptance take on a different meaning then? If we are active Church members, welcome in our wards and interacting every day among other Church members, couldn't we say that peer acceptance represents a high standard? Yes, I think there would be some truth in this. But a plateau is a plateau. The very things that are the badges of peer acceptance in the local ward—adherence to the Word of Wisdom, payment of tithing, fulfillment of a Church calling, attendance at Church meetings—may begin to seem sufficient in themselves. President Harold B. Lee said, "This gospel is not a gospel of being. It is a gospel of becoming." In spite of those smiles of appreciation from other ward members when we walk into the chapel, in spite of the satisfaction of being seen as a model member, just "being" is not enough. The sudden withdrawal of peer acceptance may let us know when we have transgressed, but winning peer acceptance guarantees only a minimum standard. It is not an assurance that we are moving every day toward the pattern of a divine example.

The friends who know us best may be the most inclined to tolerate our shortcomings rather than help us note them. They may tiptoe around our bad temper so that they are the ones who become skillful in handling the problem of our temper; we aren't required to mend our ways at all. They may indulgently redefine our stubbornness as strength of character. They may redefine our cynicism as shrewd common sense, our lack of commitment as serene detachment, our vanity as self-respect.

When we are preoccupied with peer acceptance, our energies are fragmented in some ways that really drain us. We must be continually comparing ourselves with trends and norms. In my ward in Southern California, beautiful long fingernails have become so common that they are almost taken for granted as part of good grooming. They may be acrylic fingernails, or they may be long and highly polished fingernails of one's own. Both my visiting teachers have beautiful fingernails; so do all three of the sisters whom I visit. Should I be saying to myself, "Karen, where is your self-respect? What kind of fingernails are those?" I have to stop for a moment and remind myself what a superficial concern this is. I have to say to myself, consciously, "That isn't for you; they don't mix with music or with typing; for someone else they're important, but for you they aren't. Surely, when you attend Relief Society, you can think about something better than fingernail tallies: 'Let's see, out of nine of us sitting on this row, there are six sets of beautiful nails, one set polished but not long, one other set that looks like mine. . . .' "

It is wonderful when we can just step forth as our own selves, confident that most right-thinking people will be happy to accept us on our own terms, not with the feeling we have to pass an audition or be checked off according to some rating form. Then we can save our energies for more important concerns. If we are trying every minute to meet the expectations of some person or group, this exacts a high toll from our nerves and our energies. In "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," T. S. Eliot created a character who has been described as merely a name with a voice. Prufrock has no identity, no sense of self, no feeling of purpose. And two of the most devastating lines Prufrock speaks in the whole poem are these:

There will be time, there will be time To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet. . . . (T. S. Eliot, "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," in Collected Poems, 1909-1962 [New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1963], lines 26-27.)

What kind of a life is this, to feel that we must put on a new face, like a mask, in order to try to please each person? For one thing, it's an exhausting life. The strain of this effort deflects our attentions and energies from the task of just going ahead and "becoming."

If we routinely accept the social norms that surround us, we may become deaf to a voice inside that wishes us to act in a different way. Several years ago, William Dyer, a faculty member of the BYU School of Management, gave a forum address titled "On Becoming an Authentic, Congruent Person." I have never forgotten that talk. An authentic, congruent person is the opposite of J. Alfred Prufrock. An authentic, congruent person never has to prepare a new face for a new situation. I was particularly impressed with this anecdote that Professor Dyer related:

"Some years ago I decided to try to respond more directly to my own warm and loving feelings when it was appropriate according to my values. I had noticed with my four sons that when they were young, I would hug and kiss them. But as they grew older for some reason I stopped that most satisfying behavior. I discovered that I still felt like showing my affection and reasoned that to be more congruent I should act more directly. I decided to hug and kiss my sons, and to share openly this affection, particularly when I would leave or return from a trip. I've always been able to share affection with my daughter, but with my sons, as the scripture says, there was the 'fear of men.' I think my boys were a little uneasy at first at this revival of physical affection. But I also think that they liked this response from their father.

"One day I was faced with an interesting situation. One of my sons offered to take me to the airport as I was leaving on a trip. He invited a young lady to drive with us. When we got to the airport I thought, 'Should I hug and kiss my son as I usually do, or would that embarrass him with this young lady present?' I then concluded that I had the right feelings. He also knew that I was a kissing father, and that was his problem. If he didn't like that, then he would have to be congruent and let me know. So I hugged and kissed my son as usual. There was no apparent embarrassment in him, and I think he would have been disappointed in me had I abandoned our usual practice. At that point, not doing that would have been an incongruent act on my part."

Authenticity and individuality are wonderful qualities, and we must not let a false feeling of accountability to society sap the vigor from these traits. Nevertheless, we are social beings; we live in groups. As Latter-day Saints, we choose to meet together partly because we think we have something to derive from one another—something more important than seeing if we are the last holdout with short fingernails.

As Latter-day Saints, we agree on the great persuading force of example. The ultimate example for our earthly lives is our Savior, Jesus Christ. We can study His life; we can live so that we feel His presence, so that His spirit will influence our attitudes and our decisions, We tell our teenagers, "Conduct yourselves so that if the Savior were with you in your car tonight, you would be proud to have Him as a witness of everything you do and say."

But that's an abstraction. In a literal sense, the Savior is not physically present in that car or in our home. What does He do when He needs to give us a very direct message? I feel that what He often does is to delegate one of His sons and daughters to be the conduit of His message. We know He sends many kinds of blessings to His children through others of His children. Why would He not bless us by raising up an example for us when we need it? He may not speak to us in person; He may not even send us a telegram; but what He very well may do is send one of His other children to represent an example we need to see.

In pondering the question of peer pressure, the important distinction we must make is this: although the acceptance of our peers may represent nothing more than an agreed-upon standard of minimum decency, the individual example of one of our friends or family members can represent a Christlike standard. When we need to have a particular weakness made known to us, a neighbor, a member of our ward, a visiting teacher may appear right in front of us, usually without being aware of the mission she is fulfilling, to act out the strength we must cultivate.

But it's easier to talk about responding to these examples and learning from them than it is to actually respond. Let me tell you one problem I have. I live in a wonderful ward, and I need do nothing more than look around my Relief Society to see fine examples of godly women. But when I begin taking note of these examples, what is my first reaction? I feel crummy. I feel inferior and discouraged. I can go down my entire Relief Society roster and be intimidated by every name on the list. Why can't I cook like Sally Cauch? Why can't I have an organized household like Anne McCullough? Why can't I sing like Christie Frandsen? Why can't I be as fit as Teresa Rinallo?

I think the trouble is that my approach is artificial. I'm doing exactly what we've been saying not to: I'm keeping score; I'm measuring. I'm tending to see others at their best and myself at my worst. When another person's example has influenced my life, I haven't come across that example by going down the Relief Society roster or by checking out so many sets of fingernails. The examples seem to have arisen naturally. They have been there when I've needed them, because I've needed them.

When I became a stepmother, one little stepson was nine and the other was four. I was overwhelmed not by the joy of my new role but by its seriousness. I was determined to be reasonable, fair, consistent, and responsible. So I often heard myself saying things like, "Eliott, that toast is not burned; it's your toast, and you will eat it right now. You don't need to be so silly." I had to watch my mother and my sister, both of whom were experienced mothers, indulge my stepsons before I realized that at least sometimes I could just say, "All right. We'll fix another toast for you if you don't want that one." They were much more at ease, much more accepting. I had been inclined to say, "If you can't find your tennis shoes, then you haven't looked very hard. You look until you find them, and I mean right now. They are your shoes, and you had better have them on your feet by the time we leave in three minutes." They showed me that I was just as far ahead to respond to this little crisis by saying, "Well then, let's hunt! I'm sure your shoes are around here someplace. Now where could they have gone?"

My change was quite sudden. As soon as I saw how differently my mother and sister treated my stepsons, it struck me how out of line I had been. I became more patient, less rule-oriented; I just needed to see an example of that kind of behavior. But I hate to think how long it might have taken me to mend my ways if the example of my mother and my sister had not been there for me to see. As reluctant as I am to admit this, I have to say that even if I had had a front row seat at general conference and heard one of the Brethren address the Church on the subject of patience, I'm afraid it still would have washed right over me. I wouldn't have related his talk to my problem. I needed something more direct. I could have heard—in fact, taught—a Relief Society lesson on patience and gone home and still acted the role of the critical, rigid, unbending enforcer. It was example that caught my attention and compelled me to change this wrong, pointless pattern that was making everyone so unhappy. I could ease up; I could let things go. Examples give us inspiration. In this case, the example also gave me permission.

I am greatly indebted to my friends and relatives for many other examples that have been crucial to my life. I didn't marry until I was thirty-eight years old; the fact that I was able to establish a productive and very happy life as a single woman is something I owe largely to the happy single women who are my friends. No book could have taught me that. I had to see them doing it. I feel privileged to be partly responsible for a new hymn in our hymnbook—number 197, "Each Life That Touches Ours for Good"—that gives us the opportunity to praise our Heavenly Father for the blessing of fine friends.

Most of us sometime in our Church experience have heard someone say, "The Lord doesn't really punish us by sending us to a lower kingdom. He just knows where we'll be the most comfortable." I don't know if this is true doctrine or not, but I think the notion is true. All of us have righteous, Christlike friends in whose presence we want to feel comfortable. The minute we feel out of tune, ill at ease in the presence of such a friend, that feeling is a useful warning. The Lord has placed many righteous people on this earth. If we are seeking to perfect ourselves, we will desire the company of these people. We will feel comfortable with them.

As a teacher of literature, I agree with the observation that in literature, evil is often more interesting than good. There is no such thing as a fascinating novel populated entirely by saintly people. But in real life, I believe the reverse is true. Good is more interesting than evil. I think the Lord will cause us to be drawn toward the good. We will find it more interesting. Suppose the house on either side of yours is sold, and into each house moves a new family. One of the families is a decent, average family. They watch a great deal of television, they get most excited when they talk about the new motorboat they are planning to buy—they are an ordinary family, with an ordinary vision of themselves. The other family, by contrast, seeks virtue. They devote their summers to assisting in a camp for asthmatic children, they instill nonmaterialistic values in their children, they strive for saintly goals that have nothing to do with what television tells them is important in life. Which family is more interesting? Which one arrests your attention?

I assure you that all around us are messages in the form of example that our Father in Heaven wishes us to heed. The goodness, the productive creativity, and the righteous energies that we can see in our family and associates are immense. The Lord inspires different ones of His children to great spiritual heights in different ways.

We do not all need to be the same. Sameness is one of the false premises of peer pressure. One of the most important things we come to learn as adult women is that two profoundly different people may both be fine, devoted members of the Church. But we can never and in many instances should never want to escape the influence or expectations of our peers. Among them we must recognize the example of those whose lives have reached a higher plane than that required for mere group acceptance. I feel that sometimes, when the Lord wishes to show us with great impact a better way to be and live, He uses concrete examples of such lives—our friends—to teach us what to do. As we learn in studying about the Savior, the example of a single life well lived can be far more motivating, and ultimately rewarding, than all the easy accolades of our peers. To be attentive to the virtues of others can open wonderful new doors. To settle into nothing higher than comfortable social acceptability is a mistake. The responsibility is ours to know the difference.

Peer Pressure and the Truly Adult Woman Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Louise Plummer is a wife and the mother of four boys. She has a master's degree in English from the University of Minnesota and is the author of a young adult novel, The Romantic Obsessions and Humiliations of Annie Sehlmeier (Delacorte Press). She teaches writing at Brigham Young University and has served as a Primary teacher in the Oak Hills Fifth Ward in Provo, Utah.
