E Chapter 16 sthEr

For Such a Time as This

Yad vaShem, Israel’s memorial to the Holocaust, is contains echoes of other attempts to destroy Abel, a living testimony to the cruel horror of the most black spots on the course of human history. seductive of all evils: sacrificing others on the altar The Book of Esther, for instance, recounts a much of one’s own ambition. The many exhibits, artifacts earlier attempt to annihilate the Jewish people. That and monuments displayed throughout the site, both one was perpetrated by the coldly calculating Ha-indoors and out, portray aspects of the deliberate man and his unwitting (and somewhat dim-witted) and systematic attempt by Nazi Germany to wipe sovereign Ahasuerus, king of a Persian Empire that the Jewish people from the face of the earth. Among was otherwise relatively tolerant of its subjected them is a small cattle car, once jammed with over peoples. (Then again, the Germany of the Weimar one hundred men, women and children—sealed in, Republic and Third Reich was otherwise among dehumanized and suffering in horror, standing in the most highly educated and culturally advanced their own filth, pushing their noses to cracks in the nations on earth.) The story focuses on four indi-wooden sides like so much livestock on the way to viduals: Ahasuerus and his trusted but twisted vizier slaughter. The car now stands at the end of a broken Haman, Mordecai the Jew who “sat in the king’s bridge jutting over a yawning chasm, perched on gate” (Esth 2:19), and Mordecai’s younger cousin Es-the brink of oblivion. From the belly of a similar car ther. Woven into the primary plot line are multiple there once came a gasp, originally scribbled in pen-sub-plots and motifs, including the rags-to-riches

Designed by internationally cil, now indelibly inscribed on a stone wall nearby rise of the orphaned Esther; Haman’s vain attempts renowned architect Moshe the railcar exhibit, forever yet never silenced, va-to glorify himself; and the recurring—and comically Safdi, the rail-car exhibit at Yad porous and enduring:

redundant—sequence in which the highest affairs of

vaShem speaks of the journey Here in this carload I am Eve,

state are decided at drunken banquets. Most of the

into oblivion for countless Jews with Abel my son.

scenes take place in and around Ahasuerus’s royal

of the Holocaust. Twenty-five

hundred years earlier Haman’s If you see my other son Cain Son of Man, palace in Susa with Haman, the evil genius upon

whom the tables deliciously turn in the end, lurk-

order to round up the Jews tell him I.…

ing in its corridors of power. But it is Mordecai, solid

of the Persian Empire for a Tell him.…

and reliable, and especially Esther, the charming and

journey to annihilation came Man’s inhumanity to man is endemic to the hu-beautiful heroine, first naïve then rising to the occa-to naught by the timely (and man race. Cain and Abel were both created in the sion, who carry the day. It was she, after all, who was early) intervention of Esther,

who came to power “for such a image of God, but something happened to skew the born “for such a time as this” (Esth 4:14). time as this” (Esth 4:14). picture horribly. Abel was dead and Cain, turning Aspects of the story of Esther fit nicely with what

his back, denied responsibility for his brother’s wel-is known about the Persian Empire, the largest the fare. It’s a familiar story, all the more real because world had yet known. Persian control stretched of the magnitude with which it unfolded during the “from India to Ethiopia” (Esth 1:1), that is, from the years of the Third Reich. The Holocaust was un-Indus River to Upper (southern) Egypt and the Ae-paralleled among acts of human savagery. Still, it gean Sea. Herodotus (Histories 3.89–95) reports that

It was all pomp and circum-

stance in the Persian royal

court, with everyone in their

proper order and place. Here,

on a relief from Persepolis

Darius I, stern of face, sits

on his throne with scepter in

hand to receive a visitor who

approaches with a rather

cowed demeanor. Darius’s

son and successor, Xerxes,

the Ahasuerus of the Book

of Esther, stands behind the

throne, learning well the rights

and privileges of authority.

126
