The Persian Empire. During the course of the

sixth century B.C., energetic kings of Persia left

their home on the southwestern Iranian Plateau to

gobble up huge tracks of land in every direction.

Cyrus the Great conquered Sardis in western

Anatolia in 547 B.C. and seized Babylon with its

empire eight years later. He had already pushed

to what is now Afghanistan and the border of

India. Cyrus’s successor, Cambyses II, became the

first Persian Pharaoh of Egypt. Then, sitting on a

large and unwieldy empire, the Persian monarchs

fostered a policy of good-will among their many

subjected peoples and built a network of highways,

including the Susa-to-Sardis Royal Road, to bind

everything together.

Darius I (521–486 B.C.) organized the empire

into twenty satrapies; these were subdivided

into the 127 provinces mentioned in Esther

1:1. Jews were scattered at various places

throughout, though certainly not in each

of the 127. Besides in the southern Levant, influence in the Persian court, Susa would have Jews (or persons of Israelite descent) lived along the been a good place to do it (cf. Neh 1:1). Darius I and Two Persian nobles stand northern and northeastern bend of the Fertile Cres-Xerxes rebuilt the extravagant royal district of Susa at rapt attention on a relief cent (thanks largely to the Assyrian deportation of on top of the remains of the older Elamite palaces, adorning a wall in the royal Israel; 2 Kgs 17:6), in Egypt (2 Kgs 25:26) and in the vi-and archaeological and textual evidence confirms palace in Persepolis. The cinity of Babylon (2 Chron 36:20). Some became well the overdone splendor of the Persian court that is position of the hands, one off in their new surroundings, such as those con-so garishly described in the Book of Esther ( clenched to a staff, the other nected to the Murashu family, financiers from Nip-and 6:8, where even the royal horses wore crowns!). Esth 1:6–7 at rest, suggests the ease that pur, an ancient city-state on the Babylonian plain All of this, and other details of names, genealo-accompanies many years of midway between Babylon and Susa; this is attested gies, terms and the like, provide a context for the experience on the job, while in cuneiform records dating to the reigns of Artax-story of Esther that fits nicely with the workings the expressionless face reflects erxes I (464–424 B.C.) and Darius II (423–404 B.C.). and trappings of the Persian court. But with King the cold and calculating power The story of Esther is set slightly earlier during the Ahasuerus things become strange. Simply put, of the king whose will they

wait to enforce. The tightly

reign of Ahasuerus (= Xerxes; 485–465 B.C.), a con-Ahasuerus doesn’t act the role of Xerxes, the great rolled hair and beard, a style text comfortable with a situation in which a Jewish visionary and military leader who put down rebel-held over from the Assyrians, man such as Mordecai could “sit at the king’s gate” lions in Babylon and Egypt and amassed a vast navy speaks of people who have time (Esth 2:19) . This was a position of honor and influence for battles against the Greeks in the Aegean. Classi-to take care of the finer things among those who hobnobbed among royal circles, cal writers do point out certain excesses back home: of life. As for dress, the long, and the phrase “to sit at the king’s gate” could even Xerxes had a soft spot for lavish banquets and ex-voluminous sleeves, plaited robe indicate that Mordecai was a Persian official of some travagant gifts and, typical to many in his position, and crown—prominent though rank (Xenophon, Cyropaedia 7.1.6 and Herodotus, Histories could be easily driven to anger and quick decisions. not nearly as elegant as that of 3.120). Nor should this be surprising, as he counted But the Xerxes of the story of Esther, Ahasuerus, the king—give visible weight to among his ancestors some of the best and brightest plays a bit of a stooge, a fool too dependent on his the important office these nobles that Judah had to offer (Esth 2:5–6; cf. 2 Kgs 24:14). hormones and wholly given over to suggestion and held.

The Persian royal city of Susa, where the action subterfuge (this is nicely portrayed by Maurice Sam-

of the Esther story takes place, lay on the eastern uel in Certain People of the Book). If Ahasuerus had edge of the Babylonian plain. Susa had been the an-acted as responsibly in his dealings with Haman and cient capital of Elam; now it was in the heart of the Mordecai as he did with Egypt, Babylon and Greece, sprawling Persian Empire, a great crossroads on the the sequence of events described in the Book of Es-network of imperial highways that ran hither and ther could have never taken place. No matter; any yon to the farthest reaches of the empire. The win-one of the conquered peoples of the Persian Empire ter weather was much more pleasant in Susa than in would have enjoyed portraying Xerxes as the Book Persepolis and Ecbatana, other Persian capitals high of Esther does—“we would like to hope to think on the Iranian plateau, and so the Persian kings that he really is a fool who doesn’t stand a spitting preferred to spend up to half the year here, carry-chance of holding his own, one-on-one, to one of ing on all manner of diplomatic and administrative us, if we would only be given the chance.” duties that affected everyone who lived under the Mordecai and Esther, on behalf of their people long arm of the Persian law. If a Jew wanted to gain the Jews, got that chance. It started with a great

127

ch16_Esther.indd 127

11/21/12 10:51 AM
