The royal palace in Susa

especially when everyone should be enjoying them-

was built by Darius and

selves watching him enjoying himself, and so Ahas-

used by subsequent kings

uerus, in cahoots with his pompous advisors, did the

including Xerxes. The entire

only sensible thing his foggy mind could do—banish

complex was constructed

her and create an empire-wide cover-up: she had to

on a terrace raised 50 feet

go or women everywhere would start to treat their

above the surrounding plain.

husbands with the same kind of disrespect she dared

A Propylaeum (ceremonial

show him. Men, after all, must be men, even if it

pavilion) lay outside the gate

takes a royal edict to make them so (Esth 1:13–22).

to the east. Adjoining the royal

With morning comes the morning after and the

quarters to the north was an

Apadana (hypostyle hall of

“oops” of the night before was pretty apparent. Of

massive columns), which was

course the simple thing would have been for the

probably surrounded on three

king to admit his wayward ways and beg Vashti

sides by lavish gardens. The

back, but this Ahasuerus could never do. Absolute

buildings were made of mud

monarchs never err. (Fortunately he was covered by

brick with walls of important display of kingly splendor—only three years on the the conveniently irreversible “laws of the Medes and rooms covered by slabs of stone throne and Ahasuerus held a six-month show-and-Persians” that prevented such an embarrassment;

glazed tiles. or baked clay, or by colorful tell with all the pomp and circumstance that only he Esth 1:19.) So a new queen had to be chosen, and

could muster, topped off with a seven-day banquet, what better way than an empire-wide beauty contest open to the public, in his decked-to-the-hilt royal (Esth 2:1–4)? Ahasuerus liked his queens to be beauti-garden (Esth 1:1–10). By the end of the revelry the ful. Chauvinistic, yes, but at least this time he was king was “merry with wine”—let’s call him drunk sober—and without excuse. Among the beautiful to silliness—and he commanded that his own dear young virgins gathered to Susa was Esther (there is Queen Vashti present herself before all his merry no hint what any of them might have thought about subjects so that the entire city could admire her the idea; presumably the honor of a night with the physical beauty (and she was beautiful) in some de-high and mighty king should have been motive tail. Understandably unwilling to submit herself, let enough). She was “beautiful in form and face,” the alone her office, to the whims of a rousing house orphaned cousin of Mordecai (Esth 2:7). Both were of revelry—that is what slave girls are for—Vashti already residents of Susa (Esth 2:5–7; cf. Esth 2:19) and point blank refused (Esth 1:10–12). But public humili-one wonders if either had witnessed the public hu-ation is never becoming a man of high standing, miliation of Vashti. Esther went through the pro-

scribed twelve-month beauty treatment for

would-be queens while faithful Mordecai

nervously paced outside the harem, then had

her night with Ahasuerus. Lucky her!—the

king called Esther back for full-time duty and

a new queen was crowned (Esth 2:9–18).

Under the advice of Mordecai, Esther had

not revealed her birth name—Hadassah,

“myrtle”—or the identity that it would have

given away: that she was Jewish (Esth 2:19–20).

Being queen was, of course, the highest hon-

or to which a woman of the Persian Empire

could attain, and Esther came to the posi-

tion with no qualifications except those that

were God-given. Better to be quiet about

everything else unless or until circumstances

Persian Wars in the Aegean. Darius I,

father of Xerxes, twice tried to invade the Greek

mainland from Persian bases in western Anatolia

and twice was turned back; first by a storm (492

B.C.) and then at the battle of Marathon, only 20

miles from Athens (490 B.C.). Xerxes’ combined

land and sea invasion ten years later was routed

at Salamis, Plataea and Mycale. The Greek

writers had a field day with the Persian defeat;

they would have enjoyed the way that Xerxes was

portrayed as Ahasuerus in the Book of Esther.

128

ch16_Esther.indd 128

11/21/12 10:51 AM
