EsthEr

might demand otherwise. So Esther began her new single one be rounded up and “destroyed, killed career as a dutiful wife in the high and mighty royal and annihilated” (as if any one of these fates alone palace in Susa.

wasn’t enough!). The act was to take place exactly

Mordecai, too, had his time in the limelight, but eleven months hence, on the thirteenth day of Adar

it was for a much briefer moment. Recorded then in the twelfth year of Ahasuerus (March 9, 473 b.c.; forgotten—the fate of many a good deed done by Esth 3:7–15). Eleven long months to stare death in the many an unassuming person—Mordecai uncovered face and know that Death would not be the first to a plot on the king’s life. His only reward was that his blink.

name was buried in the official Book of the Chron- The order went out by royal courier across the icles of the kings of Persia (Esth 2:21–23). Ahh, such is empire, from pillar to post. Herodotus commented life lived in the shadow of the only one who counts. on the efficiency of the Persian mail service:

body But at least the king was busy recognizing some- Now there is nothing mortal that accomplishes a

. Ahasuerus appointed one Haman “over all course more swiftly than do these messengers [sent]

the princes who were with him” (Esth 3:1). The ti- by the Persian’s skillful contrivance. It is said that as Of the many decorated scenes tle of Grand Vizier might do nicely. Haman was many days as there are in the whole journey, there depicting mythic and real an Agagite, which probably meant nothing to the are that many men and horses standing along the images lining the walls of the king but to the queen and her people an “Agagite” road, each horse and man at the interval of a day’s royal palace in Susa, those must somehow have been a descendant of Agag journey. Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of made of richly glazed tiles

Saul the Amalekite, Israel’s nemesis in the days of King night stays these couriers from the swift completion of are the most striking. The

(cf. 1 Sam 15:1–35). At least this is how Josephus their appointed rounds. (Herodotus, Histories most complete is the frieze of

R. and the rabbis understood the story (Ant. xi.6.5; Esth. No chance this order wasn’t going to be carried 8.98) archers, the “Guard of the Ten

7:13, 9:4; Targ. Sheni on Esth. 9:7). Haman took his job out! Satisfied with a day’s work well done, Ahas-Thousand Immortals” standing

as second-in-command to heart and demanded that uerus and Haman congratulated each other with a ready for the king’s every all the princes beneath him do just obeisance to his long drink, confident that soon Kristallnacht command. Craftsmen added lordly presence. This Mordecai resolutely refused to be in full swing with rail cars grinding their way to would colors to the outlines of the figures by mixing metal oxides to

do; his identity as a Jew demanded that he bow to the ovens.

no human being. For high-horse Haman, the act of And everyone else said, “What??!!” the liquid glazes before the third (Esth 3:15) firing of the bricks. The patterns

one implicated all and so the only punishment suit- Jews throughout the empire immediately went . depicted on the archer’s long

in the empire able for the crime was the eradication of every Jew into loud, public mourning. Their grief was of true and elegant robes indicate a (Esth 3:2–6).

Haman’s plan was cut and dried: just tell Ahas-biblical proportions (Esth 4:1–3). Esther, meanwhile, highly developed textile industry

uerus that a people (he was careful not to give them was apparently locked up somewhere in the palace, in the region—a fact confirmed

from the site. How could Esther

a name) scattered throughout the empire followed totally unaware of the goings-on in the kingdom by earlier Elamite inscriptions

laws other than those decreed by the king. First a and ignored by even her husband (cf. Esth 4:11). She hope to influence such a court little suggestion whispered in the ear—“it is not in had to be told by her maidens and eunuchs (serv-as this? the king’s best interest to let them remain”—then ants always seem to know the latest scuttlebutt), the final solution: they must be destroyed and their then sent one of them to Mordecai (her heart must property in the amount of 10,000 talents of silver have longed for the good old days, just she and Mor-The most important Persian confiscated by the royal treasury decai taking care of each other back home) to find capital was Persepolis. This

(Esth 3:7–9). Even

was the location of coronations,

though in Ahasuerus’s eyes three-quarters of a mil-

royal burials, the magnificent

lion pounds of silver at the going rate was a pretty

New Year’s celebration and

fair exchange for a troublesome people, we have

other ceremonies of the imperial

to wonder why he didn’t ask any questions about

pomp and circumstance. Every

the affair. Wasn’t he the least bit curious about who

New Year’s Day dignitaries

these people were? About where they lived? Or how

from across the empire—such

Haman knew? Whether any had infiltrated the pal-

as these Median nobles in bold

ace? Or if they were such a big threat, why hadn’t

relief—converged on Persepolis,

he heard of their lawless deeds before? Maurice

then marched in solemn

Samuel:

procession up a wide, low set

of stairs to a raised terrace on

Not that Ahasuerus was a Jew-hater; he was merely

which were built the residential

the kind of person who votes a Haman into office

and ceremonial palaces of

and then says: “Buchenwald? I never heard of the

the king. Here was the great

place.” Also, in the more familiar phrase: “Why, one

audience hall; nearby, rooms

of my dearest friends is a Jew”—or “a Jewess.”

for banquets. With most of the

(Certain People of the Book, p. 18)

empire living in huts and hovels,

the reality of the royal court

No, Ahasuerus simply gave the order (he would

was nothing but opulent—as

probably say he was just following orders) that every

the story of Esther suggests.

129

EsthEr

out what was happening. How Mordecai knew even til stew…; cf. Gen 25:27–34.) Evening came and Ahas-the exact amount of money to be stolen from the uerus, never one to keep honor waiting, fully en-Jews is not said; apparently he was the kind of fellow joyed himself, no doubt wondering what his queen who just knew, and in that Esther found some fa-had on her mind. Just another invitation to another miliar comfort (Esth 4:4–8). And now Mordecai, dear, banquet tomorrow night (Esth 5:3–8). Twist, twist. dear always-knows-what-to-do-to-get-us-out-of-a-“Why didn’t I notice how much fun she was before?” jam Mordecai, asked Esther, wide-eyed, silent and Haman, also invited, shared the king’s pleasure. wondering, to help. Esther of course saw only the He left the banquet stuffed with himself. On the obstacle—Ahasuerus banishes those who refuse his way out he passed Mordecai, who again refused to summons and kills those who come in without his bow. Barely controlling his anger, Haman couldn’t call. “How could I possibly?” (Esth 4:9–12). Mordecai wait for Slaughtering Day. He ordered a “gallows” laid all the cards on the table:

(lit. “tree”) seventy-five feet high be erected and

Don’t imagine that just because you are in the king’s vowed that in the morning he would ask the king palace that you can escape any more than all of the to hang that impudent Mordecai on it (Esth 5:9–14).

Esther was known among other Jews. If you remain silent at this time, relief Most commentators note the impossible height her people as Hadassah (the and deliverance will arise for the Jews from another of the gallows, although Rabbinic tradition solves Hebrew word for “myrtle”; place, while you and your father’s house will perish. the problem by adding that Haman cut a cedar

2:7), a name fit for a queen. Esth Who knows? Perhaps you have attained royalty for (the tallest of trees in the Near East, from which The evergreen myrtle, more a such a time as this. (Esth 4:13–14) ship’s masts were made; Ezek 27:5) out of the palace bush than a tree, has dense, Of course Mordecai was right. And now that garden and, with chants and shouts, had it set up upright branches with rich, the problem was clear, now that a situation made at the entrance to his house. This was not “hang green leaves that secrete a by men and wholly unable to be solved by men was by the neck until dead.” According to Herodotus fragrant oil held to have healing Kristall-clear, the woman Esther rose to the occa-(Histories 3.125, 159), the going form of capital punish-qualities. Even when cut, the sion. “Fast and pray,” she said, “for I am going to the ment in Persia was to be impaled on a stake. Hang branches remain upright, fresh king. If I perish, I perish!” (Esth 4:15–17). This was no Mordecai above the city like a flag, Haman thought. and fragrant, and so became Masada suicide-wish, but the quiet yet firm realiza-Stick him up on a high pole. That ought to show the a symbol of immortality in tion that sometimes one has to sacrifice one’s own Jews! Then, off to the banquet. Jewish tradition. Esther’s grace, ambitions on the altar for others.

For a king who didn’t seem too concerned about

strength and charm, qualities Sensing that her husband the king was one who higher affairs of state, sleep came surprisingly hard critical to her success as queen, liked to know a secret (“shhh! Did you know that there’s for Ahasuerus that night. Perhaps it was something mirrored the plant after which a rabble out to get you?”) and that he simply loved a he drank. Rather than toss and turn, he asked to she was named. “…instead of good banquet, Esther concocted a plan to twist hear a chapter or two from the Chronicles of the the thorn the myrtle will come him, bit by bit, around her little finger. First she ap-Kings of Persia; that way he could reminisce on oth-up, and it will be a memorial to

the LORD, for an everlasting proached the throne room, wholly unannounced, er good days and fall asleep content, shuttering the sign which will not be cut off” coyly distant yet near. Ahasuerus perhaps felt a little cries outside his window that he didn’t hear anyway. (Isa 55:13).

guilty (“has it really been thirty days The page was opened exactly—for such a time as since we were

last together?”) and allowed her to remain (Esth 5:1–2; this!—to the record of Mordecai’s good deed and cf. Esth 4:11). In fact, he offered her half the kingdom, how the king’s life had been saved. No day is done

Esther, in the presence of quite an overture to someone who was already his without a good deed repaid and so Ahasuerus, full Ahasuerus, touching the wife. Esther’s only request was that Ahasuerus and of the need to be gracious, summoned his faithful royal scepter his beloved Haman be guests of honor at a special Haman to right the wrong (Esth 6:1–5).

century engraving (Esth 5:1–2), 19th banquet that night. (Was half the Persian Empire re- And now one of the greatest sets of dialogue lines Jerusalem) (Carta, ally worth this little? Then again, Esau had given up in the Bible (Esth 6:6–10). Both men spoke exactly ac-number of imaginative details . Josephus provides a his chance at chosen-peoplehood for a bowl of len-cording to character. of the meeting: “He looked

Ahasuerus to Haman: “What should be done to

at her somewhat severely,

the one the king desires to honor?”

his countenance on fire with

Haman to himself: “Surely the king means me!”

anger, and her joints failed her

Haman to Ahasuerus: “Let him be decked in

immediately out of dread so

royal splendor and led through Susa on a roy-

that she fell down sideways in a

al horse with criers shouting that he is the one

swoon. Concerned for his wife,

most honored by the king.”

he leapt from his throne, took

Ahasuerus to Haman: “Perfect! See that it’s

her in his arms and recovered

done—to Mordecai!”

her by embracing and speaking

The next morning Haman did as he was bidden,

comfortably to her…then put

looking like death warmed over. And Mordecai, du-

the scepter in her hand”

(Ant. xi.6.9). Why not? Josephus

tifully receiving the honor, surely couldn’t have en-

would have made a great

joyed being paraded around the city square knowing

Hollywood screenwriter.

that his people, even those looking on, were still as

130

EsthEr

doomed as ever. Later in the day, while Haman was Haman.”

pouting about the house, his wife Zeresh saw the Haman’s property was given to Esther and his omen coming: “If Mordecai is Jewish, you will surely position to Mordecai (Esth 8:1–2, 10:1–3). In the palace fall before him” (Esth 6:12–13).

everything was resolved, but the real problem still

That night, with banquet #2 in full swing, Ahas-remained. Esther, in an emotional plea for her peo-

uerus again asked the question, and again promised ple, reminded the king that the order to kill all the half the kingdom to his suddenly enchanting wife. Jews of the empire was still in effect. The law of the This time Esther surprised him. Certainly he ex-Medes and Persians, once evoked, could not be re-pected a favor, but likely had in mind something, scinded (Esth 8:3–7). The solution was ingenious, and shall we say, a bit feminine—a personal request per-quite effective. Mordecai, in the name and power haps, or some concession for the harem. But what of the king, issued a follow-up edict to all 127 prov-Ahasuerus heard was something much different. inces of the empire giving the Jews the right “to as-

We have been sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, semble and to defend their lives, to destroy, kill and

killed and annihilated. Now if we had only been annihilate their enemies” on the thirteenth day of In the ancient Near East the sold as slaves I would have remained silent, for that Adar, what had been decreed as Slaughtering Day. stately cedar was to plants trouble alone would not be worth annoying the king. And defend themselves they did, with the help of what the lion was to animals

(Esth 7:4) the governors of the provinces, against everyone (Ps 104:16; Ezek 31:1–18) . Cedar

(Haman jerked to attention, but tried to look dis-throughout the empire who had conspired to do beams were used to span the

interested.) Esther was decisive and forthright, yet them harm (Esth 8:8–9:17). roofs of palaces and temples

careful to first arouse the king’s interest, then his This was a great victory over the forces of evil, and planks of cedar paneled anger, then his will to act. Lingering on every sylla-certainly one worth celebrating. Mordecai, in fact, walls of the houses of the ble, she deliberately dragged out the accusation: “A mandated that Jews everywhere celebrate their wealthy (1 Kgs 5:6, 5:10, 6:14–18; foe, an enemy…is…this…wicked… triumph the next two days “with feasting and re-Song of Songs 1:17). Soaring to denly neither the queen nor the king were the cent-Haman!” Sud-joicing and sending portions of food to one an-heights of over 100 feet, the er of attention in the room. Things were unraveling other and gifts to the poor” (Esth 9:17–32) cedar remains the tallest tree fast for the evil vizier. As Ahasuerus stormed out to the festival of Purim, now a wonderful holiday for . This is in the Middle East today, still the garden to try to figure out what was happening children (when every boy dresses like Mordecai a tree fit for kings. Rabbinic and why he was the last to know, Haman, reduced and every girl like Esther), and the one day of the tradition holds that Haman to a sniveling shell, plead for mercy from the queen year when “it is the duty of a man to mellow him-constructed his 75-foot

self [with wine]…until he cannot tell the difference “gallows” from a cedar tree,

(Esth 7:5–6). Ahasuerus was in a real quandary. His wife, iso-between [someone who says] ‘cursed be Haman’ perhaps as a sign of mock-

royalty for Mordecai.

lated in the harem, had been the perfect detective: and [someone who says] ‘blessed by Mordecai’ ” identifying the crime, finding the perpetrator, mak-(Babylonian Talmud, Megillah 7b). ing the accusation and, he was sure, getting a confes- Time and distance have turned the events sur-This brick and stone mausoleum in Hamadan, Iran sion. And he, the king…“Someone must have rounding Purim into a good story, a time to poke fun (ancient Ecbatana) dating to me into being a part of the conspiracy! That traitor tricked at Haman and Ahasuerus and to cheer Mordecai the 13th century a.d. is believed Haman is to blame. He didn’t tell me they were the and Esther. The fun of the story, however, shouldn’t by the faithful to house the queen’s people…but why didn’t I ask?” The king had mask the dead seriousness of the edict that prompt-graves of Esther and Mordecai. been a fool, a drunken fool. He knew it, and now ed Esther’s bold acts. A terrible massacre had been Inside the modest Islamic everyone would know. As frustrated and angry as averted. Mordecai and Esther were fortunate: their structure, capped with a simple his sauced male ego could be, Ahasuerus reentered monarch was only a fool. Not so with the Holo-dome, are two exquisite wooden the banquet hall to find Haman sprawled out on caust, the most horrible atrocity of the living past. tomb-boxes, one of which bears Esther’s couch, begging for his life. The timing was The Holocaust has no parallels, yet there are some a Hebrew inscription. The site most unfortunate for Haman and Ahasuerus, look-points of connection between it and the events of was restored by Iran’s Jewish ing for a place to focus his rage, locked on to his the Book of Esther. Mordecai, the proud partisan, community and is cared for by suddenly former vizier: “Will he even assault the refused to bend the knee. He survived, but even if Islamic authorities. queen when I’m still in the house?!” Then one final he had not, his life would be remembered for the nail for Haman’s coffin: an attendant eagerly offered strength that God gives to his people and the honor a welcome piece of news. Haman had just erected that cannot be taken away even in death. And Es-a huge hanging tree, intending to impale Mor-ther, the lovely heroine, stands for help that comes decai, the newly honored friend of the king. The from unexpected places, often at the last possible solution was easy; justice swift: “Hang him on it!” moment. In spite of—and in the midst of—wide-(Esth 7:7–10). And it is easy to imagine all of Susa, spread horror or unbearable challenges, individual already confused by the edict to kill, destroy and an-acts of greatness, through the grace and strength of nihilate the Jews (cf. Esth 3:15), looking up in the sky God, still exist and become most pronounced when the next morning and remarking, “Why, that poor a person leaves behind “what can I possibly do?” to fellow up there bears an uncanny resemblance to grasp “I am here for such a time as this.”

131
