Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

Acknowledgments

To acknowledge by name all those who have contributed to the development of the thoughts expressed in this book is a virtual impossibility. Many I know and many I do not know.

I do know that my family is central, and I am deeply grateful for the love and believing support of my parents, my brother and my sisters, my wife, and our nine children. Experiences in my home have developed an underlying attitude toward life reflected explicitly and implicitly throughout this book and have provided many of its illustrations. The awareness, memory, and unspoken challenge of my heritage, particularly my grandfather, Stephen L Richards, have been a constant inspiration to keep my expressions responsible.

The examples and stimulation received from many individuals and the insights gained from relationships with them were major influences in shaping the ideas expressed here. I feel indebted to many former teachers and students, including patrons of Brigham Young University Education Week, to missionaries (to whom the missionary material was initially directed) and members of the Irish Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to members of the former BYU 12th Ward, and to many friends and colleagues on the BYU faculty and staff.

I also thankfully acknowledge the learning and inspirational influence of several Church leaders whom I was privileged to associate with in connection with my responsibilities. In particular, President Henry D. Moyle, President N. Eldon Tanner, President Spencer W. Kimball, Elder Mark E. Petersen, Elder Bernard Brockbank, President Ernest L. Wilkinson, and my own mission president, A. Hamer Reiser, have influenced me. The teachings, example, and touch of the prophet President McKay have been pervasive and powerful in their effect on this work.

Inasmuch as most of the thinking in this book came directly out of having responsibility to do what was necessary, consistent with true principles, to fulfill those responsibilities, I am especially grateful for the training and service opportunities in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and for the teaching and administrative responsibilities at Brigham Young University. I also appreciate the training in analytical thinking given at the Harvard Business School.

Thanks is expressed to the Instructor, the Church News, the Relief Society Magazine, the MIA general board, and BYU Extension Publications for permission to use some of the material prepared originally for their use.

I have dedicated this book to my dear wife, Sandra, because of her constant support during its preparation, her intuitive human insight and understanding, her candid constructive criticisms and suggestions in light of this natural wisdom, and her magnificent second-mile spirit.

Finally, I give heartfelt thanks to Alva Parry for encouragement years ago to prepare such a manuscript, to William James Mortimer for subsequent encouragement and professional assistance, to Eleanor Knowles for expert editorial work and counsel, to Lela Dalton for splendid secretarial help, to President Owen J. Cook and many others in Laie, Hawaii, for an ideal environment in which to write.
