Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

I

Vision—An Eternal Perspective

1

Our Purpose Here: Obedience

By obedience to the principles and ordinances of the eternal gospel of Jesus Christ, men and women will gradually become "partakers of the divine nature" ( [^1]) and will feel comfort and confidence in the presence of their Eternal Father and their Elder Brother, the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the purpose of life.

It all may be summarized in another way—growth toward Godhood. When the Lord revealed that his work and his glory was "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" ( [^2]), he essentially outlined the two great parts or programs or objectives of all that he has attempted to do among mankind since the beginning.

The first grand part or objective is immortality, which was achieved through the miracle of the resurrection. With the seeds of mortality and death along with immortality and life flowing in his veins, Christ willingly laid down his own life and took it up again. Through his resurrection, all mankind will be resurrected into immortality.

The second grand design of the Lord is eternal life, which has to do with the quality of the resurrection. While immortality is a free gift to all mankind, eternal life is a personal achievement by each individual, made possible through the atonement and grace of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The gospel may be studied from different points of view, and each makes its own valuable and unique contribution. The traditional viewpoints are what we might term "definitional" and "legalistic." The definitional viewpoint involves essentially coming to a clear understanding of what various gospel terms mean, such as faith, repentance, baptism, immortality, eternal life, salvation, and so forth. The legalistic way of thinking views God as the judge and jury, individuals and society as the defendants, the principles of the gospel as the laws of celestial society, judgment as the verdict, and punishment as jail or hell.

There is an additional, extremely fascinating, and immensely useful study framework that we might term a behavioral viewpoint. Let us analyze eternal life from this framework.

In life we are immersed in various kinds of values: physical, social, material, family, spiritual. Life can be seen as a series of alternative choices within these value systems. Many times we find ourselves in conflicting situations where we must choose to accept one value and, by so doing, knowingly or unknowingly reject another. This choosing process is the growth process. If we love God more than pleasures, we will grow to become like God. If we love our worldly pleasures more than God, we will choose and grow in another direction.

From this perspective, what, then, is eternal life? Eternal life is essentially that quality of character and personal integrity achieved through Christlike service and lifetime obedience to the principles of the gospel, which through the grace and power of the Savior enable us to be so changed—gradually and almost imperceptibly—in our very nature that our "confidence wax[es] strong in the presence of God." ( [^3].) If we had not so grown from within, we would feel like strangers and foreigners and would shun the presence of this perfect and holy Being, feeling more comfortable with those who have lived a lower order or a lower law, such as found in a terrestrial or a telestial level.

What is judgment? It is the divine process of God revealing us to ourselves. We are only as good as we are. "Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." ( [^4].)

There is no mystery about this business. It is very simple. The laws of the gospel are the laws of human growth toward godhood. The Sermon on the Mount, for example, contains the perfect laws of social, mental, and spiritual health. Elsewhere, when Christ said that it was life eternal to know God, he again taught the behavioral principle that true knowledge is a state of being. (Study [^5] and [^6].)

This behavioral approach to the study of the gospel reveals the transparent error and inconsistency of man-made doctrines regarding salvation and eternal life. Deathbed confession or mere ordinance work do not change man's nature. This is the reason Satan's plan to force everyone to be good would have failed, for there could never be a returning to the presence of the Eternal Father without a testing in the face of opposites and temptation and without the continuous choosing of the highest good over lesser goods and over evil. Any other approach to salvation ignores this process of growth and turns it all into some kind of an arbitrary and awesome mystery that, to many, is the hallmark of spirituality.

From this behavioral viewpoint, every principle of the gospel can be prayerfully studied again, and new light and understanding and motivation will result. The blessings of God come in the form of divine growth, and the cursings of God in the form of a lack of divine growth, or a growth in the opposite direction.

Repentance is change of mind and action, resulting in confessing and forsaking sin and embracing good works—divine growth. The after-life cursing, or hell, amounts to that kind of anguish that follows a clear recollection of misdeeds and acknowledgment that the judgment is just and self-chosen, with a quickened realization of the enormous loss and the widened gap between God's nature and human nature. "For of all sad words of tongue and pen,/The saddest are these: 'It might have been!' " John Greenleaf Whittier.)

To summarize the purposes of life from a behavioral standpoint, I would suggest that every principle of the gospel is so calculated that, through obedience to it, there is an immediate growth or blessing. Through continued faithfulness, sin gradually loses its pull and attractiveness, and we lose all desire for anything but continued service to our fellow beings and obedience to higher and higher laws of the gospel. The Savior taught that we must be "born again." ( [^7].) We are born of the water in baptism and are born of the Spirit as we obey the injunction given at our confirmation ("receive the Holy Ghost") to so live as to receive the continued purifying, sanctifying, and perfecting influence of the Holy Ghost.

As begotten spirit children of God, we have the laws of the gospel implicit within our very nature. The revelations of the Lord through prophets make those implicit internal laws and our pre-mortal memory (shrouded by the veil of mortality) explicit or open to mortal understanding and response. Through obedience and selfless service, we become celestialized personalities and thus fulfill our promise and purpose. This is a divine miracle.

---
Notas:
[^1] Vision. An eternal perspective toward life, its problems, and challenges should influence all decisions and actions.
[^2] Commitment. Once we understand "the big picture" (who we are, why we're here, and so forth), the next logical step is to decide or to commit ourselves to act accordingly.
[^3] Understanding and Example. The quality of our own lives and the depth of our understanding of others are the fundamental roots in succeeding with people.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
