Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

2

Six Days of Creation: Process of Growth and Development

The Lord took six days to create the world. Each day was important—each in its own time.

A child learns to turn over, to sit up, to crawl, then to walk and run. Each step is important. No step can be skipped.

In school we study mathematics before we study algebra. We can then go on to geometry and calculus. We simply can't do calculus until we understand algebra.

So it is also with spiritual growth and development in the Church. Repentance precedes making a covenant in the waters of baptism. Baptism and faithfulness precede the covenants of endowment and temple marriage. With the priesthood, the requirements of the Aaronic Priesthood are met before assuming the obligation of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

This is true with all phases of life and with the development of all skills, whether it be piano playing or communicating. It is true with individuals, and it is true with groups and families.

In all of life there are stages, or processes, of growth and development. We know and accept this fact of process in the area of physical things, but understanding it in emotional areas, in human relations, and even in the spiritual area is less common and more difficult. And even though we may have this understanding, accepting it and working on that basis are even less common and more difficult. Things in the physical area are seen, and constant evidence is supplied; but things in the other areas are largely unseen, and evidence is not as direct or as plain. Therefore, we sometimes look for shortcuts, preferring to skip some of these vital steps in order to save time and effort and still reap the desired reward.

For the purposes of understanding and clarity, let us use the idea of the six days of creation to represent this process of growth and development. Then let us reason together.

Consider your answer to this question: What happens when a person attempts to shortcut this process in his or her development? For instance, in sports, if you are only an average tennis player at, say, day three, but decide to play today at day six in order to make a better impression, what will result? Or if you were at a day-three skill level in golf and were to compete against someone at day five, would positive thinking alone beat that person?

In another area, what would happen if you were to lead your friends to believe that you could play the piano at day six, while your actual present skill was at day two!

The answers are obvious. Violating, ignoring, or cutting short this development process is simply impossible. It is contrary to nature, and any attempt to seek such a shortcut will result in confusion and frustration. If I am at day two in any field and desire to move to day five, I must first take the step toward day three. As the saying goes, "A thousand-mile journey begins with the first step, one step at a time"—"precept upon precept; line upon line . . . ; here a little, and there a little." ( [^1].) This is the law of the harvest (you reap what you sow)—part of the law of justice and a natural law of God.

No bypassing, no shortcutting, no pretending or cultivating appearances, no making impressions will compensate. "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven . . . " ( [^2].) This involves accepting the fact that I am at day two and refusing to pretend to be anywhere else. If you don't let a teacher know at what level you are—by asking a question, or revealing your ignorance—you will not learn or grow. You cannot pretend for long, for you will eventually be found out. This admission of our ignorance is often the first step in our education.

Let me illustrate. The missionaries in one British mission held regular street meetings as a proselyting method to meet people. One elder would never participate. He had a different excuse every day—a cold, sore throat, other duties, and so on. His father was a prominent and successful civic, Church, and business leader. Everyone expected his young missionary son to also be successful. The missionary enjoyed the inheritance of being well thought of, receiving admiration for qualities others assumed he had. He did not want to reveal himself—and the fact that he too had to start at the beginning, at day one. He did not know the scriptures and could not preach with clarity and persuasion, and so he would not participate. Until the time he was willing to pay the price of revealing the level he was at, he could not grow or move from the tortuous task of pretense.

Now, instead of growth in skill or knowledge, let us consider the internal growth (emotional and spiritual) of an individual. Let us say, for instance, that a particular mother is at day five intellectually but at day two emotionally. Everything is okay when the sun is shining or when things go well. But what happens when fatigue and the pressure of screaming kids, diapers, dishes, and telephones join together? Or struggling with uncooperative teenagers and a husband who is always gone?

This emotionally immature mother may find herself absolutely enslaved to the emotions of anger, impatience, and criticalness. She may find herself incapable of acting upon what she knows in her mind is right because of the built-in, ingrained habit of losing her temper. All this adds to her guilty feeling. And yet in public, when things are going well, others may never detect this internal deficiency, this emotional immaturity. She has a good mind and seems to be patient and in control.

I recall an occasion when two daughters came to me tearfully complaining about their father's harshness and lack of understanding. They were afraid to open up with either of their parents for fear of the consequences. And yet they desperately needed the kind of love, understanding, and guidance that can come only from parents. I talked with the father, and he agreed with the complaints and was intellectually aware of what was happening. But while he admitted he had a temper problem, he refused to take responsibility for it and to honestly accept the fact that he was, in a sense, emotionally at day two. It was more pride than he could swallow to take the first step toward day three.

This is obvious with tennis or piano playing, where pretending is impossible. But it is not so obvious in emotional and spiritual areas. We can "pose" and put on a front. We can pretend. And for a while we can get away with it—at least in public or on "one-night stands." We might even deceive ourselves. Yet I believe that most of us know the truth of what we really are inside, as do some of those we live with and work around.

To relate effectively with our wives, husbands, or children requires emotional strength, because we must learn to listen. Listening involves patience, openness, and the desire to understand. And when we are really open, we run the risk that we may be influenced and changed. And if we are so sure that we are right, we don't want to change. We find it easier to be closed and to tell and dictate. It is easier to operate from our day-two emotional level and to give day-six advice.

Let me illustrate from my own experience how I once attempted to teach the value of sharing to my daughter.

One day I returned home to my little girl's third-year birthday party, only to find her in the corner of the front room defiantly grasping all of her presents, unwilling to let the other children play with them. The first thing I sensed was the presence of several parents witnessing this selfish display. I was embarrassed, and doubly so because I was serving as a bishop at the time and was also a college teacher in the held of human relations. And I knew, or at least felt, the expectation of these parents.

The atmosphere in the room was really charged: the children crowding around my little daughter with their hands out, asking to play with the presents they had just given, and my daughter adamantly refusing. I said to myself, Certainly I should teach my daughter to share; the value of sharing is one of the most basic things we believe in. So I proceeded through the following process:

My first method was to simply make a request: "Honey, would you please share with your friends the toys they've given you?"

A flat "No."

My second method was to use a little reasoning. "Honey, if you learn to share your toys with them when they are at your home, then when you go to their homes, they will share their toys with you."

Again, "No!"

I was becoming a little more embarrassed, for I was evidently having no influence. The third method was bribery. Very softly: "Honey, if you'll share, I've got a special surprise for you. I'll give you a piece of gum."

"I don't want a piece of gum!" she exploded.

Now I was becoming exasperated. My fourth method—fear, threat: "Unless you share, you'll be in real trouble!"

"I don't care. These are my things. I don't have to share!"

Last method—force. I merely took some of the toys and gave them to the other kids. "Here, kids, play with them."

Perhaps my daughter needed the experience of possessing the things before she could give them. (In fact, unless I possess something, can I ever really give it?) Because I valued the opinion those parents had of me at that moment more than the growth and development of my child and our relationship together, I simply made an initial judgment that I was right: she should share, and she was wrong in not doing so. Based on that judgment, I proceeded to manipulate her until I ultimately forced her. Perhaps she was at day two and I at that moment superimposed a day-five expectation—simply because on my own scale I was also at day two emotionally. I was unable or unwilling to give patience or understanding, so I expected her to give things.

If I had been more mature, I may have allowed her to make a choice as to whether she wanted to share or not to share. Perhaps after the reasoning method, I could then have attempted to turn the attention of the children to an interesting game, thus taking all that emotional pressure off my child. I've learned that once my children gain a sense of real possession, then they share very naturally, freely, and spontaneously.

My experience has been that there are times to verbally teach and times not to teach. When your relationships are strained and the air is charged with emotion, an attempt to verbally teach is often perceived as a form of judgment and rejection. But to take the child alone, quietly, when the relationship is good and to discuss the teaching or the value seems to have real merit. But again, this requires patience and internal control—in short, emotional maturity.

Indeed, a sense of possession should precede a genuine giving, just as algebra precedes calculus. Must not we as parents be patient enough to allow our children the sense of possession? We must also be wise enough to teach them the value of giving and to provide the example ourselves. Perhaps many who give mechanically or who refuse to give and share in their marriages and families have never experienced what it means to possess, which would include a feeling of one's own worth and identity (possessing one's self).

This story of my daughter is an example that focuses on the principle of sharing or giving and on the ways the teaching approach distorted the very principle itself. What about other principles—such as work, responsibility, appreciation, honesty, virtue? Isn't it possible that they too might be distorted in the mind and life of the child or student when the parent or teacher does not exemplify or embody his or her own teachings!

When Borrowing Strength Builds Weakness

In addition to parents, many employers, leaders, teachers, and others in positions of authority may be competent, knowledgeable, and skillful (at day six) but are emotionally and spiritually immature (at day two). They too may attempt to compensate for the deficiency, or gap, by borrowing their entire strength from their positions or from their authority.

How do these immature people react to pressure? How does the boss react when subordinates don't do things his way? The teacher when the students challenge her viewpoint?

How would such an immature father treat his teenage daughter when she interrupts his convenience with her problems? How does he discipline the younger children when they get in the way? How does he handle a difference with his wife on an emotionally potent matter?

Such an emotionally immature, although intelligent, father will tend to borrow strength to make up for his character imbalance. Because he lacks the internal control and the wisdom to handle each situation on its own merit as it comes up, he may react almost blindly by relying upon his sheer physical size, perhaps with the younger children, or on his intellectual prowess, perhaps with his teenage daughter or his wife. He may end up losing his temper and borrow strength from his angry volume, his position, even his priesthood.

Eventually this father discovers, and inwardly knows, that when he borrows strength, he builds weakness. He builds weakness in three places: First, he builds it in himself. Borrowing strength from position or authority alone reinforces his own dependence upon external factors to get things done in the future. Second, he builds weakness in the other person involved, because the younger child, the teenager, or wife learns to act or react in terms of fear or position alone, and this leaves little room for his or her own reasoning, freedom, and growth in internal discipline. Third, he builds weakness in the relationship. It becomes strained. Fear replaces the spirit of cooperation. And then each person involved becomes a little more arbitrary, a little more sharp and quick with the other person, a little more defensive.

If to win an argument he uses his intellectual abilities to reason the children and his wife into a corner, he will poison the atmosphere. No one likes to breathe poisonous air. Even though he wins the argument, he loses. Everyone loses. His very strength becomes his weakness.

If this father has the habit of borrowing strength from his size or position, from threatening, bullying, and spanking almost at will, what happens when the children grow up and he can no longer do these things? Unless he repents and uses other, more effective methods of influence and discipline, he may then find himself without influence.

His children may feel belittled and crushed, with little sense of worth or identity or individuality. Others may become rebellious and strike back in their own ways. Sometimes one way is to strike back against the very things that the father seemingly loves and treasures the most: the Church and the gospel plan. And sometimes then it's almost too late for such a father to change his methods of influence and to use the higher forms: consistent example, high goals and standards, persuasion, kindness, patience, and discipline based on well-understood principles and rules, not on the mood of the moment.

When trust or credibility is low, even the best of intentions and the finest methods of influence will be viewed with suspicion and mistrust. "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." ( [^3].)

In fact, whenever we build our security or borrow strength from our possessions or our credentials (the letters following our name), or from our appearances or our memberships in certain social cliques, or from status symbols or past achievements, or from someone else's faith and testimony, what happens to us when these things change or are no longer there? Obviously we remain with our developed weaknesses, for these things are all external to our selves.

From what sources, then, can we borrow strength without building weakness? Only from sources that build the internal capacity to deal with whatever the situation calls for. For instance, a surgeon borrows strength from developed skill and knowledge; a distance runner from his or her disciplined body, strong legs, and powerful lungs; a missionary from the developed capacity to love and teach and testify.

In other words, we ask the question: What is it that the situation demands? What strength, what skill, what knowledge, what attitude? Obviously the possessions, the appearances, or the credentials of the surgeon, the athlete, or the missionary are only symbols of the things that are needed, and as symbols, they are therefore worthless and deceiving without the substance.

But when we borrow strength from divine sources and from eternal principles, the very nature of the borrowing demands living better, and we thus build strength inside: "Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life." ( [^4].)

Six Implications of the Process of Growth

Based on the above analysis, I see six significant implications:

First, we have learned that the growth process is a natural one that follows God's laws. "All things must be done in order" ( [^5]): precept upon precept; you reap as you sow; math, algebra, calculus; crawling before walking.

Second, we are also aware that all of us are at different "days" (levels of growth) in the physical, social, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual realms. I am at a different level than you. Perhaps things I need to work on and overcome, you have already conquered, and vice versa. Your day four may be my day two, or vice versa. (The time, the circumstance, and the others involved are other variables that influence the manifestation, at least, of the level we're at. It is a complex matter, and we must not oversimplify or generalize from one or two selected instances.)

Third, we must be aware of the dangers of comparing.

"Tom, there is simply no reason for you to bring home a report card like this. If only you'd apply yourself like your brother, you could get good grades too!" This may be true, but if our children's (or our own) sense of worth and personal security comes from being compared with others, how insecure and anxious they will be—feeling superior one minute and inferior the next. Opinions, customs, and fashions are fickle, always changing. There is no anchorage or security in changing things. Internal security simply does not come externally. Borrowing strength from any source that does not build and internally strengthen the borrower will internally weaken him.

Such comparing and borrowing breed complacency and vanity on the one hand and discouragement and self-dislike on the other. They encourage people to seek shortcuts, to be ruled by opinion, to live by appearances, and to borrow more and more heavily from external sources.

While we must learn from good examples and keep always in mind the bigger goal, we must compare ourselves only with ourselves. We can't focus or base our happiness on another's progress; we can focus only on our own. We should compare each child against his or her own potential and then exercise faith in that potential and the child's effort. We should ask, How is he doing with what he's got? instead of asking, How does she compare with her sister? (and then meting out love or punishment on the basis of that comparison).

Fourth, there is no shortcut. If I am at day two (to use the analogy of the six days of creation) and desire to move to day six, I must go through days three, four, and five. If I pretend to be at day six in order to impress others, eventually I will be found out.

Trying to be all things to all people results in the loss of everybody's respect, including one's own.

If the order, harmony, and mutual understanding (communication) in my home are at day two and my neighbor's are at day six, I must move through each of the intervening steps. If I try to push too hard or to go too fast in order to shorten the process, I may further strain the relationships and drop back to day one.

If my family, or my son, or the priests quorum, or the Sunday School class is at day three, comparing and criticizing them because they aren't at day five or six are futile and hurtful activities. There simply is no shortcut. "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." ( [^6].)

Fifth, we all need to begin to improve, starting from where we are (not from where we should be, or where someone else is, or even from where others may think we are).

By doing one more push-up each day, I could do thirty after one month. Likewise, in any area of improvement, I could also exercise a little more of what it takes, such as a little more patience, a little more understanding, a little more moral courage, slowly increasing my capacity through daily effort and discipline.

I believe that days one and two for most of us involve getting more control over the body—such as getting to bed early, arising early, exercising regularly, eating in moderation, and staying at our work when necessary even though tired. Too many are trying to conquer other higher weaknesses (days four, five, and six), such as procrastination, impatience, or pride, while still being slaves to their appetites. If we can't control the body and its appetites, how can we ever control our tongues (a part of the body) or overcome the emotions of anger, envy, jealousy, or hatred? Can I truly love and gossip also? Remember that in development, algebra precedes calculus.

Many pray for the blessings of days five and six (love, spirituality, wisdom, specific guidance in making decisions) yet are unwilling to obey the laws of days one, two, three, and four (mastering appetites and passions). We may give lip service to the principle of consecration and yet not participate in quorum, Relief Society, or welfare projects and not magnify our home-teaching or visiting-teaching callings.

Until we gain, to some degree, a control over the lower laws, we can never hope to rake the next steps. President David O. McKay continuously stressed the importance of mastering our appetites and passions. He stated: "There can be no fullness of life where there is slavery, and the man who is subject to his appetite is the most abject slave. He who can rule his passions is greater than a king."

We cannot effectively teach our children about the evils of smoking, drinking, and drugs if we ourselves have flesh problems—no control over our appetites or our tongues; no ability to he moderate, to exercise, to get up early. Where is our power if we don't live the principles? We can't testify effectively of prayer unless we pray fervently and regularly. We need to gain control of ourselves before we can exercise control over others or before we can give up control of ourselves to the Lord.

Priesthood ordinance work, Church activity, and service embody perfect opportunities for the exercise of both belief power and will power. Such a combination will build character, or reserve power, to meet the stresses and tests of life.

Sixth, an accurate understanding of our weaknesses and the power to overcome them comes from the Lord (and from active involvement in his programs).

Many of us simply don't know where to start. We don't. always know what things come before other things. Someone else's pattern and process may differ from ours. Someone else's "day five" may be our "day two." At one time we may be in "day four" and at "day one" another time—even on the same matter! At times we will need to do some work at each day or level simultaneously.

We must not oversimplify a complex, variable subject merely to not feel confused. We may really be confused. Moreover, we may find ourselves bogged down in a circular habit pattern of making resolutions, then breaking them, remaking them, then breaking them again.

Where then is the light through our confusion? What is the answer? It lies with the Lord—for he understands all this and infinitely more. He understands exactly where we are and what we need to do. He knows these divine processes and promises to help and guide us if we come to him and obey his voice (through our conscience or through the Holy Ghost): "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." ( [^7].)

---
Notas:
[^1] Vision. An eternal perspective toward life, its problems, and challenges should influence all decisions and actions.
[^2] Commitment. Once we understand "the big picture" (who we are, why we're here, and so forth), the next logical step is to decide or to commit ourselves to act accordingly.
[^3] Understanding and Example. The quality of our own lives and the depth of our understanding of others are the fundamental roots in succeeding with people.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
