Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

3

The Three Temptations: Understanding and Overcoming

It has always been interesting to note the time in the Savior's life and ministry when he was led into the wilderness "of the Spirit . . . to be tempted of the devil." ( [^1].) Chapter 1 of Matthew records the genealogy of Christ, his conception and birth, and the special message to Joseph from the angel. Chapter 2 tells of the visit of the wise men, the flight into Egypt, and the slaying of the children by Herod. Chapter 3 introduces John the Baptist and records the baptism of Christ in the Jordan. Chapter 4 records the temptations of the Savior. Immediately afterward he began preaching and teaching, and chapters 5, 6, and 7 contain the greatest sermon ever given to man—the Sermon on the Mount. It is noteworthy that the temptations followed baptism and preceded his great teaching and ministry. Think about it.

I believe the sequence is significant and has its parallel in many lives. Conquering or overcoming temptation often seems to be a prelude to becoming or developing oneself and to understanding others and their temptations, problems, and feelings. Paul informs us that Christ was "touched with the feeling of our infirmities," for he was "in all points tempted like as we are." (Hebrew 4:15.) Perhaps a deep personal understanding of these temptations is necessary before we can understand and effectively influence others.

Many who are sorely tried and tempted before their baptisms think that such temptations will cease once they have been baptized. To their surprise, however, they discover that the temptations often increase, although they may change in character. Being a disciple of Christ does not stop temptations from coming. The greater the growth, the more subtle the temptation.

Yet we are told that we are never tempted beyond our capacity to endure and overcome, so no one can say he or she was forced or seduced by a temptation. Such a person chose to give in. Moreover, there is always a way to escape the temptation, if there is a belief and will to do so. God is faithful and will provide the way: "There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." ( [^2].)

Let us now consider each of the temptations that came to the Savior, which also come to all of us.

The first temptation. Consider very carefully these words: "Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." ( [^3].)

What is the nature of this temptation and of the Savior's response to it? Put briefly, could it not be stated flesh versus the spirit? Is it the temptation of appetite, of bodily longings, of what is physiologically based?

Flesh versus the spirit . . . After forty days and forty nights of fasting, the Savior must have been very weakened and incredibly hungry. Satan knew this and appealed to the Savior's appetite by pointing to little limestones somewhat resembling a Jewish loaf of bread, saying, "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." But the Savior would not subject himself to the tauntings and directions of Satan. His spirit ruled his flesh, and his spirit was subject to every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God, his Father.

Each of us faces temptations of appetite or of bodily longings. There are many. Let's consider two of them: First, food. Many people today are literally slaves to their stomachs! Their stomachs control their minds and their spirits rather than being subject to their minds and spirits. To eat to excess or to gorge oneself is gluttony, which is a perversion of a God-given appetite. To knowingly take things into the body that are harmful or addictive or that simply put on weight is foolishness. It betokens again the control of the stomach or the taste buds or whatever you might call the flesh.

Considered in this light, gluttony or the ingestion of harmful substances obviously doesn't hurt just the body—it also hurts the spirit. It becomes a spiritual matter; and to the Lord all things are spiritual, and all of his laws and commandments are spiritual: "Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created. Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual." ( [^4].)

How great is the wisdom in the Word of Wisdom, found in Section 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants! Particularly is this so in our affluent society, with an overabundance of things to eat and to satisfy the cravings of the body. Many researchers and nutrition experts and doctors believe that many more people in America die of overeating than of hunger. "I saw few die of hunger—of eating, a hundred thousand." (Benjamin Franklin.)

I know very well the effect of overeating on the spirit, for I have learned for myself that when I overindulge, I lose sensitivity to the needs of others. I become angry with myself and sense the tendency to take that anger out on others at the earliest provocation. Sir Walter Scott puts my learning succinctly: "He who indulges his sense in any excesses, renders himself obnoxious to his own reason; and to gratify the brute in him, displeases the man, and sets his two natures at variance."

Now let us look at another temptation of the appetite or bodily longing: sleep. Think about your own situation. How many times do you set the alarm or your mind to get up early, knowing all of the things you have to do in the morning, anxious to get the day organized right, to have a calm and orderly and enjoyable breakfast with the family, to have an unhurried and peaceful scripture reading and a sweet family prayer before sending everyone off? What happens during the night so that when the alarm does go off, your good resolves seem to dissolve? Mind versus mattress! Often the mattress wins. You find yourself getting up just a little too late, then beginning a frantic, desperate rush to get dressed, to get organized, to get fed and be off. In the spirit of rush, you grow impatient and begin yelling at family members. Nerves get frayed, tempers short; and by the time you get everyone to family prayer, there often just isn't any "prayer spirit" left. And all because of giving in to the temptations of the flesh to sleep in. A chain of unhappy events and sorry consequences often follows not keeping the first resolution of the day. That day may begin and end in defeat.

The extra sleep is hardly ever worth it. In fact, considering the above, such sleep is terribly tiring and exhausting.

But what a difference if you organize and arrange your affairs at night in order to get to bed at a reasonable time. (I find that often the last hour or two before retiring is the most inefficient time of the day and is often spent just fussing around.) Then when the mechanical or mental alarm goes off, you get up, have a private prayer, and then get at the task of preparing for the day. Such an early-morning victory gives a sense of conquering, of overcoming, of mastering, and this sense is good and clean and propels one on to conquer further difficulties. Success begets success, and a day with an early victory over self is on its way to many more.

The second temptation. Ask yourself as you read about the second temptation, what its nature is: "Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." ( [^5].)

The Jews expected their Messiah to come in great power and glory and to dramatically right the wrongs perpetuated on their nation. If only Satan could get the true Messiah to fulfill their wants, their expectations, how he could frustrate and thwart the purposes of God!

And again the taunting "If thou be the Son of God"—the desire to prove himself, to demonstrate his superior power, to call angels from heaven to bear him up. What an appeal to vanity and to pride!

What is the nature of this temptation? I suggest it might be put in these terms: appearances vs. reality. In other words, pretending to be vs. being.

The Lord knew who he was. He had a divine definition of himself. It was given to him by his Father—in fact, just before his temptations. At the time of his baptism, the Father confirmed to his beloved Son how pleased he was with him: "Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: and lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." ( [^6].)

If our definition or concept of ourselves comes from what others think of us, we will find ourselves gearing our lives to their wants and their expectations; and the more we live in terms of what others expect of us, the more insecure we will become. Expectations change. Opinion is fickle. One person or one group may expect certain things, while another individual or group expects other things. Whom should you please? The teenage son may desire to please both his parents and the peer group to which he seeks belonging, but they demand different things; they hold different standards. If he is true to one, he is untrue to the other; but if he learns to pretend or to put on appearances, he might be able to get by, so he thinks. However, in the long run he discovers that by trying to become all things to all people, he eventually is discovered for what he is, and he loses the respect of others as well as of himself. The only sure anchor to personal security is in God and in God's definition of man.

Consider anger or hatred or envy or jealousy or most any other negative emotion or passion, and you will discover that their roots lie in the desire to be accepted, approved, and esteemed of those who are alienated from the things of God. Thus the temptation to pretend or to appear to be.

The tendency to cram in school or to take a shortcut is a form of appearing or pretending to be a good student. The reality or truth of the matter is that there is no shortcut. The student needs to obey the law of the harvest, but in order to please everyone (teachers, parents, friends), he or she searches for a shortcut to "beat the system."

Once a student visited me in my office to ask how he was doing in the class. After developing some rapport, I confronted him directly: "You didn't really come in to find out how you were doing in the class. You came in to find out how I thought you were doing. You really know how you are doing in the class far better than I do, don't you?"

He acknowledged meekly that he did, and so I asked him, "Just how are you doing?"

He admitted that he was trying to get by. He had a host of reasons and excuses for not studying as he ought and for taking the shortcut, and he came in to see if this was working (if he had "psyched" me out, as it's put).

Satan tempted Christ to appear in all his power and glory to prove himself and to thwart the divine plan. Christ did not come to prove himself, for he already knew who he was. Instead, he came to teach others that they needed to change, to repent, and that they could not rely upon their Messiah to change outside things for them. They didn't want this. They didn't like it, but they needed it.

If people go on long enough playing roles or pretending, giving in to their vanity and to their pride, they will gradually deceive themselves. They will find themselves frequently buffeted and threatened by various circumstances and people and will then fight to maintain their false front.

But if they come to accept the reality or truth about themselves and then follow line on line and precept upon precept the laws and principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, living always the law of the harvest, they will gradually develop (receive) a divine definition or concept of themselves.

The effort to keep up with the Joneses puts one on a treadmill that only seems to go faster and faster, almost like chasing a shadow. But it will never satisfy. To build one's security on good looks or fashionable clothing or possessions or status symbols or anything vain and prideful will prove to be a snare and the undoing of that person. Edwin Hubbel Chapin said: "Fashion is the science of appearances, and it inspires one with the desire to seem rather than to be."

Perhaps we could call the second temptation one of passion or emotions, as contrasted to the first temptation, the appeal to the appetites. If we lose our temper, we are controlled by the emotion of anger. What a tyrant to be ruled by! Nothing good could ever come by it. Even the Savior, before he cast the money changers out of the temple, braided his whip; he was in full control of himself in the exercise of his righteous indignation.

We need to concern ourselves only with the truth about ourselves from the Lord's point of view. We should be interested in others' opinions and perceptions so that we might learn to be more effective with them, but we need to refuse to accept their opinion as a fact and then act or react accordingly. When others ask or pressure us to be someone we are not, we need to remember the Lord's temptation and his response to Satan, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God!"

The third temptation. Consider what the thrust of the third temptation is: "Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." ( [^7].)

Here Satan is dealing with mortal desires or motives. Here he appeals to our love of power and wealth, to our desire for position and domain.

Let us term this temptation aspiration vs. consecration. By aspiration I mean the seeking for one's own glory, the "what's in it for me" attitude. By consecration I mean seeking for God's glory, the attitude of "how can I best serve?"

Consecrated people have given or dedicated all they have or ever will have to the Lord's purposes. They look on their time, talents, and possessions as stewardships—ones for which they are to give an honest accounting from time to time. Nothing is their own, in this sense. Everything is the Lord's, even their own children. They are agents—the Lord is their principal—and they seek only to serve God's purposes.

Aspiring individuals are deeply concerned with their own things. They even regard their children as possessions and often attempt to wrest from them the kind of behavior that will win more popularity and esteem in the eyes of others. This kind of possessive love is destructive. Instead of being agents or stewards, they see themselves as principals and become laws unto themselves. They then interpret everything in life in terms of what it will do for them, and everybody, in a sense, becomes a competitor. Their relationships, even close, intimate ones, tend to be competitive rather than cooperative. They use various methods of manipulation to achieve their ends, such as threat, fear, bribery, and pressure, for they are unable to learn the lesson that the only real power and honor that have enduring quality come from obeying the principles of righteousness.

"Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—that the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." ( [^8].)

The Lord was a perfect model of the consecrated life. He refused Satan's appeal to love of power and wealth and reaffirmed his commitment to follow the will of the Father. In the Sermon on the Mount he clearly taught that serving two masters—that is, seeking both your own glory and the Lord's glory—is impossible. It is like trying to walk east and west at the same time. We can see this, perhaps, in all of us. Until we acquire the spirit of service and consecration, we might say we love the Church, but inwardly we might despise the demands the Church makes on our own lives and conveniences. We often try to escape from these demands, even moving on occasion, only to find the home teachers and the bishopric visiting us again: "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." ( [^9].)

The apostle James put the matter squarely: "A double minded man is unstable in all his ways." ( [^10].) Double-mindedness is having two conflicting motives or interests. It inevitably sets us at war within ourselves, and under storm conditions this internal civil war breaks out into war with others. "From whence come wars and fighting among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts." [^11].)

The opposite of double-mindedness is self-unity or integrity. When we control, know, and unify ourselves in all our feelings and desires to the Lord's cause, this is integrity. This is sincerity, "with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent." ( [^12].) This is a person who lives what he or she teaches. This is the Son of God, who said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." ( [^13].) He didn't just say this is the truth. He said, "I am the truth." He is our exemplar and our model, and he tells us to become like him, to be perfect even as he and our Father in heaven are perfect. (See [^14].) To achieve this is a very real possibility and arises through the consecration of ourselves to his divine purpose—that is, to selfless gospel service of others.

President McKay taught regarding these three temptations:

Nearly every temptation that comes to you and me comes in one of those forms. Classify them, and you will find that under one of those three, nearly every given temptation that makes you and me "spotted," ever so little as it may be, comes to us as: (1) a temptation of the appetite; (2) a yielding to the pride and fashion and vanity of those alienated from the things of God; or (3) a gratifying of the passion or a desire for the riches of the world or power among men. ("Individual Righteousness the Strength of the Church," Instructor, September 1962, p. 290.)

How instructive to understand that these three temptations of the Savior are also the same temptations that come to us! This very understanding yields power to resist, to conquer, and to overcome. For instance, if we find ourselves in situations in our everyday affairs where, by compromising slightly our integrity, we would seem to gain in position or power or influence or esteem, we can then look within and sense that these are temptations. Once we see them clearly as temptations, we can then marshal our wills to resist them. When we know that our tendency to be gluttonous, for example, is not just a little foible of our human nature but a real giving in to fundamental temptations, we are encouraged to conquer and be the master of ourselves.

Relationship of the Three Temptations to Each Other

The practical implications for our personal lives of understanding the relationships between the three temptations are tremendous.

I may be oversimplifying, but I have come to believe that until we conquer to a considerable extent the first temptation, we will be unable to conquer the second one; that is, unless we acquire control of our appetites, our flesh, our bodies, we will not be able to control our passions and our emotions and place them in subjection to our spirit. Similarly, unless we conquer the second temptation to a considerable extent, we will be unable to successfully consecrate ourselves. We will, instead, find ourselves victims of our passions and thereby would naturally yield to the temptation of seeking or aspiring to our own glory in the form of wealth and dominion, prestige and power.

Yet, in another sense, all of us face all three temptations simultaneously, and we must work (resist and overcome) at all three levels.

Conquering the first temptation, at least to a large extent, is possible without conquering the second or the third; similarly, conquering the first and the second temptations, to a considerable extent, is possible without consecrating ourselves to the Lord's cause and to his value system. We have known of great athletes who have amazing discipline over their bodies, who have trained and developed their bodies so as to be able to do almost Herculean feats of skill and speed, and yet in other areas of their lives they lack discipline. As students, they lack the disciplined power to mentally concentrate and achieve in their studies. Others are highly volatile and temperamental.

We have also seen people who have, to a considerable extent, acquired a great mental and emotional discipline. They have learned to concentrate and discipline their minds and school their feelings so as to create and accomplish fantastically. I have met many such individuals and feel enormous respect for their self-discipline, intellectual prowess, and emotional control. Yet, by their own admission, they are not consecrated to the Lord's purposes and the doing of his will, but they have instead consecrated themselves to their own causes and their own glory—in other words, to laying up for themselves "treasures on earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal." ( [^15].) Their aspiring self-control focuses upon temporal rather than eternal pursuits and values.

Yet I have never known a person who was thoroughly consecrated to the Lord's purposes who had not also control of his or her own passions and appetites. Have you?

I have taken the opportunity in the last several months to read and reread many of the sermons, messages, and articles of President David O. McKay. Again I am impressed with what seems to me to be a dominant theme he constantly emphasized: We need to rise above the physical, the animal existence, through the conquering of our appetites and our passions and to live a spiritual existence. President McKay defined spirituality, in part, as "a consciousness of victory over self."

I will never forget one of the missionaries in the Irish Mission. When he first came out, and for several weeks, he followed a slovenly, irresponsible, undisciplined, and selfish pattern. He seemed to lack control of anything about himself. He was a slave not only to his appetites, but also to his tongue and temper. Sleep itself became a form of escape from accepting the responsibilities of missionary work. If his companion slept in, he would sleep in. He was unable to concentrate in his study, to memorize scriptures, to master the teaching discussions. He resented tracting, using the excuse that he hated to intrude himself into other people's lives. He gorged himself at every chance and grew overweight and sloppy.

With all of this you would naturally expect him to have relationship problems with any companion who refused to take the course of least resistance. Such was the case. His hair-trigger temper flashed again and again, snapping and biting and wounding. When I counseled with him regarding these problems, he often became softened and open and teachable, and he would express an eagerness and determination to conquer these tendencies and to be a good missionary. Yet again and again, under various stresses, he found himself unable or at least unwilling to keep his resolves.

One day, after weeks of counseling, he asked me to transfer him to a new area and assign him to a new companion. The relationship he had with his present companion was so poor he was afraid of what he might do in a fit of anger. Up to that point I had listened attentively to him and counseled him to learn to be kind, to obey, and to give himself to the work. Then I began to realize that I was asking him to conquer the third temptation before he had conquered the first and that perhaps this was somewhat similar to expecting children to walk before they could crawl, or for students to conjugate verbs before they could even distinguish between verbs and nouns.

I decided to change the approach of my counsel and to focus heavily on the first temptation, the first level, by encouraging him to master his flesh. I knew he wasn't getting up regularly at 5:55 in the morning when the missionaries were expected to, so I asked him if he would do this every morning for one full month. His response was most interesting. He said, "I came to talk to you about my companion and my problems with him, and here you tell me to get up at 5:55."

I replied, "Let's get to work at conquering the flesh first, and then later you'll deal with these emotions and your relationships. Will you get up at 5:55 for one full month?"

He answered, "I am nor really sure I can."

I told him not to make a promise unless he knew he would keep it, and that if he wasn't sure he could keep it for a full month, could he keep it for a week? He said he was sure he could do that, and he made a commitment.

What a beaming face after a week! He was thrilled with his achievement. However small it may appear to others, to him he had overcome a major obstacle. I congratulated him on his integrity, and we then determined on the next step, which was to continue getting up at that time but also to put in two-and-a-half hours of solid individual and companion study in the morning. He didn't think he could do this, for his mind was so undisciplined it would constantly jump from one thing to another. Most any and every interruption distracted him. So I directed, "All right, then merely commit yourself to sit there and to try, but do not get up."

Several days later I was able to commend him again. Then we moved to the next step, that of getting out and beginning tracting each morning at 9:30. He honored the commitments, and he grew in a sense of integrity and honor. Little by little, line upon line, he acquired control over his flesh. His consciousness of victory over himself became such a thrilling thing to him that he started to get up at 5:30 in the morning so that he might have a little more time to study. He began to develop self-power over his tongue, which was also part of his body. Even though he often felt anger and jealousy, he held his tongue. He didn't say the nasty things he had said before.

Gradually he experienced an increase in his power to study and to concentrate in his prayers, to express the feelings of his heart. He sought God's blessings upon his emotions so that he would acquire the power to control them, to subject them to God's spirit. He had no more companion or relationship problems.

To make a long story short, he became one of the most powerful and influential teaching missionaries in the entire field. He became highly esteemed and respected because of his selflessness and his tendency to go the second mile in serving others. When he was put into a top leadership position in the mission, his example and spirituality were so well-known and esteemed that the zone over which he presided immediately leaped forward in application and dedication and shortly thereafter in accomplishment.

How absolutely inspiring it was to witness this transformation, this second birth! I am convinced the same principle holds in many of our lives. If we could merely be strong in certain of the hard moments, then when other temptations come, we would be amazed at the reserve strength we would have to face them. I believe that most of us are struggling with some of these problems and that if we would begin by conquering some of the basic appetites first, we would be amazed at the power we would develop to accurately discern and conquer higher-level temptations.

A great many men and women, for one reason or another, have a tendency to overeat and thus are rather heavy. It makes many of them feel self-conscious and ugly, and it depresses their entire spirit. What an emotional and spiritual transformation would begin to take place if they could get back to normal weight through a strict program of self-mastery. They would not only look better, but they would also feel better and would thereby treat others better. They would grow in a "consciousness of victory over self." And with this increased power, they would have the capacity to do many other things they have only longed to do before.

In the mission field we had a motto that focused on this entire concept: "Until you can say, 'I am my master,' you cannot say, 'I am thy servant.' " A missionary or any one of us might profess to be a servant of the Lord, and we might feel sincere in that particular moment, but under the right pressure or stress, we might find ourselves controlled by a particular passion or appetite. We lose our temper. We become jealous or envious or lustful or slothful. Then we feel guilty. We make promises and break them; we make resolutions and break them. We gradually lose faith in our own capacities to make any professions or promises, or we do so only mechanically. Despite our profession to be the Lord's servants, we become the servants or slaves of whatever masters us.

This reminds me of the plea of Richard Rich to Thomas More in the movie A Man for All Seasons. Richard Rich admired More's honesty and integrity and wanted to be employed by him. He asked, "Employ me."

More answered, "No."

Again Rich pleaded, "Employ me," and again the answer was no.

Then Rich made this pitiful yet endearing promise: "Sir Thomas, employ me. I would be faithful to you."

Sir Thomas, knowing what really mastered Richard Rich, answered, "Richard, you can't even so much as answer for yourself tonight," meaning "You might profess to me faithfulness now, but all it will take is a different circumstance, the right bribe or pressure, and you will find yourself so controlled by your pride, your spleen, your vain ambition, that you could not be faithful to me." Sir Thomas More's prognosis came to pass that very night, for Richard Rich betrayed him!

The real key to growth is to learn to make promises and to keep them. In the ordinances of the gospel, the Lord has provided magnificent opportunities for promises or covenants. He himself enters into the covenants and promises to give us his spirit and power if we are true to our covenant. I believe that daily prayer is the most appropriate time to renew in a very private way our promises or covenants.

We must never make a promise or a covenant we do not intend to keep. If we can't make the larger ones, then we should begin by making the smaller ones. But we must begin somewhere to conquer temptations and unworthy habits.

I think most of us need to start with acquiring control over our bodies. We know in our minds what we need to do. Our problem is not a lack of knowledge—it is habit. The body is sacred—it is the house in which the spirit lives. Paul, the apostle, called it a temple: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." ( [^16].)

I tend to believe that through the power of the Savior's atonement and resurrection, we will participate in resurrecting ourselves, but until the spirit has control over the flesh, the spirit body may be unable to go to the grave and pick up the flesh and unite with it. We are told that those who will come with the Savior in his second coming are the "dead in Christ" and those who will rise in the air to meet him are those who are sanctified and holy. (See [^17], [^18].) Elsewhere, the apostle John tells us that those who inherit all things are those who "overcometh" ( [^19])—meaning, as I understand it, they overcome the flesh and the world. With God's help they become their own masters. Only then can their submission to the mastery of the Lord be fully complete and whole. The Savior himself, when he delivers up the kingdom and presents it unto the Father spotless, will say: "I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God." ( [^20].)

Through study of the scriptures and the teachings of our modern prophets, we learn that apparently our first and most basic stewardship is our bodies. To acquire bodies was one of the main purposes of our coming to earth, and we are then to use our bodies as divine instruments to perfect and train our spirits until our spirits have the full control and mastery of our bodies under the direction of the Holy Spirit.

I will never forget hearing one of our Church leaders report to a congregation counsel he gave to a brother who had lived in deep sin for a long period of time, to the effect that he should be very careful to take no chances or risks of an accident because his body was so important in the overcoming of his sins and in making a full and complete repentance. He presented the idea that it would be infinitely more difficult to repent of sins of the body, in the spirit world, without a body.

Perhaps a sense of the buffetings of Satan is to be in the spirit world without a body yet possess the same disposition and character weaknesses there as in mortality, to have all of the appetites and desires and passions but without the instrument of expression. The controls would not lie in the spirit, but in the body, which is in the grave. What a hell this would be!

We need to conquer the first temptation first and continue working to conquer all unworthy passions, feelings, and emotions until we can realistically and deeply mean our consecration of ourselves to the Church and to God's divine purposes. If I do not honor the stewardship over my own flesh, how could I possibly honor my stewardship as a husband or wife, or father or mother, or any other role in the kingdom of God!

Some Practical Exercises

All individuals must strive to know themselves, that is, to know some of their tendencies and propensities and weaknesses, as well as their strengths and capacities. On this understanding and with some spiritual motivation, they can build a practical program of self-mastery. They will find, as they begin to control themselves, their appetites, and their passions, that their knowledge of themselves will also increase. The following steps may help in a program of self-mastery: First, whenever you set your alarm to get up, get up, regardless of how you might feel at the time. Second, have a program of daily exercise that is geared to your own general health and capacity. Third, practice moderation in diet and fasting. (It is easier for some to fast than to eat moderately.) "The worst education that teaches self-denial is better than the best that teaches everything else and nor that." (John Sterling.)

In regard to the second level, or the second temptation, I have found that the exercise of patience and understanding is a cardinal principle, one that helps fashion and develop other gospel virtues, including sincerity of life. If we will exercise patience when we are tempted to become critical or angered, we will find that many other things will fall into place.

At the third level, in dealing with the third temptation, I stress two exercises: first, the habit of daily scripture study and meditation leading to some private commitments in prayer to live by the principles of righteousness that day; and second, anonymously serving others and "going the second mile," which involves magnifying a church or priesthood calling. Such service flows out of the spirit of consecration and also feeds and reinforces that spirit so that we do the right things for the right reasons.

The essential element in overcoming all three temptations and in "practicing" the exercises given above is self-denial. "The secret of all success is to know how to deny yourself. Prove that you can control yourself, and you are an educated man; and without this all other education is good for nothing." (Roswell Dwight Hitchcock.)

"One secret act of self-denial, one sacrifice of inclination to duty, is worth all the mere good thoughts, warm feelings, passionate prayers in which idle people indulge themselves." John Henry Newman.)

After the Savior conquered the three temptations, according to the scriptures, "then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him." ( [^21].) When you and I learn to conquer the evil one and his temptations, whether open and blatant or insidious and subtle, then I believe that God's sweet spirit will also come to us and minister to us. Our characters will grow in power, and from this increased strength will emerge the power to resist future temptations and to work more righteousness.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Nature of Relationships
[^2] The Root Cause of Breakdowns in Relationships
[^3] The Root Solution in Building and in Healing Broken Relationships.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
