Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

4

Life's Central Challenge: Building Relationships

All relationships are interwoven with each other. To graphically illustrate:

From the illustration, observe that your relationship with yourself (3) both affects and is influenced by your relationships with God (1), your family (2), and others (4). There is an interdependency here. Conversely, your relationship with God (1) is based on your relationships with yourself (3), your family (2), and others (4). To sense the interdependency, ponder these scriptures: "Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." ( [^1].) "The second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." ( [^2].) "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." ( [^3].)

It is also true that your ability to get along well with others (4) flows naturally from how well you are getting along with yourself (3), from your own internal peace and harmony, which is itself a function of your peace with God (1) and your family (2).

The family is singled out, first, because of its preeminence throughout all eternity among other relationships, and second, because it involves a different and often more intense set of forces, problems, expectations, and challenges than found in relationships with others.

It's senseless to work on one relationship without working on them all. Let's think through an example. To grow closer to my wife (or husband), to build a richer and deeper respect for her and communication with her, I first need to draw closer to the Lord. The same principles that govern communication between people also apply in communication with the Lord. Between people, there must be a desire to understand and to be understood—so also with prayer. Communication between people must be two way—so also with prayer. A regard (reverence) for the other person's worth and dignity must be felt—so also with prayer.

Now, one step further: to draw closer to the Lord will probably involve making some changes within myself, in my attitudes and behavior. I may need to repent of breaking his laws, which has resulted in a quarrel with my own conscience. I may have taken out my self-anger on my wife or my children in moments of seeing their weaknesses or in other times of stress.

It isn't easy to repent. My pride will stand in the way. I need to ask forgiveness. I'll need to pray more sincerely from the heart and worship with real intent in order to be consistently more kind and less critical, more understanding and less judgmental.

Accomplishing this repentance, I feel better inside—more internal peace, less internal quarreling. I like and respect myself more and find it easier to like others more, to give of myself more freely and spontaneously. I love the Lord more. I'm less defensive and guarded, more open and respectful of my wife's feelings. We become closer.

In other words, to improve any of our relationships involves a simultaneous improvement in them all. How superficial and futile to work on one without working on all other relationships.

Two Relationship Tests

There are two real tests of the strength and quality of any relationship. The first comes under conditions of stress and strain. When all is fine, when the sun is shining, no deep-root relationship structure is required. Appearances seem sufficient, but when the storm breaks, appearances are thrown to the wind, and in the winds that blow, some of us lash out with an ugliness held deep within. We may wound—and wound deeply—the tender, sensitive feelings of our spouses or children or others and thereby teach them to be defensive and guarded against such hurts in the future.

An article once depicted the figure of a little girl, burying her face in her mother's apron and weeping as her mother lashed out her venom and hatred on some black children going into a recently integrated school. A social observer to this scene commented, "That child is not weeping because of the mother's prejudice but out of fear that someday, somehow, some poisonous hatred would be turned on her."

The other test of the quality of relationship is found in the little things of daily life, little courtesies, little acts of kindness, the give and take in little moments. "Men best show their character in trifles, where they are not on their guard. It is in insignificant matters, and in the simplest habits, that we often see the boundless egotism which pays no regard to the feeling of others, and denies nothing to itself." (Arthur Schopenhauer.)

I used to write to new converts in the mission field, inquiring what impressed and touched them so deeply about the gospel and the Church. It's significant that a good percentage were most impressed by two things: first, the love missionary companions showed to each other (one new convert wrote, "I felt I could trust the love they gave me by the respect they showed to each other"); and second, the consistent and unconditional love the missionaries gave the contacts when they were struggling, and even rebelling, under the new demands of the gospel and the social persecution they were experiencing. "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." [^4].)

If the elders had returned unkindness for unkindness, the contacts might have felt justified in dropping the teaching. But how does a good person reject kindness?

Too many human relations formulas are sunshine philosophies, which sound simple and logical and do work when environmental conditions are freed of the "storms of life." But unless they work on the roots, deep within the character makeup of an individual, they only temporarily tranquilize and anesthetize. Then individuals and relations buckle when the real storms move in, whether in the form of money problems, personal role conflicts, social pressures, physical suffering or affliction, or death of a loved one. Many such relationships even struggle in the face of simple, everyday problems, like time pressures, minor household crises, deadlines, conflicting schedules, or disappointing behavior of others.

When these winds blow and rains descend, the relationships built on the sand, with shallow root structures, are buffeted and uprooted. (See [^5].) People may lose their tempers, shout, condemn, criticize, or otherwise take out their hostilities on others. Or they may walk out, withdraw into a numbed indifference, act calloused and uncaring, and seek their satisfactions elsewhere. They may even turn on themselves—self-condemning, self-hating, paralyzed by indecisiveness, fear, guilt. Lashing out and escaping are the two most common reactions of immature people when responsibilities and storms threaten to damage their emotional root structure.

Valuing the Individual

The key in keeping the ninety-nine sheep is in the treatment of the one. Valuing the individual, particularly the unlovable, the obnoxious, the awkward, the "drop out," communicates powerfully and persuasively your sincere regard and loving concern to all the rest (all of whom are unlovable or awkward in some way and who may be on their guard).

In some way each of us is inactive in the Church—whether it be our poor attendance at meetings or our inattention to certain laws, particularly the laws of love as they apply to those who are difficult to love (the ungrateful, the rude, the obnoxious, the pushy, the haughty, and so on). We all need love, understanding, and acceptance; but fearing we may not receive such warmth, we learn to play roles and defend ourselves against being hurt, to guard our communication, to pretend and stand behind facades, to elevate ourselves above others by judging them. Because of this unlovable behavior pattern, we do not "receive" the love we need, even though given.

Sarcastically cut one of your children, and all will fear your sarcasm. Gossip with your friend about another, and the first storm on your seeming friendship may uproot it. Make fun of another, sarcastically dig at a weakness, belittle someone's sincere effort, laugh at someone's weakness, and you'll sow the seeds of destruction in all of your relationships. It may take some real storms to forcibly teach you this truth.

We simply cannot violate a true principle toward one without doing so toward all, any more than we can pray sincerely to God and be insincere to his other children. Just as an injury or infection in any organ or limb of the human body affects the well-being and feeling of the entire person, so it is with relationships.

We must all hold two pulses simultaneously—God's and man's. We can never serve man's deepest needs without God. Neither do we serve God and his purposes without serving his children in his way. Am I really feeling the pulse of the Lord—praying to him, receiving his Spirit, understanding his ways and designs—if I am unloving, critical, and judging of his children?

This truth became so clear in the mission field. Those missionaries who claimed to be close to the Lord but were not to their companions and contacts served neither the Lord nor his children. They began to use the gospel, like the praying Pharisee, as a tool for judgment and rejection and self-justification. Some of their opinions were right, but their spirits were wrong. Their unloving use of the religion of love distorted their perspectives, destroyed their effectiveness, and increasingly isolated them.

Some claimed to be close to the people, but were not to the Lord. Mistaking wants for needs, they became popular social friends with their contacts or the Saints but never really lifted lives. There was no vision, no strength in committing the people to repent and obey, no giving the bread of life to hungry souls.

Unless we hold the pulse of both heaven and earth, of God and man, learning from both, appreciating and loving both (with God first), we hold neither. There is no power, no influence, no life in truth without love. There is no vision, no lifting power, no conviction, no light in life without truth. Our greatest role in relationships is to be a light, not a judge.

Relationship problems begin within the individual.

When Adam and his posterity were cut off from the presence of God for transgression, man's insecurity began. Whenever I or you sin against the light we've been given, we become estranged from God and his spirit. Further, we become split within and lose our wholeness and unity, our integrity. We feel insecure.

We read and hear a great deal on how to overcome insecurity and inferiority and how to acquire confidence and peace within. But which of these well-intentioned philosophers, scientists, or commercial advice-givers work on the roots? Who, among them, literally believe in and teach of the human soul, of God and his laws and plan of life, of the effect of sin on personality and relationships, of the role of Christ, the one appointed to be the Savior of the human soul, the only ultimate source of personal security?

A correct understanding of the nature of man as a dual being is absolutely vital in giving an accurate understanding of and counsel on overcoming insecurity and developing genuine self-confidence. President McKay taught:

Man is a dual being; and his life, a plan of God. Man has a natural body and a spiritual body. Man's body is but the tabernacle in which his spirit dwells. Too many, far too many, are prone to regard the body as the man, and consequently to direct their efforts to the gratifying of the body's pleasures, its appetites, its desires, its passions. Too few recognize that the real man is an immortal spirit, which [is] "intelligence or the light of truth," animated as an individual entity before the body was begotten, and that this spiritual entity with all its distinguishing traits will continue after the body ceases to respond to its earthly environment. ("Resisting Evil and Gaining the Abundant Life in a Selfish World," Instructor, April 1965, p. 122.)

Inherent within our souls is a longing to return to our Creator, the Father of us all, and also the propensity to believe and to obey the laws that blessed reward is predicated upon. Disobedience and rebellion create a deep split within human nature, between body, mind, and spirit. This might be termed self-alienation and is the root or fundamental cause of relationship breakdowns and most human problems. What many call insecurity is alienation or separation from God, our Father, caused by transgression.

This includes the transgressions of others as well as ourselves. How we are treated by others as human beings has a powerful influence, though not controlling, on how we think, feel, and behave. From others and traditions, we may learn false values and false principles. Our culture and models may teach us to exploit and manipulate relationships, to defend and to hurt before being hurt, to suspect and doubt, to pretend and to take shortcuts, to throw off the straitjacket of "outmoded" moral codes, to gratify our appetites and selfish desires at the expense of others, if necessary.

But over and above negative cultural determinants is the light of Christ, our conscience, which prompts us regarding God's moral laws. If we listen to and follow it, more light comes. Gradually we become increasingly freed from the effects of our environment. We all know of individuals who have risen above their environments. Christ, our great exemplar, overcame all things and declared, "I have overcome the world." ( [^6].)

If, on the other hand, we ignore or disobey the light of Christ (our conscience) by following the ways of the world, our internal world gradually deteriorates. President McKay taught of the effect transgression has on the human soul.

You may cheat your fellow men and apparently for awhile succeed, but nature is never deceived. She credits and debits according to merit; for here in this old world the law of retribution is just as constant as the law of compensation.

The same condition exists in the moral world. You cannot violate a moral principle without suffering the consequences. The world may not know of the violation but there are two beings who do know it. One is God, and one is he who perpetrates the deed. In that connection Charles Kingsley has aptly said: "The more I know intimately the lives of other men, to say nothing of my own, the more obvious is it to me that the wicked do not flourish nor is the righteous punished. The ledger of the Almighty is strictly kept and every one of us has the balance of his operations paid over to him at the end of every minute of his existence. The absolute justice of the system of things is as clear to me as any scientific fact. The gravitation of sin to sorrow is as certain as that of the earth to the sun; and more so, for experimental truth of that fact is within the reach of all, nay, is before us all in our lives, daily if we have the eyes to see it.". . .

If law is operative in the physical, intellectual, and moral world; it is also operative in the spiritual world. Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, has given us laws—fundamental and eternal—by obedience to which we might enjoy abundant life, might keep the spirit free, and gain complete mastery over all things physical. ("Law of Compensation, of Retribution Constantly Operative," Instructor, March 1963, p. 78.)

Roots of Strife and Prejudice

A breakdown or split within the individual translates itself into every relationship and becomes clearly evident in times of storm. James explains that war and strife among people stem from the war within, from lust, jealousy, selfish ambition, hatred. (See [^7].)

If we possess no internal security and if we feel no external security in a fickle world—nothing fixed—what can we depend upon? Too often, I fear, we take either the route of living for appearances, which only feeds the fires of envy and covetousness, or the route of freezing our views and opinions and conclusions. This freezes our internal world and, to a degree, provides a modicum of security, something fixed or anchored to depend upon.

This is one form and one cause of prejudice. Prejudice means prejudgment or judgment of people, events, or causes before understanding them. Understanding requires openness, sincere listening, and empathy. But these efforts carry a risk insecure people can barely afford, the risk of changing, of modifying judgments, of unfreezing within, creating again the problem of having nothing fixed to feel secure with. Yet we all know that understanding is the basis of communication and harmonious cooperative relationships. Look carefully at your own human relation problems to discover how many of these problems grew from making judgments before really understanding.

To judge someone before understanding that person is a form of human rejection and feeds upon itself. It intensifies personal insecurities, necessitating more judgment (prejudice) and less understanding. The processes continue in this vicious cycle.

Accepting Christ and his atoning sacrifice is the root solution to self-alienation or personal insecurity, to estranged relationships with others, in addition to reconciliation between God and man.

Atonement means at-one-ment. The atonement and resurrection of Christ are the most transcendently important events in all human history and profoundly affect all human life and all relationships. Every principle of the gospel becomes efficacious only in and through the suffering and sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ.

You ask: You mean to say my relationship with myself and my relationships with my spouse and children and others are founded on my accepting the atonement of the Savior? I mean exactly that. To my understanding, the Fall and the Atonement are intimately connected with the development or deterioration of human personality and human relationships.

To understand how the Atonement profoundly influences relationships, consider how we receive the transcendent gift of Christ and his atonement. Though we are all given the gift, unless we receive the gift, we rejoice "not in that which is given unto [us], neither [rejoice] in him who is the giver of the gift." ( [^8].)

To receive the gift of the Atonement, we must first place our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ instead of on the "arm of flesh" ( [^9]), which includes our learning, possessions, position, and ability. Second, we must repent of our sins, as evidenced by confessing and forsaking them. Third, we must enter into sacred covenants at the waters of baptism and renew them in the sacrament. Fourth, we must receive the Holy Ghost, which is the baptism of spirit or fire and which burns out the dross and gives us a new birth, a new mind, and a changed and pure heart.

These endeavors are not easy or mechanical. Great and consistent physical, mental, and spiritual effort is required.

Merely an appreciation of the social ethics of Jesus, however, is not sufficient. Men's hearts must be changed. . . . Force and compulsion will never establish the ideal society. This can come only by a transformation within the individual soul—a life brought into harmony with the divine will. We must be "born again.". . . Christ is the light to humanity. In that light man sees his way clearly. When it is rejected, the soul of man stumbles in darkness. No person, no group, no nation can achieve true success without following him who said:

"I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." ( [^10].) (David O. McKay, General Conference, October 1961, pp. 7-8.)

For a person to go through this gospel process necessitates subduing and overcoming the appetites and desires of the physical body, thus bringing a unity and harmony between the physical body and the spiritual body. President McKay wrote about Christ as the example of self-mastery: "From the 40 days' fast on the mount of temptation to the moment on the cross when He cried in triumph, 'It is finished,' Christ's life was a divine example of subduing and overcoming."

Having mastered our bodies and minds and placed them in subjection to our spirits, we then place our spirits in subjection to and harmony with God's spirit. Through continued obedience to the laws and principles of the gospel and through consecration to his divine purposes, a deep unity and integrity gradually develop inside. Harmony and real personal security replace estrangement and insecurity. In the very process of nurturing our faith in him through obedience, study, prayer, faith, confession, repentance, covenants, and service, we gradually inculcate his qualities into our characters until we become "partakers of the divine nature." (See [^11].) Christ literally is the healer, the unifier, the Savior of the soul. He was the only one so appointed. There is no other way. (See [^12], [^13].)

Marriage and Christ

Why is the Atonement so important to your marriage? No relationship is so demanding as marriage. To properly fulfill the divine purpose of marriage, which is to bring spirits into the world and rear them in the nurture of the Lord, will require the utmost in self-discipline, self-sacrifice, courage, love, humility, and integrity (self-unity). Again, Christ taught, "I am the way." He was the perfect example of these character traits and instructed us to follow in his footsteps. In addition, the very nature of the process of receiving the divine gift of the Atonement develops these character traits.

Significantly, there is no permanent marriage outside the gospel of Jesus Christ. Why is an eternal marriage found only in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom? I believe it is because a truly successful marriage, which can sustain any storm, must be a three-way divine partnership. The Savior and his atonement are the foundation of this harmonious partnership, this beautiful marriage. He is the Savior of the family relationship as well as of the individual soul.

So it is with our relations with others. Again, he is "the way." We forgive because he forgave. We love him because he first loved us. He suffered for us incomprehensibly and described such suffering in a modern revelation. ( [^14].)

Don't his suffering and love draw you to him and our Father in heaven and to all his other children? Once drawn to him, and once born of him, we gain the security that comes from within, not from without—not from what others think of us, not from our social stations or our material possessions, which provide no real security at all. Therefore, anchored to light and truth, we can accept the risks of understanding and loving freely, nondefensively, without prejudging or asking for something in return.

To improve your relationships, don't look to others to change and don't look to easy, step-by-step shortcuts or sunshine formulas that do not strike at the roots. Look to yourself. Be honest with yourself first—the roots of your problems are spiritual. So also, therefore, are the root solutions. The key lies in your own heart: "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." ( [^15].)

You are called to be a light, not a judge. Build your own character and relationships on the light of this world. Build your home and family around him. "Remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall descend forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." ( [^16].)

---
Notas:
[^1] The Nature of Relationships
[^2] The Root Cause of Breakdowns in Relationships
[^3] The Root Solution in Building and in Healing Broken Relationships.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
