Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

5

Conversion: The Divine Miracle

The prophets Ezekiel and Jeremiah wrote of the divine miracle of conversion: "I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh: that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God." ( [^1].) "I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people." ( [^2].)

Not infrequently we hear faith-promoting stories of dramatic spiritual manifestations, of sudden, miraculous healings, of special inspiration and direction in times of need and decision. These are glorious, confirming blessings vital in the Lord's work today. Yet, it is my conviction that the divine purpose behind the gifts of the spirit and the greater manifestations of the Holy Ghost are largely fulfilled in the silent, peaceful, almost imperceptible workings upon the heart and mind of the person who is striving to know, to obey, and to love the Lord of life.

I fear that in our study of God and his dealings with us, we focus on the special, the sudden, the dramatic, and overlook his silent, natural, gradual workings within the breast of each individual who surrenders his or her will to a higher will.

We live in a shortcut world. Cities and human organizations are built apart from nature and are often governed by artificial rather than natural law. Can you imagine a farmer "cramming" in the fall to bring forth the harvest, as students have done, and still do, to pass examinations? Can you imagine a distance runner pretending speed and endurance, or a concert pianist putting on the appearance of skill and proficiency? Obviously there is no shortcut, no "something for nothing" in farming or in developing a physical skill.

Yet when it comes to internal emotional and spiritual growth, we often apply the shortcut lessons of an artificial social world where we cram and pretend, get by on appearances or glib tongues, and literally think we do get something for nothing. I have observed scores of missionaries come into the mission field, many with a "shortcut mentality" of wanting something for nothing or for very little. As the realities of mission life bore down, such missionaries often felt a period of frustration, disappointment, and a desire for escape. The "shortcut artists" simply cannot get by on good looks, fashionable clothing, clever talk, or past achievements. There is no way to "cram" someone into conversion, no pretending good discussions. There are no shortcuts anymore.

What a moment of truth! "No shortcuts." "No one to blame but me." "I've got to pay the price." "Got to start right now, with me, a step at a time." For every missionary, teaching and testifying with power and loving with deep sincerity, particularly when the storms break, emerge from deep wellsprings of internal character growth, not from technique or a little knowledge combined with some persuasive and manipulative skills.

To an eager, youthful reformer, Tolstoi said, "Young man, you sweat too much blood for the world; sweat some for yourself first. . . . If you want to make the world better you have to be the best you can. . . . You cannot bring the Kingdom of God into the world until you bring it into your own heart first."

As the missionaries experience their "moment of truth," the divine miracle begins. Gradually, line upon line, precept upon precept, through the days, weeks, and months of giving themselves over to faith and faithfulness, their souls unfold. Spiritual values replace physical and material values and transcend intellectual and social values. The doctrine of the priesthood distills upon their souls "as the dews from heaven" ( [^3]), and the Holy Ghost becomes their companion. Through their devoted service the Lord writes his laws and his love into their lives, "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart." ( [^4].)

Shortly after beginning their labors, many missionaries feel they are leaving the Garden of Eden and going into a cold and dreary world. Their "life" is in their environment. But on departing from the mission field, with changed hearts, they feel they are leaving their Garden of Eden and going back into a cold and dreary world. Christ has become their life and the Light of their lives.

Who would deny this miracle? No missionary who experiences it. Nor would any parent of a missionary. But when does it take place?

The "second birth" and "new life," beginning with baptism, is a gradual, almost imperceptible process for most of us. The Savior said to Nicodemus: "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth; so is every one that is born of the Spirit." [^5].)

I remember asking recently baptized converts if they knew when they had the Holy Ghost and when they did not. The answers, in almost every instance, were unequivocal. They knew they had come out of darkness into light. The contrast was simply too great to deny. And yet few testified to any special signs or unusual manifestations. They knew, for they had felt the pulsation of the Holy Ghost when they heard the missionaries testify and as they gave themselves over to a new, divine way of living.

These examples and experiences stem from the mission field, but the principle behind them is universal and applies to us all, in whatever circumstance we are in. It is the principle of conversion. Conversion means change. Change implies repentance. Perhaps this perspective gives some understanding of the Lord's oft-given instruction to "say nothing but repentance unto this generation." ( [^6]; [^7]; see also 19:21.)

Testimony: Setting Out to Be True

In this process of conversion, which is the divine miracle, we acquire a testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ and his gospel. This kind of knowledge is as different from any other kind as a knowledge of sight differs from a knowledge about sight.

Try sometime to explain to a person who has never experienced sight what it means to see, or to a deaf person what it means to hear. We can communicate facts and ideas, but we cannot convey to a blind or deaf person a true knowledge or understanding of what seeing or hearing really means.

And yet a blind person could make a lifelong study of the eye, the properties of light, the sight process, and become a great expert in the field. He might become so expert as to advise medical doctors who can see. But, in another sense, he would know nothing about sight. Such personal knowledge can come only from personal experience.

This is also true with divine knowledge, which is the kind of knowledge that comes from God to the spirit within man. It does not come from flesh and blood (see [^8]), nor from the reasoning and wisdom of man (see [^9]; [^10]). Rather, it comes from God, as his spirit speaks to the spirit of man. A person could know a great deal about God and yet not know God. A person could understand God's dealings with his children through all dispensations and could impressively recite the principles and doctrines of the gospel and perhaps, from an intellectual standpoint, effectively teach a Sunday School class, yet have little or no personal knowledge about God, the author of it all.

In Ireland we observed the conversion process of hundreds of people, amid struggles, doubts, fears, escapes, and fights. Again and again we came to the conclusion that individuals would know the truth to the degree that they were true to the truth. In other words, we found that people would know that the gospel was restored if they became true to its unique teachings, such as the Word of Wisdom, prayer, tithing, and study. We concluded that people did not really doubt the gospel; rather, they doubted themselves and their own desire and ability to live it.

What a startling discovery! The whole teaching approach changed! Instead of offering more logic, more scripture, more external evidence, in the spirit of love and testimony we asked each to look into his or her own heart, "for out of it are the issues of life." ( [^11].) The key to testimony was right there in the heart.

Some would try to escape from this fundamental responsibility, this reality, by seeking a shortcut or by mere intellectualization, thereby refusing to look within, to repent, to study prayerfully, to seek earnestly, or to pray sincerely from the heart. Others would fight and rebel as Amulek did prior to his conversion: "Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart." ( [^12].)

The Father has promised to grant through the Holy Ghost a witness of the divinity of his Son to anyone who qualifies. The responsibility, then, is upon us to qualify. The Lord is not the one who must make up his mind to communicate. We are the ones who must change and prepare ourselves to receive the communication he has promised.

Once we clearly understand that, as the Lord says, "my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways" ( [^13]); that "the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God" ( [^14]); that "if any man will do [God's] will, he shall know of the doctrine" ( [^15]); then we begin to look within for the key to this learning. We ask, "How sincere am I? Do I really want to know? Am I willing to pay the price to do whatever is necessary in study, prayer, repentance, and service, to qualify."

Many then discover that Christ is not the one—nor the prophets who testify of him—that they doubt. In their sincere introspection they cannot honestly lay the blame upon the Lord for their failure to receive a witness. What they really doubt is their own ability to make themselves worthy. They sense that the obstacle or weakness lies in them.

One investigator wrote, "I doubted whether I really could or even wanted to give up my smoking." Others also acknowledge, in this crisis of self-honesty, that the problem is within themselves—intellectual pride, perhaps, or sensuality, or materialistic desires, or hypocrisy. They see they have failed to gain a testimony of Christ's divinity "because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—that . . . the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." ( [^16].)

Many people do not like this principle because often it implies some agonizing admissions about themselves, and it promises hard effort to bring about personal change. There is no way to shortcut these admissions and these efforts. Self-honesty is not a matter of merely acquiring information while remaining one's old self. The people themselves must change if they are to be able to receive a witness of the divinity of Christ and his restored Church.

This principle threatened the proud hopes of the Jews at the Savior's time, those who looked for a powerful political Messiah to take the responsibility of changing the world so they would not have to change. They were looking for the spectacular. Their Messiah was to display great power and glory in overthrowing the Roman taskmasters and enthroning Israel again. Their Messiah did come—born naturally, in a manger, of a virgin. Instead of bringing a revolution among the nations, he taught of a revolution to take place within the hearts of men and women.

We are too often like these early Jews, expecting others to change, looking for a miracle or manifestation outside ourselves, instead of within. The Savior addressed these Jews directly and taught them this very principle: "Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned? Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." ( [^17].)

But this was too hard a doctrine for the learned Jews, for it demanded that they themselves change. They thought eternal life was in the scriptures, which they could study with their minds and which they could use to justify themselves and judge others. But they would not come to Christ, of whom the scriptures testified, and have life: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life." ( [^18].) With all their pride and double-mindedness, the cost of humility, repentance, and obedience to Christ was simply too great.

Divine knowledge is a function of humility and obedience to the laws of God. The laws of God are simply the natural, divine laws of eternal growth, obedience to which releases the divinity within and perhaps unlocks the contents of a veiled memory of covenants, conviction, and divine knowledge gained before we came into this second estate.

There is no shortcut to this divine knowledge. The something-for-nothing philosophy—learning without obedience, intellectualizing without repentance, thinking without praying, accepting science without Christ—will fail utterly in bringing saving knowledge.

Peter outlines this process of acquiring divine knowledge, or a knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ, whom to know is eternal life (see [^19]). In becoming "partakers of the divine nature," Peter outlines, first, the need for self-denial and self-mastery—"having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust," and second, a diligent effort to develop the divine attributes of God, starting with faith and ending with charity. Net result: "For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." (See [^20]; italics added.)

Both levels of obedience are necessary, the second building on the first. Obeying lower laws builds internal discipline and strength of character and enables the individual to resist the tougher temptations and to obey the higher laws of humility, love, and selfless service. To attempt to develop a divine character without leaving, through strict self-control, the worldly fountains is the height of self-deception. (See [^21].)

When people can honestly say to themselves, "I am my own master," because their spirits have mastered their flesh, they are then fully in the position where they can say to the Lord, "Now I am thy servant." Servants look to their master for direction, guidance, and correction. So also servants of the Lord look to their Master. Therefore, they need living contact with the spirit of the Lord. Generally, the medium of this contact is one's own conscience.

How do people counsel with their conscience? Right now you may honestly ask yourself, "What should I do to get closer to the Savior?" First, listen. Then, meditate. Examine yourself. And again, listen. You will hear a voice speak to you: the still, small voice of conscience. You won't hear it in your ear. You will feel it within yourself—deep within yourself—in your heart and mind. It will tell you exactly what you must do to draw closer to the Lord. You will become aware of acts that call for repentance, someone to whom you should be kinder, someone whose forgiveness you must ask, some habit you must overcome, some virtue you must develop. What you hear or feel in your conscience is your personal formula for gaining a vital, living testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Lord may try to get through to us, even while we harden our hearts against him, as Nephi indicated Laman and Lemuel had done: "Ye have heard his voice from time to time; . . . but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." ( [^22].)

We then go through the motions of religious worship and service. Our prayers become one-way, mechanical, and ritualistic, offered out of duty, not desire. "They draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are Far from me." ( [^23].) Little wonder many of us lose faith in prayer: we have no response, no two-way communication with the Lord. We do not hear.

We should try listening in our prayers. When we ask for particular blessings, let us quietly listen with our hearts to understand the law on which those blessings are predicated. (See [^24].) When we hear the answers in our hearts, let us carefully consider them and honestly examine ourselves to see if we are willing to obey those laws. If so, let us answer back and commit or promise to the Lord that we will obey. If not, let us not ask for those blessings. If we are not willing to sincerely commit ourselves to qualify for a living testimony of Christ, we cannot expect to receive one: "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." ( [^25].)

Few things will inspire self-honesty and humility more than a genuine, listening, two-way prayer. It brings us into living contact with the light and Spirit of Christ. In this attitude of perfect honesty, humility, reaching out, and dedication, we can literally have the Holy Ghost as our guide and companion; and he will bestow upon us a witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

However intelligent and knowledgeable we may be, unless we have real and personal experiences with the Spirit of God, we will know no more about Christ than the man blind from his birth knows about light and sight, however glib he may be in describing the anatomy of the eye or the properties of light.

This personal testimony is thus a living thing. It is neither borrowed from another nor from the remembrance of past spirituality. It is rather a well of "living water" ( [^26]), arising from current and real experiences obtained through earnest prayer, study, repentance, covenant making, obedience, and service—and all achieved through the empowering principle that it be done "with real intent":

"When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." ( [^27].)

With the deepest conviction in my heart, I encourage a daily, earnest, prayerful study of the scriptures—which contain the feeling and thinking of the Lord—with the express purposes of finding him, of gaining inspiration and enlightenment, of being humbled by the revelation of our own weaknesses, of being motivated to serve better, of learning sacrifice and obedience, and of having security, approval, and peace that come from within rather than from without. "He that cometh to me shall never hunger." ( [^28].)

The right to the companionship and blessings of the Holy Ghost has been given to all Latter-day Saints. To receive this divine gift, we must seek it—praying, working, and living for it. By doing so we will experience for ourselves on a daily basis direction, inspiration, comfort, strength, and testimony. Knowing how God works, we will come to know, to trust, and to testify of that still, small voice. The Savior said: "I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." ( [^29].)

He did not say, "I stood"—he said, "I stand."

---
Notas:
[^1] The Nature of Relationships
[^2] The Root Cause of Breakdowns in Relationships
[^3] The Root Solution in Building and in Healing Broken Relationships.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
