Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

II

Commitment: Private Victory Precedes Public Victory

6

The Daily Private Victory

Even his disciples fell asleep. The Lord went apart and knelt down in prayer. From the account given in the scriptures, both ancient and modern, the Lord has indicated to us that his greatest trial and test began in the Garden of Gethsemane. In describing it, he used these words: "Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." ( [^1].)

Gethsemane was the place that he renewed and deepened his internal commitment or covenant with his Father to go forth on the mission of his life, the very purpose for which he was sent to this world. And that mission was to suffer in some way incomprehensible to us in taking upon himself the full effects of our transgressions and our sins, which caused himself, "even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." He committed himself in Gethsemane to give his life up on Calvary. Remember that no man took his life from him. The Jews did not take the Savior's life. He even said, "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." ( [^2].)

On Calvary he came to a point, unlike any other human being, even martyrs, where he willingly sacrificed his life even though he had the power to call legions of heaven to save himself, but he said, "Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit." ( [^3].)

His Calvary was successful partly because his Gethsemane was successful. At one time, he cried out, "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." ( [^4].) In other words, he fought the central issue that most masters people's lives: my will or thy will. Jesus decided, he committed, he pledged, he promised, he covenanted with God, "Thy will be done." He won a private battle, which gave him additional power to win a public battle. He waged his private battle at Gethsemane two more times and fought through it until he had mastered, I am sure, that fundamental issue of life. All he needed to do then was to carry out this private decision in public.

Since Christ is "the way" for us, let us think symbolically of Gethsemane and Calvary as private and public battles respectively. All of us have our private battles—that is, the opportunities to live out our public battles in our minds and in our hearts before we ever come to them in fact. We can do this as the scriptures counsel—privately, in prayer and communion. In this sense we can actually live out the trials and temptations and challenges of our day before they come. We can, in the unseen presence of God, deal with all of our unrighteous aspirations, our selfishness, perverse inclinations, touchiness, impatience, anger, impurities, procrastinating tendencies, or just our sheer irresponsibility and lack of discipline. We can fight these things through in the presence of God our Father, who seeth all things.

If we stay in that presence, seeking his Spirit, and make a deep covenant with him, we will have won the battle before it comes upon us in fact. Then when the public battles come—our public trials, the temptations, the pressures and stresses, the storms that descend upon our lives—we will have the internal strength from the life and light of this world—the Savior of this world, the Redeemer of all men—to resist and to overcome. Our spiritual roots will have grown out of him naturally.

Winning such private battles before going into the public battles is a form of spiritual creation. The scriptures tell us that the Lord created the world spiritually before it was created temporally or physically: "Thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth. And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens. According to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew." ( [^5].)

In a sense we all do this in many activities in our lives. For instance, in building a house, before a single shovelful of earth is turned, the entire house is planned almost to the last detail and reduced to a blueprint. Therefore, I raise the question: Why should we not also create each day or each week or each year in our minds before we live them in fact? This is more than planning, for circumstances will change and plans will need to be altered accordingly. It also involves making commitments, private commitments, regarding those principles we will live our lives by, regardless of the circumstances. This process of thrashing the issues about in our minds, confronting directly mixed feelings and double motives and grappling with the forces within, is called the private battle. "The greatest battle of life," President McKay taught, "is fought out within the silent chambers of the soul."

Once we have resolved the inner conflict and have made up our minds, we have achieved a kind of spiritual creation or the private victory. In speaking of this inner battle, President McKay went on to say, "There is a battle on with you, and with me, every day. The world's hope and destiny are centered in the Man of Galilee, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. In your moment when you are fighting out the battle of the day, will you look introspectively and see whether you really believe that."

From my own experience and observation, I have learned these two basic lessons about this. We do not have a successful public victory—that is, an accomplished worthy task—unless we have a successful private victory. The opposite is also true. We seldom have deep, honest communication with God unless we also have a divine service to perform, where we feel the need to have God's Spirit to assist us, such as in the rearing of our children and teaching them to anchor their lives to eternal values. We need to have this vital work to perform before we will find ourselves honestly communicating from our hearts and pleading with a deep sincerity and hunger within ourselves for the Spirit of God. Otherwise, we can just go down a little checklist in a mechanical, almost ritualistic sort of way. If we have no deep commitment to a divine service—sharing the gospel, teaching our children, or magnifying a calling—we feel little need for any private victory.

The Savior says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness" ( [^6]; italics added), not the righteousness of this world. The righteousness of this world only responds to its own kind. When people treat you kindly, you are kind in return. But the power to respond with good in the face of evil comes from the righteousness of God, and Christ is his Son and the Way, and he led the way perfectly.

I would like, for an illustration, to paraphrase a few lines from the excellent movie A Man for All Seasons. I saw in it two great personalities who demonstrate this principle of private victories preceding public victories. Sir Thomas More was the man who opposed King Henry VIII in his desire to divorce his wife and marry Anne Boleyn. For various reasons it violated More's conscience, and he would not take a particular oath dealing with loyalty to the king and division from the Catholic church. Because he was a man of such honesty and integrity, his influence, even in silence, assisted in disrupting things in the British Empire. As Cromwell, the king's minister, put it, his "silence thundered all up and down Europe," because people knew he was honest, and he would not subscribe to an oath contrary to his conscience.

He went through a process of gradually losing everything. He lost his station, his position, his wealth. He lost his physical comforts, for he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Cromwell eventually took away his reading materials. His captors used every opportunity to tempt him and to induce him to "give in" and to sign the oath to the king. He wouldn't do it. He maintained silence.

While he was imprisoned in the Tower of London, his enemies' final strategy was to use his family to persuade him to give in. They brought to him his wife and daughter. His wife pleaded, "Oh, you've got to give in. I am afraid if they take your life, I'll hate you for it."

He needed the sustaining influence of his wife. Without it he wasn't sure he had the power and the courage to go forward. He pleaded with her, "You can't do this. You must understand. I dread to think what they might do to me, but I dread even more what might happen inside to me if I do it."

When his wife knew he meant it and that he was deeply committed to the truth within him, she embraced him and said, "You are the greatest man I have ever known or ever will know."

His daughter then came to him and pleaded, "Oh, Father, do you know what it is like at home without you? We can't even afford candles there. It is a miserable life. You've taught me all my life that God regards the heart, not the words of the lips. Father, take this oath with your lips, but think otherwise in your heart."

He answered her, "Daughter, what is an oath but words you speak to God!" Cupping his hands, he continued, "My oath is my life. I hold it in my hands like water. If I ever open my hands, I can never expect to find my life again."

He then told his family to leave the country because he knew he would never see them again. Eventually he was condemned to die. At the chopping block, he looked right at the anxious, hesitating executioner and said, "Do not begrudge your office. You only send me to God."

The Archbishop of Canterbury spoke up, "Oh, are you so sure of that, Sir Thomas?"

Sir Thomas answered, "God would not refuse one so blind."

In other words, his total commitment and faith resided in the unseen God. That was the oath he had made in the various private battles of his life.

The other fascinating character in the movie was Richard Rich. He gained many "kingdoms" and eventually also became chancellor of England. But at what a price! He sold his soul. He would lie and cheat, violate confidences, and make and break oaths for the right bribe.

Once Cromwell, the king's minister, in an attempt to get certain evidence against More, put a bribe before Richard Rich that at first he resisted and then later gave in to. "That wasn't so bad, was it," Cromwell observed.

Rich nodded affirmatively. He sensed his unworthiness and grew depressed, and Cromwell, observing this, stated: "It is a sad omen to see a person receive such a large favor and become depressed."

Rich answered, "Oh, I'm not depressed. It is just that I feel like I have lost my innocence."

Then Cromwell observed, "Oh, you just noticed! You lost it a long time ago."

Here are the two characters: Sir Thomas More, who became a "man for all seasons"—in season or out of season, he was true to the source of his life, to God; and Richard Rich, who, like the chameleon that changes colors to blend into its environment, was buffeted constantly in his personal life. He would change with the seasons or with the force of another's personality or the pressure of the circumstance, and he was untrue to God but true to his god, which was the fickle, changing, uncertain world, the source of his buffetings. That became the nature of his character.

More won and Rich lost their public battles in private. One was a totally buffeted life, and the other a life anchored and true and powerful, and very, very influential.

Someone inquired of a Hindu who had a great serenity and peace about him, no matter what pressures were put upon him, "How do you maintain that serenity and peace?" His answer: "I never leave my place of meditation." Every morning he meditated for thirty minutes. Then in his mind and heart he never left it—he maintained the spirit of that place all during his public life and pressures.

Joseph Smith had his Sacred Grove experience, and perhaps the greatest revelation or theophany ever given to man came there. The Father and the Son appeared. Yet even he, the Prophet of this dispensation, was chastened by the Lord for yielding at various times to the pressures, to "the persuasions of men." ( [^7].) Once, after chastening him, the Lord said, "Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord." ( [^8].) In a sense he was told, "Never leave your Sacred Grove."

The Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon—Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer—had their marvelous, divine experience, but then they left it; they yielded to the persuasions of men under the pressures of this world, and they were buffeted. In the first several sections of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord counsels these and other brethren again and again, essentially, to remember who they are, remember their callings, remember their divine experiences.

I suggest that every day of our lives you and I can go to our places of prayerful study and meditation where we can "live out" the events that will transpire that day, rely on true principles and God's way to master those issues that seem to dominate life, and rededicate and commit ourselves to the source of light to which God has called us—to Jesus Christ, who is the father of our second birth and who is the author of the covenants we made in the waters of baptism, of the covenants we renew at the sacrament table.

God has ordained certain places and times for private victories: the private prayer, the sacrament, the temple, honest moments of meditation, fasting, scripture reading. We can prayerfully use our scriptures almost like our own Urim and Thummim, to translate our lives, to help translate the will of God for us today. "Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times." ( [^9].) But remember, we will not have deep, meaningful communion with God unless we honestly desire to serve and have some divine service—some great task ahead of us.

Try this method of winning private victories, would you? Try it for thirty days. Don't judge it the first week. Judge it after a month. Try it every morning. Get up earlier. Discipline yourself—the very root of disciple means discipline. The root of discipline is disciple.

Whip those procrastinating, undisciplined tendencies, those inclinations toward weakness. Do it in private—and you will find that you will sweat it out, for it is not an easy thing, but rather a most difficult thing—but take the time to do it, and watch the gradual serenity and power that will come into your life. I know it will help you more than anything else to develop courage and integrity and to become a man or a woman "for all seasons."

Let me share a letter I received from a student whom I challenged, along with others, to prayerfully study the scriptures for thirty minutes a day for thirty days:

Final examinations, graduation, and moving detained me from personally visiting with you and finalizing my part of our covenant wherein I promised to read in the scriptures for at least one half hour each day for a month with the express purpose of coming to know the Author through the experience. At the end of the thirty-day period I was to bear testimony to you of the effect of this daily spiritual nourishment on my life, and it is for this purpose that I have undertaken to write this letter.

At the outset I must acknowledge that in addition to gaining from the reading itself, I also learned much about myself—about my character strengths and weaknesses in attempting to fulfill a personal commitment such as this. And I must confess to having missed four days during the month. The revealing thing to me was that these four days were in a row, that they were early in the month, and that having missed just one day, three others rather easily followed. To begin again on a fifth day was sheer effort, but once on the track again I was cautious to avoid another harmless-looking "just one day" that might lead to another serious void.

Furthermore, I became more aware of my own rationalizations, my own double-mindedness, and those distractions and temptations to which I am vulnerable as I attempt to pursue a disciplined program of daily spiritual nourishment. Then in clarion terms came the most shocking realization of all—that the Prince of the earth was dismayed by my study and was literally seeking to avert my efforts. To not feed my soul daily was to daily pay homage to him, and he had so long enjoyed that homage from me that he was determined to retain it!

In addition to these unexpected benefits and insights came those blessings that you unequivocably promised to those who would submit to a program of daily study. The content of the morning's reading I found was in my mind throughout the day. It began to become an important factor in my day-to-day relationships with my fellowman. The morning's reading gave me the Master's pattern for living, and his example began to influence and temper my daily decisions and actions. As I began to know the Son, I began to love him and better know his Father. And my prayers to the Father increased in scope and meaningfulness. And as this transformation continued, I began to better understand the essence of your message to us.

This attitude, in my opinion, is the beginning of the greatest and most needed change that can take place in the world today, within our own hearts and minds. It is then that we become a light to people, and not their judges.

I bear testimony that Christ lives. He is the Son of God. He is the Savior of the world, and there is a source of life within him that we can tap if we will take the time every morning to sink our spiritual roots deep, to have this successful private experience. Then we will have the power to be anchored in times of temptation and stress to eternal truths and eternal values in a world of change and turmoil.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Nature of Relationships
[^2] The Root Cause of Breakdowns in Relationships
[^3] The Root Solution in Building and in Healing Broken Relationships.
[^4] Communication. Communicating (human and divine) is the most important single activity of man.
