Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

7

Self-Fulfillment through Self-Expression

The best we can be, we must be. Achievement of the highest internal potential is self-fulfillment. As children of God, spiritually begotten, we possess our Father's nature, with all its potential. We are, therefore, Gods in embryo. The profound joy of which the scriptures speak—"men are, that they might have joy" ( [^1])—is one of self-fulfillment and transcends all worldly joys or pleasures or happinesses, which offer only superficial and temporary satisfaction or comfort.

The world's culture in which we are enmeshed primarily embraces material and social goals and values, which are often inconsistent with the self-fulfilling goals and values. This is the real problem, in my judgment. Our highest nature as children of God and the nature of the world's culture antagonize one another. To gain the one is to lose the other. A choice must be made, and each alternative requires sacrifices.

Our real enemy, then, is conformity—conformity to social pressures and group norms that do not contribute to self-fulfillment. Even though one might win acceptance and a sense of belonging through conformity, in another sense this is the highest cowardice. It is a betrayal of one's best nature. For in becoming all things to all people, one eventually becomes nothing to everybody—particularly to oneself. "For of all sad words of tongue or pen,/the saddest are these: 'It might have been.' " (John Greenleaf Whittier.)

In this view, religion is not an external set of rules and regulations and laws, but rather principles and laws natural to, and internalized in, our highest nature (divine self). Conformity to these divine laws requires the highest courage and amounts to being true to ourselves. In one sense, the revelations of the Lord and the inspired admonitions of our prophets and leaders make explicit the laws that are implicit in our nature, adherence to which guarantees the highest self-fulfilled growth. In such growth we may achieve a condition of development that allows us to feel comfortable and natural in the celestial and exalted presence of God our Father. We war with ourselves if we resist true religion. This is why we cannot sin with all the heart and soul. It will split us apart, for it is a conflict with our own divine nature. But, for the same reason, we can serve truth and live righteously with all the heart and soul.

Physically healthy persons are active. If inactive over a long period of time, their bodies atrophy and become easy prey to accident and disease. Without adequate food or rest, serious deficiencies may develop. A different kind of sickness, somewhat intangible but nevertheless a real sickness, overtakes those who are intellectually, emotionally, or spiritually inactive or starving. Their mental faculties are to be cultivated and used in creative and productive efforts, or they will also atrophy. Those who do not move outside themselves into the lives of others with love, empathy, and kindness eventually become increasingly isolated, lonely, unlovable, and emotionally sick. Spiritual health embodies both intellectual and emotional health. We must actively think and feel in order to effectively serve others and to worship God.

Let us call these mental, emotional, and spiritual activities "self-expression." By this is meant acting as agents for ourselves rather than being acted upon, participating instead of merely looking on, becoming actively involved as opposed to passively listening, creating rather than responding like robots or puppets to pressures, expectations, or stimuli from others.

Much of the world's work is essentially meaningless—mechanical, repetitious, physical, boring—involving no real mental exertion or emotional commitment, only robot responses. There is a great deal of research evidence to indicate that mature and healthy personalities seek for purpose and meaning in their work and desire active involvement and participation. In other words, they seek self-expression. Unable to find it in the kind of meaningless labor mentioned above, they often adapt by becoming apathetic, indifferent, and alienated. Work is seen as drudgery—as a mere means to an end that is to be avoided as far as possible.

We discover that these alienated individuals, rather than striving for personal creativity and development in the other dimensions of life, carry over complacent and apathetic attitudes and spirits into their personal leisure and into family and religious life. Their total lives slump into mediocrity and boredom. They turn from themselves, from their own unique and singular talents and capabilities. They are clock watchers all day; but once off work, they find only boredom in many of their disorganized, purposeless, shallow activities. They try one thing after another, but nothing seems to satisfy them. Their rebellion against authority-enforced work and discipline also evidences itself against almost every other form of organization and discipline, including those things that might have been imposed by themselves.

These unfulfilled persons often prefer to sit back and watch others live. They spend endless hours in undiscriminating television viewing. Here the "one-eyed monster" can feed and brainwash them, think and feel for them, entertain and somehow hypnotize them away from what is happening to their lives. They can watch others live in fancied circumstances, identify themselves with the heroes, and sense all kinds of removed and vicarious satisfactions. Or they may resort to other compensating activities or escape mechanisms, such as alcohol, illicit sex, cheap movies and literature, or some other activity carried to excess. When they are asleep, they are half awake, and when awake, they are half asleep. They are never fully involved with life.

Playing one imaginary role after another, they soon lose knowledge of their own roles and experience themselves only as others want them to be. Meaningless chatter, gossip, and sarcastic humor replace genuinely rich interpersonal communication. But ungenuine communication is boring and forced, and therefore unpleasant and difficult. However, when alone, they are also bored. What a pathetic and too common plight!

Such persons' religious lives are in themselves mechanical and superficial—much of the time they are doing the right things for the wrong reasons. Familiarity with (rather than feeling toward) church services provides them with relatively shallow satisfactions. If called upon to pray, they become fearful and more concerned with what others think of them and their prayers than with a real communication with God. Religious observances, for them, become a substitute for service rather than an inspiration to serve. To them, religion may be a weapon they can use to judge and condemn others, in order to let themselves feel superior and exclusive.

This hypothetical example may or may not be extreme, but the fundamental idea is that an apathetic attitude tends to spread itself throughout all of one's life and associations, producing a kind of spiritual disease characterized by restlessness, loss of zest, self-dislike, general depression, sin, decay of the intellectual and spiritual life, and so on. The individual in such a situation regresses, eventually becoming childishly dependent and irresponsible. With this regression comes an absence of the initiative and self-discipline that make for effective personal relationships.

Once we are aware of the forces shaping us and of our own internal powers, we can begin to take charge of ourselves and to shape our own circumstances. "Men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves." ( [^2].)

Deep desire and persistent work are demanded of us. We should search for work that provides a challenge to our unique abilities and interests, that presents an opportunity for self-expression, and that serves a purpose with which we can honestly identify ourselves. Work would then become an end in itself—creatively satisfying, recreative.

And even though every job has its monotonous, challengeless aspects, all of us have abundant opportunities somewhere, sometime in our lives to expand our interests, deepen our knowledge and understanding of those interests, and develop our skills and our abilities to participate actively in and to promote those interests—in short, to become involved in life.

Use of Our Common Resource: Time

Time is an asset we all have in common and in an equal amount. Yet the wide variety in the use or abuse of this priceless resource is a startling fact of our day.

Some people escape from life, freedom, and personal responsibility by conformity and by tranquilizing activities. But other people refuse these popular life-smothering sedatives and plumb the deeper reaches of their own makeup to find phenomenal resources of intelligence, enthusiasm, ingenuity, creativity, and interests. They engage in exposing themselves and their talents, "in trying out," and in an industrious search for meaning, purpose, stability, and integrity in every aspect of their lives. They are continuously educating themselves. Their minds are active, informed, and curious; their bodies, responsive and well-disciplined; their emotions, loving and life-affirming; their behavior, genuine, spontaneous, and kind; their spirits and motives, noble and righteous.

In short, they are living the law of their own divine nature, the law of their spiritual birthright, the law they accepted and internalized in the premortal life, the law that the Lord is constantly striving to write into their hearts and into their innermost parts. They are becoming the best they can because they must.

---
Notas:
[^1] Extrinsic valuing—comparing a person with another or against an external standard. For instance, Mark is not as good a student as his sister Alice. Or, Mark performs at the 85 percent level and therefore deserves a B+. The value is not in Mark—it lies outside him, in the comparison and in the standard. Close relationships existed between these boys and their parents, manifested by interest in the boys' welfare, concern about companions, availability for discussion of problems, and participation in joint activities. The parents gave many other signs that they regarded their children as significant individuals who were inherently worthy of their deep interest. Basking in this appraisal, the boys came to regard themselves in a favorable similar light. A Spiritually Rich Private Life.
[^2] Intrinsic valuing. Here we say that Mark has value inherent within him; as a person he has worth, apart from his performance, good or bad. If we do any comparing, we compare him only against himself or against his potential. Parents were less permissive. They demanded high standards of behavior and were consistent in enforcement of the rules, yet their discipline was not harsh. The boys with low self-esteem took the absence of rules and limits for their behavior as a sign of lack of parental interest. The Family.
