Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

8

Seven Sources of Personal Security

Consider two ways of judging or valuing another:

Both ways of judging or valuing have merit. We often use both simultaneously. But I suggest the extrinsic way is the most used and emphasized, to the person's detriment. Consider my reasoning.

From the time of birth a person belongs to one institution of society after another. Each one values or judges its members. These judgments accumulate and, taken together, label or define who the person is. This social definition may gradually become the individual's self-concept, and a person's self-concept strongly influences behavior. It becomes self-fulfilling. If people see themselves as inferior or irresponsible, and if they are continuously defined and treated that way, they will probably behave that way—that is, unless they place a different judgment or value on themselves.

Now consider the institutions we join since birth.

The Family

The tendency to compare one child against another is a common practice used by parents. Discipline is often given out on the mood of the moment rather than on well-considered and communicated principles and rules. Individual differences are frequently ignored. Love, acceptance, warmth are often given conditionally, that is, if the behavior meets the expectation or standard. Judgment and rejection of the person often follow nonconformance.

Is there any wonder so many children doubt themselves and feel inferior and inadequate? They feel no value in themselves, only in what they do! And that is subject to the opinions and judgments of others, which are fickle, being influenced by many different forces and standards. No wonder many feel anxious and fearful and live to pretend, to impress. Their lives are buffeted by outside changing forces instead of being anchored by the changeless intrinsic value within. Development of a good self-concept is a vital function of the family. A group of psychologists working with the support of the National Institute of Mental Health conducted a series of studies in self-esteem, which was reported in the February 1968 issue of Scientific American. The subjects were a representative sample of normal boys from middle-class, urban families, who were followed from pre-adolescence to early adulthood (an eight-year period). They found that

the youngsters with a high degree of self-esteem are active, expressive individuals who tend to be successful both academically and socially. They are eager to express their opinions, do not sidestep disagreement, are not particularly sensitive to criticism, are highly interested in public affairs, and showed little destructiveness in early childhood. . . .

They appear to trust their own perceptions and reactions and have confidence that their efforts will meet with success. They are optimistic and not self-conscious or pre-occupied with personal difficulties.

Some surprising factors brought out in these studies showed that there was no consistent relation between self-esteem and physical attractiveness or family social position or income level. These subjects tended to gauge their individual worth primarily by their achievements and treatment in their own interpersonal environment and day-to-day personal relationships, rather than by general and abstract norms of success.

As they looked into the backgrounds of the boys who possessed high self-esteem, they gave three findings:

The School

Almost from kindergarten, students are compared against each other. If graded on a curve, one gets a B because another got a D, and vice-versa. Yet the B student may be a "goof-off," a cramming artist with a lot of ability to find and take shortcuts, whereas the D student may be really producing in terms of perhaps fewer talents.

Again, no individual differences or potentials are considered when grading on a standard. Generally speaking, grades in school are given on an extrinsic basis, and perhaps this may be the best and most efficient way in terms of many practical realities in our present academic system.

But then in this system, what is a grade? A grade becomes more than an indicator of performance. It carries social value. The family and society reward and punish based on grades. Opportunities are given or denied. Most importantly, when love and acceptance are offered or withdrawn on the basis of grades, the academic system itself contributes to this socially rooted self-concept. People who are told again and again by various sources, "You are a D person. You are a poor student. You are irresponsible. You are stupid," tend to believe these things and thereby justify themselves in their "irresponsible, dumb, stupid" behavior. They live up to this limited concept of themselves, which acts like a straitjacket on their efforts. Their latent potential, which may be tremendous, remains latent. This is the plight of the underachieving student—good intellectual equipment with limited emotional circuitry (self-concept).

Social and Economic Systems

Generally, in social and economic institutions, worth is given on the basis of extrinsic value. Often a person's net work is equated with his personal worth. We may be grumpy and disagreeable with subordinates, or simply ignore them because they seem unimportant, but when the president of the corporation stops in, our ill disposition and unpleasant manner suddenly change. Material and social values become terribly important because they represent or symbolize or confer individual value. Or so many feel.

When we borrow our strength from the label on our shirt, sweater, shoes, or dress; from our association with a club, an "in" group; from our position of influence, power, and prestige; from our car, beautiful house, or other status symbols and trappings; or from our good looks, stylish clothing, Fashionable appearance, clever tongue, or degrees and credentials, we do so in order to compensate for being impoverished and hollow inside. But by doing so, we reinforce our dependency on these symbols, on living by appearances, on extrinsic values, and we build weakness within.

The Church

Our theology and doctrine place great value on the individual—all individuals. We are taught to love the sinner while abhorring the sin. The Lord teaches us that we should leave the ninety-nine and go after the one, that "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." ( [^1].) We are taught what we might call a divine definition of oneself. In the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, God explained his relationship to Moses and told him that he was his son and was in the similitude of his Only Begotten, Jesus Christ. Later, when Satan came, in all his power—raging and demanding to be worshiped—Moses, with a correct understanding of who he was (a child of God) was able to rebuke Satan and cast him out through the power of Jesus Christ. (See 1:6-22.) The universal appeal of the Primary song "I Am a Child of God" is basically an intrinsic appeal.

However, even some of us in the Church may use the Church in an extrinsic way to judge and reject. The very religion of love can be twisted and distorted by the unloving to justify their own seeming righteousness, to build a refuge around themselves, and to judge and reject all others. The Pharisees are an example of believers who live and judge others extrinsically.

Let me state here that I am not against extrinsic values. They serve useful purposes. For instance, I am convinced that the free enterprise system, with its free market, private property, and limited government concomitants, is the most effective and efficient economic system ever developed. Competition in any form of endeavor usually brings the best to the surface.

But what I am primarily against is the formation of a person's self-concept on the basis of these extrinsic values. I believe it should come primarily from an intrinsic sense of worth, a divine (as opposed to social) definition of oneself. The primary responsibility, in this regard, lies with the family, forged mainly out of the way the parents treat and regard each other and their children, as reinforced by the studies on self-esteem.

Seven Sources of Intrinsic Security

Parents can do a great deal to build in themselves and in their children a deep sense of internal worth, of internal security. The following suggestions may help in this regard.

Immersion in the gospel teachings, in the scriptures, and in daily prayer provides magnificent opportunity for the Lord to bestow on us a divine sense of who we really are and a testimony of his gospel. Jesus taught that those who keep the Father's commandments will receive the Father's love and will abide in his love. (See [^2]; [^3]; [^4]; [^5].) I believe this to be the perfect source of a divine definition of oneself.

The main source of distorting this eternal sense is personal transgression, for even though the Father continues to love us unconditionally, we may not feel that love. He may give the gift, but we do not receive it. As the scripture says, "For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receives not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift." ( [^6].)

The family is God's ordained unit to provide each of its members a deep sense of worth, of personal security. Parents need to spend time communicating with each other, which itself feeds the emotional roots of security, respect, acceptance, and love.

In addition to family prayer morning and night and the weekly family home evening, parents should spend time with each child on an individual basis. This should be done frequently. Just before retiring at night may prove to be a good time to sit or lie down next to a child and discuss that day and the child's feelings, concerns, and fears. I know of one mother who enjoys visiting with each child at night and asks each one to tell her the happiest experience that day, along with anything else he or she wishes to talk about. To merely be with a person and spend time with that child conveys intrinsic value. Your child knows from watching you all day how much you value time. To listen, to attempt to understand, to be patient and kind and considerate take time. Thus, you communicate that you value your children intrinsically.

To reprove with sharpness and then show forth an increase of love afterward communicates intrinsic love; "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." ( [^7].)

Security emerges largely from a sense of fairness and justice: limits clearly set, rules established, and discipline consistently applied, based on those rules and limits, not on the mood of the moment. (Chapter 21 suggesting eight principles of parenthood and character development and chapter 22 on discipline communicate my ideas on how a family and a home become vital sources of personal security, of intrinsic worth.)

Occasionally immerse yourself and the children in nature. Nature is very accepting and can bequeath its quiet strength to anyone who takes the time to feel and to appreciate. Nature teaches powerful lessons. There's no shortcut on a farm. Nature keeps careful books. Nature teaches honesty, which is called the foundation of all virtues. It's good for children to have chores in nature or in any area where natural laws plainly govern.

Animals are part of nature. Your good dog will jump up and love you even if you failed today—it always accepts. A cat will sit quietly while a child strokes it and softly talks to it. Children gain some comfort, acceptance, and security from domesticated animals.

To absorb yourself in the magnificent beauties of a canyon, to spend a day on the beach or in the mountains or in any lovely setting, and to take time to meditate and drink it all in help build an intrinsic sense of worth. There are few of us who cannot testify of this principle. Moses went into the mountains to pray, the boy Joseph Smith to the Sacred Grove, and the Savior frequently retired into nature to commune.

I've been fairly closely associated with adult education programs for a number of years, and I'm impressed with their impact. Everything is changing so rapidly in the world; much of what we learned ten, even five, years ago is obsolete today. Science and technology have made incredible advances in most every field of endeavor. Too many simply aren't trying to keep up, yet vainly build their security on now-obsolete skills or knowledge.

Taking a night class or a correspondence course, going to an education week program, or doing systematic reading take real effort. And travel is expensive. Watching television and just picking up a thing here or there are much easier. The human tendency is then to make excuses, to explain and justify. Yet the easy way in the short term is the hardest in the long.

I believe in a system of some kind for self-education. It doesn't have to be formal classes or courses. It may be an informal discussion group or a well-conceived reading program. But without some system or external discipline, most adults tend to give up after a good start on something and to fall back to old ways.

Is the gaining of knowledge the main purpose of continued education? I don't believe so. The knowledge explosion is so vast and so rapid, we could give all our time and still not keep up. If it's not knowledge, what then is it? To keep intellectually alive, to renew ourselves, to learn how to learn, how to adapt, how to change, what not to change. We must develop a feeling and a competence within that we can "make a go of it" in any situation, regardless of what happens. One main source of this confidence and competence is continuing education.

Now, what about our children and the school? How can I, as a parent, help school be a source of intrinsic security? As parents, we must encourage our children in their school work to be conscientious and systematic in their preparation, and then put value on their efforts. We should reward and recognize real learning and not merely the grade. Students know inside themselves, to a considerable extent, how well they are doing. They may not know how well their teachers think they are doing, in terms of certain specified criteria, but on the more important matters—that is, their own efforts, their daily preparation and honesty, their creative efforts, their concentration, their practical learnings, their development of understanding, and the joy and satisfaction of what they are learning—they know perhaps better than anyone else. Put value on this. In the long run these things influence performance in life far more than grades will. This is not to say that grades do not have value, for they do, and generally speaking those who follow these suggestions will get the highest grades.

Church activity and service are supremely important. Magnifying a priesthood calling, worshiping, and praying with real intent (for the right reasons) are primary fundamental sources of an intrinsic sense of worth.

Parents should practice and teach their children to do more than the minimum expected. They should exemplify the attitude of "How can I best serve?"—going the second mile—instead of "What's in it for me?" When children give anonymous service and go the second mile, and no one knows save God and them alone, they grow in a sense of their own worth and value. And they receive the Father's commendation. (See [^8].) This is divine definition, not social definition, of self. When people work diligently to help someone who may be disaffected, they are communicating value to that other, and they receive value in return.

Time must be taken for creative planning and for creative communicating with key people. Many people become bogged down in their work with mechanical details and a lot of trivia, and they nearly become automatons. Few people take the time to think very carefully about their assignments, to analyze the causes of the problems they deal with, to develop long-range plans of action to deal with them. This kind of reflection and planning takes initiative and imagination—in short, thinking, which is hard and expresses individuality. But the dividends are rich in terms of building a sense of self-worth and self-power.

When we seek in a systematic way to educate ourselves by drawing upon both informal and formal sources, and when we creatively produce in our own work assignments, we discover that our economic security lies within ourselves and not within our circumstances. There is no future in a job. The only future is inside oneself. We look inside rather than outside. We become producers rather than consumers of other people's production. Therefore, we have the security to go into new situations, to take on new challenges and job assignments. We know that we can come to grips with any circumstance and succeed.

Individuals whose security lies outside themselves can become almost desperate in an effort to avoid changing situations or circumstances, for these rock the very ground of their being. Yet, what they hope is changeless actually changes constantly. Individuals who grow on internal intrinsic values are anchored to the changeless within themselves and therefore can meet and adapt to any changing circumstance.

We must also plan into our schedule creative communication with the key people in our lives (uninterrupted blocks of time). We may give ourselves completely to our church job, to a stake board or priesthood assignment, and yet have shallow relationships with those closest to us—our wives, or husbands, children, counselors, or fellow workers. The Lord spent the majority of his ministry with a few key people, his apostles. He established a strong, deep, unforgettable relationship with them. He loved them, taught them, served them. To develop a close and open communication with those key people in your life is a rich and profound source of intrinsic security.

This last suggestion deals with integrity. When we as parents live true to the light we have been given and encourage our children to do likewise, all of these suggestions or forces combine together and create within us a sense of peace, unity, and wholeness—a sense of internal worth, internal security. Whenever we are untrue, this internal disunity puts us back onto the extrinsic treadmill, and unless we repent we will find ourselves anxious and fearful, often trying to become all things to all people. A life of pretense is a tortuous task. To live a life congruent and harmonious with Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, is the highest source of intrinsic security, a personal dominion that "without compulsory means . . .shall flow unto thee forever and ever." ( [^9].)

Ultimately, therefore, only one real and permanent source of personal security exists that is completely interwoven with all these other sources. Our Lord speaks graphically of it in the Sermon on the Mount: "Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it." ( [^10]; italics added.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Extrinsic valuing—comparing a person with another or against an external standard. For instance, Mark is not as good a student as his sister Alice. Or, Mark performs at the 85 percent level and therefore deserves a B+. The value is not in Mark—it lies outside him, in the comparison and in the standard. Close relationships existed between these boys and their parents, manifested by interest in the boys' welfare, concern about companions, availability for discussion of problems, and participation in joint activities. The parents gave many other signs that they regarded their children as significant individuals who were inherently worthy of their deep interest. Basking in this appraisal, the boys came to regard themselves in a favorable similar light. A Spiritually Rich Private Life.
[^2] Intrinsic valuing. Here we say that Mark has value inherent within him; as a person he has worth, apart from his performance, good or bad. If we do any comparing, we compare him only against himself or against his potential. Parents were less permissive. They demanded high standards of behavior and were consistent in enforcement of the rules, yet their discipline was not harsh. The boys with low self-esteem took the absence of rules and limits for their behavior as a sign of lack of parental interest. The Family.
[^3] The family life had a democratic spirit. The parents established the principles and defined the powers, privileges, and responsibilities of the members, but they respected the children's views, were open to persuasion, and gave the children a voice in the making of family plans. Nature.
[^4] Education.
[^5] The Church.
[^6] Daily Work.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
