Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

9

Overcoming the Tremendous Gravity of Habit

We were all transfixed by the lunar voyage of Apollo 11 and could hardly believe our eyes when we saw men walking on the moon. Superlatives such as "fantastic" and "incredible" are inadequate to describe those eventful days.

Where was the most power and energy expended on that heavenly journey? Going a quarter of a million miles to the moon? Returning to the earth? Orbiting the moon? Lunar and command module separation and redocking? Moon lift-off?

No, not these—not even all these together. Rather, it was on the lift-off from the earth. More energy was spent in the first few minutes of lift-off, in the first few miles of travel, than was used in half a million miles for several days. The gravity pull of those first few miles was enormous. The earth's atmosphere was compressingly heavy. It took an internal thrust greater than both the pull of gravity and the resistance of atmosphere to finally "break out" into orbit.

Now for a moment let's look at ourselves and at our habits. Our problems don't stem from ignorance nearly so much as they do from disobedience of that which we know to be right. For instance, how many of us regularly exercise? Few. How many know that regular exercise would be good for them? Nearly all. The problem typically does not lie in our ignorance but in our habits.

Have you ever resolved to break the overeating habit, only to disgustedly renew the resolve every other week? Have you ever resolved to stop procrastinating? to write those long overdue letters? to get at your genealogy? to get going at those family projects? What about your resolves to stop nagging your spouse? to spend more individual time with each child? to have regular, well-prepared family home evenings? to control your temper? to make peace with that neighbor? to really magnify your Church calling? Speaking of habits, what about the circular, self-feeding habit of making resolutions, then later breaking them, then remaking them, only to break them again. We begin to wonder if it's worth making any more.

Overcoming the Gravity of Habit

How can we break bad habits and form healthy new ones? The Savior gives us insight into the process in the following magnificent parable: "For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish." ( [^1].)

Most of us are great starters and poor finishers. We begin to "mock" at ourselves, to lose faith in our ability to keep the promises we make with ourselves. We simply do not sit down first and count the cost to see if we have sufficient to finish—sufficient desire, sufficient internal thrust. We try to lift off our launching pad without realistically calculating the "g's" (gravity pull) and the resistance of the atmosphere (our environment).

Billions of dollars, years of planning, work by thousands of scientists and engineers and by tens of thousands of technicians and workers—all went into the first successful moon walk. Everything was studied beforehand—every detail planned and programmed. The costs were counted. There was "sufficient to finish."

Habits have a tremendous gravity pull, more than most realize or would admit. Breaking deeply imbedded habitual tendencies, such as procrastination, impatience, criticalness, or living in the excesses of selfishness involve more than a little will power and a few minor changes in our lives. We're dealing with our basic character structure (what we are inside), and we need to achieve some very basic reorientation, or transformation, of values and motives as well as practices.

An Alliance with God

Furthermore, we can't fully overcome these habits and impacted tendencies by ourselves. Our own resolves, our own wills, our own efforts—all this is necessary but is not sufficient. We need the transforming power of the Savior, born of faith in him and his atoning sacrifice and of entering into a contract with him. In such a contract, made in ordinance work and in private prayer, we covenant, or promise, or witness, to take upon ourselves his name and to keep his commandments. He, in turn, promises us to give us his Spirit, which, if we are true to our promises, will renew and strengthen and transform us. In this way we combine our power with the power of the Almighty.

Before we renew our covenants in the sacrament, before we promise or resolve to overcome a bad habit and establish a new one, we should sit down first and count the cost. If we realistically count the costs and then make a deep enough commitment, we, with the Lord's help, can overcome the gravity pull of habits and the atmospheric resistance of our environment with all its luring temptations.

It will be difficult at first, very difficult. Once we decide to change (to "lift-off" the earth or "to build a tower") we will have no freedom at first to do as we please (what comes naturally) until new habits are formed and our desire for the old ways has changed. We'll be doing things "against our will" for a while simply because we know we should. It may not be too unlike the painful withdrawal process a drug addict goes through to "kick the habit," whether the craving is narcotics or alcohol or just plain food.

During the first few minutes in lift-off, the astronauts were strictly controlled and were powerfully buffeted by the forces of nature struggling to keep them on earth. This is somewhat comparable to the pull of the flesh when our alarm goes off early in the morning. Unless we put "mind over mattress" and carry out the resolves made the night before, we will experience our first defeat that day. Not sufficient to finish. Mission aborted.

But if we overcome the pull and "get up and get at it," we will have won a victory. We have kept our own resolve. We can then move to other things, for by small means great things are accomplished. Thus, even this one small step is also in another sense a giant leap.

---
Notas:
[^1] Extrinsic valuing—comparing a person with another or against an external standard. For instance, Mark is not as good a student as his sister Alice. Or, Mark performs at the 85 percent level and therefore deserves a B+. The value is not in Mark—it lies outside him, in the comparison and in the standard. Close relationships existed between these boys and their parents, manifested by interest in the boys' welfare, concern about companions, availability for discussion of problems, and participation in joint activities. The parents gave many other signs that they regarded their children as significant individuals who were inherently worthy of their deep interest. Basking in this appraisal, the boys came to regard themselves in a favorable similar light. A Spiritually Rich Private Life.
