Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

10

The Sacrament: The Lord's Weekly Provision for Self-Renewal

"Dad, that's one of the best home-evening lessons we ever had, but frankly, the sacrament has never meant that much to me. Why do we take it so often? Sometimes it seems like a meaningless ritual to me."

"Well, David, I fear that's the way it is for many of us. But, you see, we live in such a physical and material world and we're often so materially protected and satisfied with ourselves that we need a frequent reminder of Christ and the real and spiritual purposes of life. You notice the water and bread are blessed to our souls, not to our bodies, as at the dinner table."

"What do you mean—blessed to our souls? And why do we have two blessings, anyway?"

"Let me answer your second question First. The bread stands for Christ's flesh, which was broken when he was crucified on Calvary. Three days later he was resurrected and became immortal, meaning he took his body up again; his spirit and body became inseparably connected, and he will never die again. And, David, through this same miraculous power, you and I and all mankind will be resurrected and become immortal.

"Remember that scripture we memorized, the one summarizing the Lord's work and glory?"

"Yes, it was 'to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.' " [ [^1].]

"Correct, David. Now what does the bread stand for?"

"Christ's body—Calvary—the resurrection and immortality."

"Yes. The Lord has already completed one of his two purposes—the immortality of man. Now what is the Lord's second purpose?"

"To bring to pass the eternal life of man."

"This is where the water comes in. It symbolizes Christ's blood, which he shed in the Garden of Gethsemane and on Calvary for the sins of all men. This is called the Atonement. If we have faith in him and repent completely of our own sins and promise him we will keep his commandments, he will give to us the Holy Ghost. Under this divine influence, as we keep our promises, we will be forgiven, cleansed, and sanctified from our sins.

"Then, if we stay true, when we leave this life, we will feel clean and confident in God's presence. We will have a celestialized resurrection. This is eternal life, which is the second great part of the Lord's work and glory. So, David, the water stands not only for the atoning blood of Jesus Christ but also for eternal life."

"I understand that, but how could the Savior suffer for our sins!"

"I don't fully understand how he did it, but I do know it was real. He described this terrible ordeal in a modern revelation: 'Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit.' [ [^2].]

"Son, this great atoning sacrifice of the Son of God is the heart of the entire gospel plan and the greatest act and gift in all human history; and to those who receive this transcendent gift, Christ becomes their Savior."

"Dad, what do you mean by 'receive the gift'? And what does all of this have to do with the sacrament anyway?"

"Many of us never receive the gifts given to us. For instance, have you ever given kindness to someone who would not receive your kindness or love?"

"Yes."

"Well, to receive this great act of divine kindness or love, we also must do certain things. [See [^3].] This is where the principles and ordinances of the gospel come in—including the sacrament.

"Now, let's think for a moment. Do you remember why you were baptized?"

"For the remission of sins. I also promised God I would keep his commandments."

"Correct. What about any sins you have committed since your baptism?"

"I don't know, except that I should repent of them."

"Yes. You see, when you were baptized you made a covenant or solemn promise with God to be true. And in return for your obedience, he promised you his Spirit, guidance, and blessings. When you partake of the bread and water, you renew your baptismal covenants, and if you honor these covenants, the Lord will honor his. Your sins will be remitted or forgiven, and you will always have his Spirit to be with you, just as the sacramental prayers state."

"You mean by partaking of the sacrament worthily I can be forgiven of my sins?"

"Exactly, and given great spiritual strength also. The late apostle Melvin J. Ballard testified of this: 'I am a witness that there is a spirit attending the administration of the sacrament that warms the soul from head to foot; you feel the wounds of the spirit being healed, and the load being lifted.'

"David, my own experience has convinced me that when I partake of the sacrament worthily and 'with real intent,' I find peace and rest within my soul. Just as sleep unravels our weary bodies, so will worship and prayer, repentance, and covenants made 'with real intent' unravel our confused, doubting, weary spirits."

"Dad, how can I best prepare to partake?"

"First, Son, look inside. Any hypocrisy there? pride? impurity? Pray for a sense of divine sorrow. Determine to forsake any and all forms of ungodliness. As you say, repent. Do you carry any grudges or have you offended anyone? Can you ask their forgiveness? It isn't easy. Doing these things may just about break your heart, but this is exactly the kind of sacrifice expected of us today—a broken heart and contrite spirit. It is a spiritual sacrifice as contrasted to the physical or blood sacrifice required of Israel prior to Christ's earthly mission.

"At the Feast of the Passover or the Last Supper, Christ himself administered the first sacrament and taught by example and precept his higher commandments of humility [see [^4] and love [see [^5], beautifully illustrating how we are to prepare and to partake worthily. Then he performed the last blood sacrifice by voluntarily giving up his own life."

"Just how do we covenant, Dad?"

"David, prepare yourself to promise or covenant hours or days before partaking. At the service sing the sacrament hymn with feeling. Listen intently to the words of the prayers. Mean every word and remember the Savior and these truths. Then when you partake, promise the Lord within yourself, having made up your mind—in other words, renew your covenants—to take his name upon you, to always be a witness for him and to keep his commandments."

"Dad, if we do this, what can we expect?"

"If you deeply and sincerely covenant, you will feel both unity and peace. Remember that private victories precede public victories. Christ's Gethsemane preceded his Calvary. Your own internal, private victory in the sacrament will entitle you to the companionship of the Holy Spirit, the only true source of personal security. Anchored privately to true principles, you will then have public victories. Being true will bring self-respect. Your life will be calm and steady, and you will be aware of the presence of a real, though unseen Friend.

"But if you just go through the motions, through 'meaningless daily prayer rituals' and 'weekly sacrament rituals,' you'll find yourself compromising your principles and integrity under the buffeting pressures of life. You will lose both the companionship of the Spirit and your own self-respect. You will find yourself pretending, playing roles, focusing on clothes, looks, cars, and other material possessions, all in an effort to win the approval and popularity of others. But people's opinions are fickle and provide no security.

"David, most of the world is on this treadmill—thirsting for a water that does not satisfy the soul. Now, Son, to come back to your very First question, 'Why do we bless the bread and water to our souls, not our bodies?'

"When we partake worthily, it actually does satisfy our souls and improve our living. Also, we become witnesses for Christ."

---
Notas:
[^1] Extrinsic valuing—comparing a person with another or against an external standard. For instance, Mark is not as good a student as his sister Alice. Or, Mark performs at the 85 percent level and therefore deserves a B+. The value is not in Mark—it lies outside him, in the comparison and in the standard. Close relationships existed between these boys and their parents, manifested by interest in the boys' welfare, concern about companions, availability for discussion of problems, and participation in joint activities. The parents gave many other signs that they regarded their children as significant individuals who were inherently worthy of their deep interest. Basking in this appraisal, the boys came to regard themselves in a favorable similar light. A Spiritually Rich Private Life.
[^2] Intrinsic valuing. Here we say that Mark has value inherent within him; as a person he has worth, apart from his performance, good or bad. If we do any comparing, we compare him only against himself or against his potential. Parents were less permissive. They demanded high standards of behavior and were consistent in enforcement of the rules, yet their discipline was not harsh. The boys with low self-esteem took the absence of rules and limits for their behavior as a sign of lack of parental interest. The Family.
[^3] The family life had a democratic spirit. The parents established the principles and defined the powers, privileges, and responsibilities of the members, but they respected the children's views, were open to persuasion, and gave the children a voice in the making of family plans. Nature.
[^4] Education.
[^5] The Church.
