Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

III

Understanding and Example: Succeeding with People

11

Diagnose before You Prescribe

Imagine. . . . You have been getting headaches and are having trouble with your eyes. You think you need glasses. You call on Stan, your friend, an optometrist. He briefly listens to your complaint and replies, "Yes, I'm sure you need glasses. Here, I've worn this pair now for ten years, and they've really helped me. They'll do the same for you, and I've got an extra pair at home. Take this pair."

You try them on. "But Stan, I can't even see as well as before," you report.

He assures you, "That's okay, it's just a matter of adjustment, of getting used to them. Before long you'll see as well as I do."

The foolishness in this scene is transparent. And yet, in everyday settings, prescribing (giving advice) before diagnosing (understanding) is most common.

For instance, you are trying to communicate with your daughter. "Come on, honey, tell me how you feel. I know it's hard, but I'll try to understand."

"Oh, I don't know, Mother—you'd think it was stupid."

"Of course I wouldn't! You can tell me. Honey, no one cares for you as much as I do. I'm only interested in your welfare. What is it that makes you so unhappy?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"Come on, Mary, what is it?"

"Well, frankly, Mother, I just don't like school anymore."

"What do you mean you don't like school! Everyone in our family likes school! If you'd apply yourself like your older sister does, you'd do better and then you'd like school. Time and time again we've told you to settle down. You've got the ability, but you just don't apply yourself."

After a long pause you begin again, "Now go ahead. Tell me why you feel this way."

Sometimes we train our children not to open up to us with their problems.

First Seek to Understand

This tendency to rush in and "fix things up" with a lot of good advice is ever so common. Advising is easier and quicker than understanding, but it doesn't work for two basic reasons. First, we don't yet understand, and our advice may be way off the mark (as the optometrist's was). Second, the advice we give, however good, may be seen as a form of judgment, even rejection, because we never really took the time to listen in order to understand. To carefully listen is a powerful way of saying to another that we value that person. The opposite can be very demeaning. Communication, in a sense, is like an iceberg. The verbal, or word, part is like the part of an iceberg seen above the surface of the water. Yet the great mass of the iceberg is under the surface and cannot be seen. So with communication. Most of it takes place in attitudes and feelings and spirit. We call this nonverbal communication.

When we take the time to understand and stay with that effort until the other feels that we do understand, we have communicated many things: we care, we want to understand, we respect the person's expression, we give dignity and an individual sense of worth.

Communication lies more in feelings than in words. Don't you know some people you communicate with almost without words? You simply understand each other. You trust each other. You've had a relationship long enough to know what different things mean to each other. And aren't there others, perhaps even some in your family or in your work whom you see every day, with whom you have no communication, regardless of how careful you are about your words? Everyone on guard for fear of being made an "offender for a word"? ( [^1].)

People spend a great deal of effort and energy (this is particularly true with youth) fighting for the feeling of being accepted and respected, for a sense of their own worth. If you grant them this sense of uniqueness and worth by sincerely listening in order to understand, you'll find that almost all of their fight will be gone.

Try it in the next argument you find yourself getting drawn into. You'll need to exercise a lot of self-restraint and patience. As you sense the other person becoming a little heated, stop and take the time to carefully express what that person is trying to say. Stay with your effort until you are sure that the individual knows you understand his or her point of view. Watch what happens. It will amaze you. You'll discover that most arguments are really not disagreements but are rather little ego battles and misunderstandings. If you find that there is an honest difference of opinion, you'll discover yourself disagreeing without being disagreeable. And you'll have a basis for further respectful discussion in the very area you found the disagreement.

Experiment at home with this principle and discover its value for yourself. You'll find it particularly effective with your teenage children as well as with your husband or wife. But remember, it will require patience and real sincerity. If you really don't care to understand but only pretend to, this itself will communicate itself.

Now if you sincerely care to understand, you'll need to be open. You may change your understanding of the situation. This will require some internal security. Preparing yourself by thoughtful meditation and perhaps prayer is important whenever you enter into one of these emotionally charged conversations, particularly with your own loved ones.

Think of the importance the Prophet Joseph Smith put on the promise of the Lord, contained in the book of James, that God would "not upbraid" him if he asked him for wisdom. Listen to the words of the Prophet himself: "At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to 'ask of God', concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture." (Joseph Smith—History 1:13.)

To upbraid means to find fault with, to blame, or to reprove. I believe this tendency to upbraid is the main roadblock in communication between husband and wife and between parents and their children. People fear being judged and upbraided—particularly when they don't yet feel understood. It simply hurts. This is one of the reasons people pretend and play roles, say things they don't really mean, and hesitate to ask the questions they feel inside. As someone put it, "He thinks I'm stupid, so why open my mouth and remove all doubt!" We must learn to reward rather than punish people for their honest expressions of ignorance and their requests for help.

In addition to building harmonious relationships, let us look at the other reason why we must understand before we advise or judge. The reason is plain accuracy. Our advice, like the optometrist's, may simply not apply. Then if the person follows our advice and acts on our judgment, we are responsible. However, the opposite usually results. Until a person feels understood, he or she will simply not be influenced. Would you follow the prescription of the optometrist who didn't examine each eye?

To give another example, your child complains about not having friends at school. You advise, "Well, to have friends you must be a friend." Your advice may be good, but it may not apply at all. The real problem may be that your child is unhappy at school because he was caught cheating, but because he didn't have the courage to admit this, he substituted a safer reason.

Take another illustration. You're trying to teach in a home-evening lesson the importance of honoring the Sabbath day. No one is listening, and the little kids are running about and contending. The teenagers appear to be bored to death, even though they do have some real problems on the Sabbath day and some specific temptations they'd like to talk about. But they hesitate to do so for fear of being judged and upbraided.

Remember, the more emotional a problem is, the more time and effort you must put forth to understand. You'll need to listen with the third ear, the heart. People need to express themselves freely and fully, without fear of ridicule or embarrassment or censure. They will likely then become open to influence and to reasoning. You may think you understand, and in fact even without listening you might actually understand what is going on, but the people talking to you may not feel understood until they have expressed themselves. To them, their problems are unique. They're different. And you just can't simply categorize and generalize.

You will find that understanding before prescribing is not easy. It is difficult. It is ever so much easier to hand your friend or your loved ones your other pair of glasses that have fit you so well these many years.

When you understand first, you risk changing yourself. Perhaps we never fully understand another, but the effort to do so is highly affirming to the other person. The patience and restraint demanded flow out of emotional and spiritual strength. And you know where this kind of strength comes from.

---
Notas:
[^1] Extrinsic valuing—comparing a person with another or against an external standard. For instance, Mark is not as good a student as his sister Alice. Or, Mark performs at the 85 percent level and therefore deserves a B+. The value is not in Mark—it lies outside him, in the comparison and in the standard. Close relationships existed between these boys and their parents, manifested by interest in the boys' welfare, concern about companions, availability for discussion of problems, and participation in joint activities. The parents gave many other signs that they regarded their children as significant individuals who were inherently worthy of their deep interest. Basking in this appraisal, the boys came to regard themselves in a favorable similar light. A Spiritually Rich Private Life.
