Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

12

Understand the Tenderness Inside

My, we had fun together—best fathers-and-sons outing yet! Gymnastics, wrestling matches, hot dogs and orangeade, and a movie. The works!

In the middle of the movie my four-year-old, Michael Sean, fell asleep in his seat. His older brother, Stephen (age 6), and I enjoyed the rest of the movie, and then I put Sean in my arms, carried him out to the car, and laid him in the back seat. It was cold that night—very cold—so I took off my coat and gently arranged it over and around him.

On arriving home I quickly carried Sean in and tucked him into bed. After Stephen put on his "jammies" and brushed his teeth, I lay down next to him to discuss the night out together.

"How'd you like it, Stephen?"

"Fine," he answered.

"Did you have fun?"

"Yes."

"What did you like most?"

"I don't know. The trampoline, I guess."

"That was quite a thing, wasn't it—doing those somersaults and tricks in the air like that."

Not much response on his part. I found myself making conversation. I wondered why Stephen wouldn't open up more. He usually did when exciting things happened. I was a little disappointed. I sensed something was wrong; he was so quiet on the way home and while getting ready for bed.

Suddenly Stephen turned over on his left side, facing the wall.

I wondered why and lifted myself up just enough to see his eyes welling up with tears.

"What's wrong, honey? What is it?"

He turned back, and I could sense he was feeling some embarrassment for the tears and his quivering lips and chin. "Daddy, if I were cold, would you put your coat around me too?"

Of all the events of that special night out together, the most important was a little act of kindness, a momentary, unconscious showing of love to his little brother. What a powerful, personal lesson that experience was to me then and is even now. It has helped explain to me, at least, why people build defenses and often why communications between people break down.

This story is only one illustration of some universal lessons. Consider these three:

First, people are very tender, very sensitive inside. I don't believe age or experience makes much difference. Inside, even within the most toughened and callused exteriors, are the tender feelings and emotions, the heart.

Second, we learn over time how to protect ourselves from getting hurt. We build defenses—sarcasm, cynicism, indifference, aggression, criticalness. Children at first are completely open and trusting—and vulnerable. They too gradually learn how to defend themselves. They learn from getting hurt. Sometimes they care so much that their only defense is to say, "I don't care." Perhaps anger hurts them most. Often they'll fight back. Sometimes they must withdraw, perhaps into a blind apathy.

Third, "toughening our skin" may seem safer, but it may also hinder our growth and keep us apart as individuals. For example, I have a bum left shoulder from a boxing injury in college intramurals and must be somewhat careful in sports and rigorous work or it might dislocate again. This is very painful. Sometimes I briefly taste this pain just turning over the wrong way in bed. Therefore, when I ski, I ski in complete control. I overcompensate so I won't fall and take a chance. It just isn't worth it if I get hurt. But I never improve. I never get any better, and I've been skiing for years. My children pass me up quickly. We can't grow when we're always protecting ourselves. Growth is positive; defenses are negative.

Many people, particularly family members, want to express warmth and affection freely to each other. They may not know how. They feel awkward. They may fear the consequences if they do. It makes them uncomfortable, too dependent, too vulnerable. It has turned on them before. "So why risk it again?" they reason, and they escape.

But what a tragic alternative! No honesty. No real understanding. Just surface communication, guarded communication. We keep ourselves from the very source of our deepest needs and satisfactions—the free, open giving and receiving of love in the family circle. This leads to dealing with each other "at a distance" (during TV commercials), to wearing masks, to making each other "an offender for a word" ( [^1]), and to subtle forms of manipulation.

What to do? I offer one suggestion based on the above three lessons:

Realize and use the power of little acts of kindness and courtesy—when consistently given. This is true with adults, who often have learned best how to protect themselves behind social trappings and thought-out explanations. But it will make a big difference to young people, especially when they are at the various crossroads of their lives. I particularly emphasize the kindness of not rushing in and throwing around judgments and good success formulas—taking the time to understand, and then acting and counseling in terms of what we learn, in addition to what we already know.

---
Notas:
[^1] Understanding Our Behavior Fight. We fight or resist in one of several ways—physical, mental, verbal, to name a few.
