Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

13

Success with People

A world-famous graduate school of business administration, in an attempt to understand some of the prime factors or ingredients that spell success in an executive capacity, undertook an extensive research program that covered several years. They arrived at this interesting conclusion: Two qualities among all others seemed to be stated so often, so preeminently, that the research report mentioned only these two qualities. First, and not necessarily above the other, is motivation. This is a many-splendored term, including, of course, determination, initiative, and the desire to assume and act on responsibility. The second is the ability to get along with other people. These qualities are more of attitude and of personal characteristics than of knowledge and technical skills, and they are more abstract and intangible than perhaps some of the other qualities we may think of as being the determinants of success in executive capacities.

Building upon the basic assumption that the study and skill of human relations or the ability to get along with others is of supreme importance for all of us to understand and practice, I should like to briefly discuss what I consider to be two basic or cardinal concepts of human relations and to subsequently elaborate on them.

The first is the concept of understanding human behavior. Why do you behave as you do, and I as I do! Once we can gain an understanding of behavior, we will come to see why individual personal differences exist. This is a fact we intellectually accept, but accepting it emotionally is an altogether different matter. We need to respect our individual differences and to allow for them and not expect immediate and constant perfection of ourselves or of anyone else, because the very process we are going through in life is one of maturation, of trial and error, of experience, and of perfection. The implications of this concept are vast and far-reaching.

The second concept builds naturally on the first and entails two facets: a recognition of and an appreciation for the basic individual differences in people, and an understanding and a testimony of the basic divinity within all people. We are all children of God. Coupled with this concept, I add the necessity of creating and maintaining a climate or an atmosphere in our working and personal relationships that will be both productive and satisfying. Such an atmosphere is more valuable than all the techniques, gimmicks, and manipulative devices we might attempt to use in influencing other people and in soliciting their friendship and support. This atmosphere or climate is of supreme importance and cannot be overemphasized.

Now to consider these two concepts in order:

To have good relations with other people we must understand why we behave and act as we do. Basically, behavior is based upon need. We are motivated to satisfy particular needs that reside within us consciously or unconsciously. The first such basic need is biological or physical—for instance, hunger. "Man shall not live by bread alone" ( [^1]), but he does live for bread alone when there is no bread. Brigham Young was quoted as advising the elders not to preach the gospel to a hungry person, but to feed him first and then offer the gospel. As our hunger is satisfied, we are then desirous of satisfying other of our needs.

Another example: if I am denied air, I will fight for it; I will obtain it in any way possible. Once I can breathe easily again, the fight for air no longer motivates me, at least not consciously. If I am in physical danger, my only interest and motivation is safety. Once safe, I seek other things.

A second basic need that resides in all of us is a social need—to have a sense of belonging, to have opportunity to express friendship and love and to receive friendship and love; to have association with other people and to feel accepted socially.

The third, and a higher-level need, is the egoistic or psychological need. I break this down, for purposes of this discussion, into two areas: what we think of ourselves—self-esteem, our own self-confidence, independence, sense of achievement, feeling of competence and of knowledge; and what others think of us—a desire for reputation and for status among our fellow men, a desire to obtain a sense of recognition, a sense of appreciation for work well done and for the efforts that we put forth, a desire to receive the respect that we feel we deserve. These needs are basic in all of us.

The fourth need we could term the self-fulfillment or spiritual need. Within each one of us there is a basic spiritual anxiety to return to the celestial presence of God, from whose presence we have come. Until we realize the ultimate potential or possibility that we have within us, particularly the spirit within us, we will never be fully satisfied. We may have an abundance of this world's goods but remain without satisfaction because possession of things alone does not satisfy our spiritual anxiety or fulfill the ultimate potential or capacity that we have as human beings, as children of God, spiritually begotten of our Father in heaven.

Whenever any of these needs are deprived for one reason or another, there is consequent behavior. The satisfaction of certain needs may conflict with the satisfaction of other needs. If perhaps I seek a satisfaction of a self-fulfillment or spiritual need, I may have to deny a physical need or a social need. Perhaps one of the ego needs conflicts with the other. This is often the case. This internal confusion often creates a very real conflict or stress situation. When we strive for popularity with other people, for reputation and status, we may have to sacrifice our own self-esteem, our self-respect. We may "give in" on our principles, for instance, and then may feel that we are not true to ourselves, although we have gained the followership or the friendship of other people.

So the true test of life—or one aspect of it—is, which needs do we choose to satisfy? Sometimes we have to sacrifice one in order to obtain the other. We know that the ultimate criterion in making such choices and discriminations was given to us in the revelations of the Lord—and that is to differentiate between what is ultimate, eternal, and incorruptible as opposed to what is temporary, transitory, and corruptible. One's character is formed by the myriad of decisions, large and small, made in one's life. So we see here a hierarchy of needs.

Another helpful concept in attempting to understand behavior is the concept of threat. People have certain beliefs and feelings about themselves, and these are very near and dear to them. They also have needs, beliefs, and feelings about other people, about ideas, about things. Gradually these latter become less and less important to them. The most important, or the closest things to them are their beliefs about themselves as good parents, good priesthood holders, good homemakers, or whatever the case may be. This we would term the self-image or the self-concept. Whenever this self-concept is threatened or whenever these beliefs about ourselves are put in jeopardy, one of three phenomena results:

Building upon these understandings, let us now move on to another key idea in understanding human behavior and individual differences.

Different people see the world from different frames of reference. I had a memorable and significant experience at the Harvard Business School that demonstrates this. The professor of one of my classes demonstrated clearly and eloquently that two people can see the same thing, both claim it was something different, and yet both be right.

He brought into the room a stack of large cards, half of which had the image imprinted upon them of a young girl and the other half with the image imprinted upon them of an old lady. He passed to the right side of the room the cards with the image of the young girl, and to the left, cards with the image of the old lady. He asked us to look at the cards and to concentrate upon them for about ten seconds, then to pass them back in. He then projected upon the screen a picture combining both images, neither one more preeminent than the other. He asked those who had studied the image of the young girl, "What do you see?" Almost to the man they said, "We see a young girl." To the left side of the room he asked the same question, and they said, "An old lady," again almost to the man.

The students then started to converse. The professor asked one student to explain what he saw to a student on the opposite side of the room. Gradually as they talked, a tremendous breakdown in the communication began to emerge. Eventually one student caustically said, "You fool, can't you see that's an old lady?" The other one argued back, equally sure of and adamant in his position. All of this occurred in spite of one exceedingly important advantage that the students had—they knew another point of view did in fact exist, something many of us would never admit. Yet only a few students endeavored to see this picture from the other frame of reference.

After a period of futile communication, one, pointing to the screen, said to another, "I think that's the old lady's necklace." The other one said, "No, that's the young girl's mouth." Now as they calmly discussed different points, the images of both gradually came into focus. However, when we looked away and then back, we would only see the image that we were conditioned to see in a ten-second period of time.

What about the conditioning of a lifetime? The influences in our lives—the church, the social activity, our families, our schools, our friends and associates, and the other environmental influences—have made their impact upon us and helped to shape our own frames of reference, our own points of view.

You can easily understand why we run into a tremendous barrier in the communication process. Communication depends upon the point of view, the frame of reference; therefore, each of us needs to draw from this a valuable lesson that we must first seek to understand others as they understand themselves, to see the world through the eyes of others, to stand in their shoes, that we may understand why they behave as they do before attempting to evaluate, to judge, or to condemn. "Judge not, that ye be not judged." ( [^2].) We are not only wrong to judge, but we are incompetent to do so because we are often totally without understanding of the many, many factors that help to formulate a person's point of view or frame of reference that directly affects behavior.

I hope that this assists in giving us an understanding and an appreciation of and respect for individual differences. We all have basic needs, but the environmental influences and other conditioning factors tend to have us satisfy the needs in different ways, to see things in different ways.

This brings us to the second concept regarding the kind of working climate, based on human understanding, that is most productive and satisfying. While building upon the superstructure of the hierarchy of needs and individual frames of reference as we have constructed it so far, we should attempt in all our relationships to establish a climate of approval and of acceptance of people as they are, so they do not have to pretend in our presence to be someone they are not.

To do this, we need a sense of self-esteem, the feeling that we are true to ourselves, and that we have value apart from our performance or our particular point of view, and we need to learn to disassociate people's points of view and their performance from the individuals themselves. This is basic. If people do not feel accepted, they become threatened and defensive; and in such a situation there is no learning, no growth, no progression, no development.

Perhaps the attitude might be expressed in this way: It is like admitting the person to the human race. "I accept you as an individual person, as a child of God. I may not agree with your ideas. I may totally disagree with your ideas—but you, as a person, I accept and respect."

The lesson for us as students of human relations is to attempt to develop empathy—the ability to see the world as others see it, to cease judging and to work from an accepting position. This creates the atmosphere in which others will listen to constructive criticism, in which they will begin to grow and develop. The great obstacle to communication is the tendency to constantly evaluate or moralize with others, creating in them a fear to speak or to act outside of the puppetlike response we create and often desire.

The great key to this communication process is to learn to listen, and to listen attentively and with understanding, to listen acceptingly to the other person's point of view. This then creates an atmosphere of love and approval.

We should avoid the tendency to manipulate people and to pull strings. People do not like to be manipulated arbitrarily or have some type of an authority pull strings and verbally run them down any alley they wish them to go. They resist this.

On the other hand, we should not make it possible for others to think that the ideas came from within them when they were in reality our ideas. Sometimes they never find out what we did or how we did it. And what do we think of others if we attempt to use them or manipulate them into our way of thinking, even though they never find it out? Would Jesus assume this type of attitude? Would he act in this manner!

Insofar as the organization permits it, instead of attempting to manipulate people, we should attempt to gain their consent or participation in the decision-making process, particularly when it involves their own lives or jobs or activity. We should be genuine and sincere in asking them to help and to participate, especially when they want and expect to. Though the ideas finally agreed to are not what we might consider the ideal, if we have their support and cooperation, and if it involves no sacrifice of a basic principle, we will go much further in the achievement of our goals and in our personal relationships than we would if we were to ramrod and manipulate our ideas down the throats of others. I am suggesting that we need to weaken our habits and attitudes of labeling, of judging, of rejecting, and of manipulating, and substitute for them strengthened tendencies to understand, to accept, and to work participatively with others.

People Are More Important Than Anything Else

Let us realize as executives or as workers in any endeavor in any organization that people are the most important thing in this world. They are the greatest creation of God. The gospel and the Church are means to the end of developing and perfecting every individual. The Lord said, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." ( [^3].) He gave the gospel as the way of life or the means to assist in this great process.

Man's own exaltation and perfection are our goals. Let us never lose sight of them, and in all of our relationships let us allow them to shape our attitudes and our strategies. We will find that if we can achieve this atmosphere wherein the basic human needs are being met, the group and organizational goals and purposes will be achieved at a higher level than ever before. When personal needs and goals are identified with organizational goals, both goal attainment and human satisfactions, being interrelated and interdependent, will together reach new heights. Trouble begins when we put our entire emphasis upon the achievement of group goals or standards and forget the indispensable need to achieve them in ways that will satisfy the basic and high-level human needs in all of us.

The Golden Rule is perhaps the finest expression of the human relations concept. Paul in [^4] speaks of love, the key to success with others. Much of what we have been discussing here is science, but the greater part of getting along with other people is found in the art or the attitude of love. It is the basic love within you and me that determines whether we can be successful in understanding, in achieving our goals, and in maintaining happy and productive relationships with other people. The process of learning and practicing the basic human-relations skills and attitudes may often be time-consuming, hard, and frustrating, but it is worthwhile, very satisfying, and always immensely rewarding in the long run in making this world a better and happier place for all.

---
Notas:
[^1] Understanding Our Behavior Fight. We fight or resist in one of several ways—physical, mental, verbal, to name a few.
[^2] Flight. We strive to get out of the presence of the atmosphere that threatens us. Recognizing and Appreciating Differences
[^3] Rationalization. Often in embarrassing or threatening situations, we will manufacture reasons, either real or fanciful, in justifying and defending our positions and behavior. These mental calisthenics reduce the threat and often remove it altogether.
[^4] Education.
