Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

14

The Process of Rebuilding Relationships

To rebuild broken-down relationships, we must first of all study our own hearts to discover our own responsibilities, our own faults. Studying others' hearts and thereby judging and criticizing them for their failures and irresponsible acts serve no useful purpose. It is easy to stand at the sidelines and pick at others' weaknesses. This process serves only to feed our own pride and to justify ourselves. Pride is the leaven of envy and strife.

The Savior taught us to cast the beam out of our own eye first, and then, and only then, shall we see clearly enough to help our brother cast the mote out of his eye. (See [^1].) To really look into our hearts and find the keys that we must turn to begin the process of rebuilding takes honesty and courage. But there is no other key we can turn. In spite of how much we would like to, we cannot turn someone else's key. All must turn their own. Our greatest help to others is to turn ours.

Desire—the Most Fundamental Key

To rebuild a faulty relationship, we must really want to do so. This desire must be real and very strong. It must be realistic and vibrant enough to pay the price in long-suffering and self-sacrifice, time and patience, and honest, continuous effort. Many desire the great blessing of a beautiful relationship, but they do not desire it enough to obey the law upon which that blessing is predicated. The Lord teaches us forcibly that if "we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." ( [^2].) Inevitably the test of obedience becomes one of sacrifice.

There is no shortcut or simple solution or easy answer. There is no simple formula to rebuilding relationships that have taken weeks or months or perhaps years to deteriorate. Relationships involve the eternal law of the harvest—we reap what we sow, no more and no less. The significance of this cannot be overstated, because many have lived for years on a diet of easy answers and panaceas, shortcuts, and simple formulas. In many areas of their lives they have learned the technique of "getting by"—in school, in business, in church work—or acquiring a kind of superficial success through fairly simple and painless routes. They usually discover later, to their own disillusionment, that their successes were as empty and as hollow as the methods they used to achieve them.

Farmers have learned to live the law of the harvest. They know that unless they sow in the spring, they will not reap in the fall. If they want to harvest wheat, they do not sow corn. No matter what else they know, or what else they do, they simply cannot violate this basic and immutable law. Athletes learn the same thing—often the hard way—that unless they are in condition and "practiced up," they simply cannot expect to compete and to win.

This is also true of all relationships. Unless there is a basic sowing of those seeds that foster a harmonious relationship and the purposeful destruction of those seeds that undermine and destroy such relationships, there will be no reaping. Relationships must be built conscientiously. They must be worked at constantly. Let us not deceive ourselves on this point.

Now, as we look at those relationships we want to rebuild, or to help others rebuild, let us ask ourselves honestly, is our desire strong and deep and abiding! Do we honestly accept the law of the harvest?

Three Fundamental Laws in Rebuilding Relationships

The Lord taught us to love and serve him and our neighbor with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. We can distill from this all-embracing, magnificent teaching three fundamental laws to obey in rebuilding relationships: first, the "law of Moses"; second, the law of preparation; and third, the law of Christ.

The "Law of Moses"

The first fundamental law is essentially the law of personal discipline, which I call the "law of Moses." The real law of Moses was this also, for it served as "our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ." ( [^3].) Unless we learn to govern and control ourselves and become our own masters, we are continuously subject to the fickle forces of life and the approvals of others, and we will find it impossible to turn ourselves over to the government of God and to be willing and obedient servants. Until we are our own masters and lead ourselves, we cannot lead others.

In relationships, this means we must learn to discipline our tongues, to control them, to bite them occasionally rather than to say the unkind thing. We learn as President McKay did: "I learned, when I was tempted to say the unkind, thoughtless thing, to put my tongue way back in my mouth and clamp my teeth down on it; and each time I did that, it was easier the next time not to say the unkind, hurtful thing." Next time you want to criticize a leader or a teacher, don't. Next time you want to answer a "cheeky" teenager sarcastically, don't.

The "law of Moses" in rebuilding relationships teaches us to discipline our perception—that is, to look for those qualities in others that are good, desirable, and lovable. We must often do this purposefully: resist the tendency to focus on the undesirable and unlovable. We must concentrate and practice, practice, practice. This kind of discipline may run counter to our faultfinding habits and to our past labels on individuals, but nevertheless, if consistently and properly applied, this law of discipline in relationships will gradually bring us to Christ and to the laws of Christ's gospel, wherein are found the higher spiritual qualities of mercy and forgiveness, justice, and "love unfeigned."

The Law of Preparation

The second fundamental law is the law of preparation, or loving and serving God and neighbor with our minds. This involves using our intelligence. Think through the process that has brought about the deterioration in the relationship. Study the broken laws on both sides. Think and rethink. Reflect and meditate. Read, study, and prepare.

Intelligent relationships must be based upon planning and preparation. We cannot blunder into other people's presences, particularly where bad feelings exist, and expect to enjoy peace and good communication any more than we would blunder into the presence of the Lord without the true attitude of prayer and expect to feel his beautiful sustaining Spirit.

Study the prayer relationship to discover a beautiful insight into the process of rebuilding relationships. To pray effectively, we must prepare our prayers, our attitudes, and our spirits. Without such preparation of desire and feeling, prayers become mechanical and ritualistic, mere lip service. People lose faith in these kinds of prayers, for they feel as if they are speaking to the wall or simply praying "for effect" to those who are listening. This kind of praying affects people's faith in God and even in themselves—that is, in their own sense of sincerity, integrity, and inner unity—and, as a logical consequence, inevitably affects their faith in others.

But rather, before our prayers, let us say to ourselves, "What do I really want? What am I really grateful for? To whom am I talking? What is my relationship to him?" These questions, honestly put to ourselves, may lead us to make reconciliation, so that we can seek forgiveness from the Lord before we will feel to make our sincere requests. We may even discover that we had no real intention at all of obeying those laws upon which the blessings we seek are predicated. Therefore, let us offer a prayer we have prepared for, one that is worshipful and sincere. Will it not change us? Will it not give us a new frame of mind? Will it not increase our desire to serve the Master and to be kind to our neighbors?

When we pray from our hearts, not from our lips, we discover a beautiful and vibrant inner power, and then with a prepared frame of mind, we can go about rebuilding our relationships. Before we visit with the people we have alienated, we should think about the visit, think about their worth, and appreciate their noble qualities. This simple mental exercise itself will go far in making our recontact effective. We will communicate from our hearts, not from our lips alone.

The Law of Christ

The third fundamental law is the law of Christ, which involves mercy and forgiveness, love, humility, faith, repentance, covenants (baptism and the sacrament), and the gift of the Holy Ghost. If we have obeyed the first two laws in repairing relationships—the "law of Moses" (that is, self-control, self-discipline in talking, in perceiving, and in responding) and the law of preparation (that is, creating that attitudinal frame of mind conducive to harmonious and unified relationships)—then we will literally be brought to the law of Christ, which is the highest law, necessarily built on the other two and embodying both. It might be considered the law of the heart or of the spirit.

To achieve this law, we must have honesty and humility. Honesty in a large and kindly manner says, "Let's talk things over. There's no value in pretending that things are okay when down deep we both know they're not. You and I know there isn't the kind of unity and harmony with each other that we need. Let's get these matters out on the table and talk about the real things that are affecting our relationship. We can't do this work if we're carrying personal grudges and unkind memories."

Then, on top of this honest conversation, humility says, "I am sorry. Forgive me. I have judged you wrongly and harshly. This past year I thought you were always trying to find fault with me. But I recently discovered that this wasn't the case at all. I have misjudged you, and I want to grow to love and appreciate you. Please forgive me for being a stumbling block to you."

Pride is the opposite of humility. It refuses to acknowledge fault. It is boastful and pretentious, selfish and grasping. It rationalizes and justifies. It is also the opposite of honesty with self. If people are dishonest with themselves, they cannot be honest with others. When one pretends to another, both wear masks, and the whole relationship is built on a false foundation.

Applying the Three Laws

Now let's study those relationships that we want to rebuild. How can we set up a situation in which we can have an honest conversation with a good spirit present?—not an angry, critical spirit, but a kind and respecting spirit whereby we can mutually explore our points of difference and can look into past situations that have developed antagonism? We may want to discuss the present feelings that seem to affect our relationship. Admittedly, this is a difficult and humbling experience, and we must prepare for it.

Remember that sometimes we have to resurrect the past in order to rebuild the future. Old grudges and sour memories stay with people, feed upon themselves, and turn poisonous. If the spirit is right, we must discuss them with the Lord and with each other in order to "clean the place up" so that a new and true foundation can be laid. We will discover that shallow attempts at peacemaking may calm the waters at the surface, but not the unruly turbulence underneath. The true peacemaker is not a superficial peacemaker but rather comes to grips with the real underlying forces. Sooner or later those forces will surface anyway. It's best to deal with them now. But both parties must genuinely want to do that. One cannot force it upon another, for a person trying to force another person into an honest conversation will only stoke up the existing fire.

Sometimes an appeal to a third party helps. This person can serve as an arbitrator or a discussion leader or a catalyst and can help provide an accepting atmosphere in which feelings can be honestly and fully expressed without fear of ridicule or criticism or "carrying it too far." Perhaps one of the local Church leaders or a friend who is mutually respected may serve this useful role. If a Church leader is chosen, his or her calling should be one that includes both helping others to be understanding and creating an honest and frank yet kind and responsive atmosphere.

Starve the False Foundation and Feed the True

A relationship that has been based on false principles—that is, dishonesty and pride, pretense and superficial peace—will inevitably have its facade shorn away and its faulty foundation exposed the day the storm comes. Storms come in various ways: criticism, situations in which one's motives are impugned or integrity is doubted, unexpected visits from leaders, a feeling of not being understood or appreciated, time pressures, suddenly enlarged responsibilities, crises, and deadline dates. Sometimes trouble and difficulty in other areas in one's life will flow over into church work.

Whatever the storm, the winds and waves will batter viciously, testing every foundation for what it is. Those relationships built upon true foundations—upon the principles of Christ's gospel—will stand. All others will be washed out into the sea, to one degree or another. Let each person, therefore, examine each relationship, to determine the nature of its foundation. Husbands and wives must do this. Parents must do it in analyzing their relationships with their children. Church officers and teachers must do it to understand their relationships with other officers and teachers, with their leaders, and also each individual in their classes.

Let's avoid two mistakes: first, that of feeding a true foundation without starving the false one, and second, that of merely starving a false foundation without feeding the true one. Both processes must go on simultaneously. For instance, if we have a relationship that has been based on pretense, mask wearing, and insincerity, with criticism and faultfinding behind each other's backs, then we must stop the faultfinding and the pretending. It may be necessary to have an honest conversation and even to be humble enough to confess our own faults, to ask forgiveness, and then to grant forgiveness whether asked of us or not. Then we need to continue to live those three basic laws—the "law of Moses" and of preparation and of Christ—so that sincerity and genuineness and kind acts characterize the new and developing relationship.

Be patient. Relationships take time to rebuild. They cannot be rushed. We cannot overload the circuit by pushing things, or we will short-circuit it. The relationship is in its infancy, and it will mature gradually and naturally, just as a child grows gradually and naturally, unless its anxious parents tend to push that growth or become critical because it doesn't come fast enough. Each must acknowledge the right of the other to grow at his or her own pace. Each must respect the other's feelings.

Practice of these attitudes and skills may seem awkward at first. Just as in our initial attempts to teach, or to dance, or to ski or play tennis or the piano for the first time, there is always an awkward period while the skill is being developed through practice. But those who are impatient, trained in the shortcut philosophy of life, don't like this awkward phase. It feels unnatural to them. They sometimes claim it makes them feel insincere and hypocritical, and then they give up the practice.

Take an individual who finds it difficult to express warmth and appreciation. He feels love but expresses it with difficulty or feels that expressing it is dangerous because of possible mistakes and blunders, just as playing tennis or playing the piano for the first time is filled with mistakes. So he ceases the practice, saying, "I don't want to be insincere."

But sincerity is defined by intention, not habit. It is defined by feeling and desire. As long as we feel warmth and appreciation, we should express it. The expression involves practice, and it will be hard at first, but as President Heber J. Grant often quoted, "That which we persist in doing becomes easier—not that the nature of the thing has changed, but that our ability to do has increased."

A starving man feels hungry and seeks desperately for food. Similarly, any habit will seek food for survival, including the habits of faultfinding, backbiting, and criticizing. Often the only source of unity between two individuals is their criticism of a third. The relationship will hunger for such food if it is deprived. It's important to accept this hunger, to live with it for a while, until the new food begins to bring its own satisfaction, to establish new habits—habits of right thinking and kindly acting, the habits of looking for the good in people, the habits of listening respectfully to them.

The old man must die so that the new birth will take place. The old foundation must be torn down so that a new one can be erected. There are death pangs, and there is the travail of the birth—the new birth. This is part of the dynamics behind the principle of repentance.

It is not easy to rebuild badly deteriorated relationships, but it is much easier to accept fundamentally that it is not easy and that it will require sustained, sincere effort than to think that one good "makeup period" will do the job. The foundation may be temporarily rebuilt and seem strong and good, but if it is built again on false principles, or not continuously worked at, then another storm, in some way, someday, will come and wash it back out into the sea.

The usual tendency is to judge and reject when people do not live up to our expectations. Take the students in a class. Accepting them is easy when they behave in good and lovable ways, but what is our reaction when they become unlovable? Is our attitude one of acceptance—not of their behavior, but of the person—or one of rejection? Are we patronizing, saying smugly, "There, but for the grace of God, go I"?

Or when someone confronts us with hostility, do we curb our counter-hostility, trying to understand how that person feels? To accept others as they are is to respect them as moral equals, to appreciate their personal worth, to recognize fully their right to be different and to be themselves, to feel kindly disposed toward them, interested in them, desirous of knowing them better.

This is not the law of the world. The scribes and Pharisees accepted their own and rejected all else. Christ's law is a higher law—the law of the second mile, of turning the other cheek, of loving one's enemy, of praying for those who persecute and despitefully use us. Why? Why should one love the unlovable? Because of the intrinsic worth of each individual soul as a child of God! Because of our faith in their innate, Godlike potential! To treat people in terms of this potential is to help them to fulfill it. To judge and reject them serves to freeze this potential within them.

For instance, take Tom, a "cut-up" student in a class. Do we notice how he responds to moral judgments and rejection of others with aggression, hostility, and resentment? It seems to fire him up so he can get more laughs and recognition from the other students. In this mood he doesn't have the desire or the capacity to change. Moreover, as one person said, "The mutually hostile feelings completely block the only kind of communication that might lead to mutual understanding. The situation tends to deteriorate rather than to improve when there is rejection. It is unpleasant and disturbing to be rejected. It is deeply satisfying to be accepted." The first step is to accept Tom not as a problem but as a person with a problem. Try to build a relationship with him—an individual one based on true principles and on unguarded and genuine communication. He'll open up with us if he trusts us not to betray him; and as he opens up, because he knows we really like him, he'll have the courage to look honestly at himself and his behavior, and he'll learn from his experience and from us.

Understand People—Don't Label Them

Think of an individual with whom you have a poor relationship. See if your mind doesn't immediately give you labels that you attach to him or her—cold, indifferent, dominating, hypocritical, insincere, ambitious, and so on. But what is that person? Are you sure you understand what the person is? Have you ever tried to understand him or her and to see the world from the other person's point of view? To do so will be difficult, because you'll have to listen, and this will take some real humility. If you listen, you may change, and this will take courage. You also have to believe that a good purpose will be served, which will take faith.

Very few people have ever really experienced the feeling of being completely understood. When they experience it, it can become one of the richest feelings they have ever had. Truly, to listen to another with understanding requires a sincere desire plus practice, practice, and more practice, but it results in one of the richest forms of human affirmation and acceptance that exist.

Seeing the power in honest listening is amazing. Many deteriorated relationships can be rebuilt through the process of sincere listening—listening that strives to understand. If we work on the assumption that people behave as they do for good reasons and that from their point of view they are right, and if we strive to understand their point of view, we will inevitably find both of us moving a little closer to each other. We will discover that many of our earlier disagreements were misunderstandings, and with the others we will "agree to disagree agreeably."

One who has successfully rebuilt a relationship that had deteriorated will also discover that all of his or her relationships have improved, including the one with the inner self.

---
Notas:
[^1] Understanding Our Behavior Fight. We fight or resist in one of several ways—physical, mental, verbal, to name a few.
[^2] Flight. We strive to get out of the presence of the atmosphere that threatens us. Recognizing and Appreciating Differences
[^3] Rationalization. Often in embarrassing or threatening situations, we will manufacture reasons, either real or fanciful, in justifying and defending our positions and behavior. These mental calisthenics reduce the threat and often remove it altogether.
