Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

15

Be a Light, Not a Judge

The wife is upset because her husband just doesn't seem to spend enough time with her. No communication anymore. The husband is irritated because his wife doesn't understand the pressures on his life. She doesn't appreciate what he's trying to do. Their son Bill is frustrated because he can't take the car when he wants it. And all these time restrictions really get to him! Daughter Susan wishes her parents would get off her back over the way she wears her hair and the length of her skirts. And, would you believe, she can't date until she's sixteen! Marvin, the son in college, simply can't understand why the Church doesn't take a stand on more social issues. Sacrament meetings simply bore him—"so irrelevant."

These complaints aren't so abnormal. Think about some of yours. Don't you sometimes feel that if such and such a person would change, things would surely work out better for you? If only your boss would really recognize your ability and use you properly, what a contributor you could be! If only your wife would understand more and nag less. If only your husband would sense your need to get out of the house and to have some adult conversation. If only the Sunday School teacher would stop talking about her own life and get into the doctrine.

Notice the underlying thread in this complaining, murmuring, and stone throwing. If only others would change, or if the circumstance would change, then I'd improve. I'd change. Things would go well again.

In a very real sense, this kind of thinking brought about the crucifixion of the Savior. The people of that day, who ultimately crucified him, also looked for the situation to change "out there." Their Messiah was to come in great power and glory, overthrow the Roman taskmasters, and enthrone Israel into its rightful place again. This is somewhat comparable with many of today's protests: others are to change, the government should do this or that, the establishment had better "get with it or else," the youth should learn the lessons of life and appreciate what we have given them, and on and on.

But the Savior taught a hard doctrine, perhaps the hardest doctrine of all. It is the doctrine of repentance. It is the doctrine that says that I must change in order to help change the world. It is the doctrine that the only revolution with any permanent value is the one that takes place in the breast of the individual person. It is the doctrine of being "born again." Basically, it is the doctrine of accepting responsibility for one's own life and situation and for one's attitude toward whatever happens to the self.

Mote/Beam Sickness

The Savior asked, "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." ( [^1].)

Great truths are given to us here. First, there is a strong, almost universal tendency to find the fault in another; that is, the mote that is in our brother's eye.

Second, when we focus on this mote—the other person's fault—we don't focus on the beam or fault in our own life.

Third, in this spirit we often try to correct another. It doesn't work. We may have a correct opinion, but our spirit is wrong. Then we hurt, reject, offend, and threaten. Spirit, or attitude, communicates far more powerfully than opinions or gilded words.

Fourth, because of the beam in our own eye, we are unable to see clearly. Our judgment, or opinion, may be entirely wrong. We may be merely projecting our own weaknesses and calling them his or hers. We may mistake introspection for observation. Perhaps this is what Paul meant when he said: "Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things." ( [^2].)

How widespread is this mote/beam sickness! To some degree, it afflicts all of us. The doctrine of magnifying our own stewardship is the only medicine that will bring about a permanent cure.

In other words, to improve a situation, I must improve. To change my wife, I must change. To change the attitude of my husband, I must change my attitude. To win more freedom, I must be more responsible, must exercise more discipline. To raise obedient children, I and you must be more obedient to certain laws and principles.

This is not to say that I should altogether ignore the faults and weaknesses of others or that I should be blind to injustices in a situation. But it is to say that the very first step I take in improving any situation is to work on the injustice or fault in my own personal life, which is removing the beam from my eye. "And then [shall I] see clearly to cast out the mote out of [my] brother's eye." I then become a light, not a judge.

We might be terribly concerned about the various injustices in the nation, or an institution, but how just are we in rearing our own children? Is our discipline consistent, based on well-established and well-communicated principles and rules, or is it based on the mood of the moment? One moment permissively indulging them, the next moment arbitrarily restraining them? Are we upset with the hypocrisy of others? Do we live what we profess?

"Judge not, that ye be not judged." ( [^3].) Again, what is the medicine that will cure this mote/beam sickness? It is a principle, the understanding of which will eliminate the confusion as to when we are to judge and when we are not to judge—the principle of stewardship.

The principle of stewardship is the principle of focusing on our own responsibilities, on our own assignments, whatever they might be. We so focus on our duty as to magnify it, that is, to do more than is normally expected, to make more out of it than existed before. For instance, as husbands we focus on our responsibility ofbeing noble examples to our children and kind, understanding companions to our wives. We are the patriarchs of our families; and if we live and seek for the Lord's direction and help, he will inspire us with righteous judgment when we are called to exercise such a judgment, just as a bishop does over his area of stewardship and as our prophet does over his area of stewardship.

Cain became so bitter over Abel's righteous stewardship that he neglected his own, and in his insane jealousy he murdered his brother. Peter counseled wives who had the word and whose husbands did not obey the gospel that if they wanted to bring their husbands to the word, they should do it without the use of the word. (See [^4].)

There are young people who would win ever so much trust and many more rights and privileges from their parents if they would be diligent and cheerful in doing their work and obeying their parents. I've seen scores of young people get permission to join the Church from parents who had initially said no, by simply not arguing or preaching or contending in the home and by cheerfully and quietly doing more than what was asked of them. It takes time and it takes patience, but the power of example is the highest source of influence.

All of us are interested in things outside of our stewardships, and we should be, but the most important way to do anything about them is to magnify our own stewardships. This builds trust and confidence, and our responsibilities and opportunities to influence increase. The Lord says, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things." ( [^5].)

Take a magnifying glass and notice how it enlarges what it is placed over and how blurry your peripheral vision is. Now remove the glass. Observe your tendency to look all around the thing you focused on earlier. Where you focus on your own responsibility, you become relatively unconcerned with other people's stewardships. But when you don't magnify your own stewardship and are not a light yourself, you look at the stewardship of everybody else and become a judge.

All of this is a simple, almost self-evident principle. But I believe few of us really live it. Do a little introspection and find your own tendency. Once we can accept this principle, we will be amazed at how clear and simple becomes the path of duty and how freed we are from the habit of finding fault elsewhere and from excusing ourselves, justifying, and explaining.

The wise Solomon put the matter this way: "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." ( [^6].) The highest form of influence is to be a model, not a critic; a light, not a judge.

---
Notas:
[^1] Understanding Our Behavior Fight. We fight or resist in one of several ways—physical, mental, verbal, to name a few.
[^2] Flight. We strive to get out of the presence of the atmosphere that threatens us. Recognizing and Appreciating Differences
[^3] Rationalization. Often in embarrassing or threatening situations, we will manufacture reasons, either real or fanciful, in justifying and defending our positions and behavior. These mental calisthenics reduce the threat and often remove it altogether.
[^4] Education.
[^5] The Church.
[^6] Daily Work.
