Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

16

The Key to the Ninety-nine Is the One

After a zone leaders' meeting in the mission field, one of the missionary leaders approached his mission president, expressed appreciation for the meeting, and then made a rather strange remark: "For the first time since I have been in the mission field, I can believe and accept your expression of appreciation and affection for me."

"Why would you say that, Elder? You've been out here eighteen months. What is it that's made you feel this way now?"

"Remember in the meeting when we were talking about that elder in that far-off city, and how his zone leaders gave such a critical report of his rebelliousness and slothfulness?"

"Yes, I remember that."

"Well, I sensed as the report was being given, and as the other elders chipped in their two-bits on this elder, that you sincerely cared for him as a person."

"I do sincerely care for him. I am concerned."

"But it was more than that. As you questioned the zone leaders back and forth, I felt that you were really looking for a way to help him and that you really cared for him, if you know what I mean."

"I'm not sure I do know what you mean. Besides, why would this make such a particular impression upon you?"

"Well, that's the very point. You sincerely do care about us as individuals and want to help us. You see, I am rebellious too—only you don't know it. Whenever I'm around you I'm always on my guard, trying to make the best impression. But many times I get very rebellious inside myself, and so critical about my companion, about mission rules and about a lot of things. But I just never let on as that elder does.

"So all through these months when you've expressed your affection for me, and when you've congratulated me on my work, inside I kept saying to myself, he doesn't really know me. If he really knew what I was like, he wouldn't say that. But this afternoon when you didn't join in on some of the sarcasm and laughter over this elder's antics, I felt that even if you did know what I was really like, you would still have sincere regard and care for me too. I'm so glad I had that experience in the meeting. Otherwise, I wouldn't even have the courage to tell you what I've just told you. I would have been too afraid of disappointing you and of opening up too much of myself. But now I feel that you would accept me and try to understand and help."

To the mission president, this sobering experience taught him an invaluable principle of human influence—that the way to inspire and preserve the many (the ninety-nine) is in the treatment given to the one. Going after the one "lost sheep" results not in neglecting the ninety-nine, but in effectively reaching them.

Test it for yourself. What happens inside you when someone in your company maliciously rips into another? What happens inside you when a teacher is caustic and sarcastic and always tries to give the clever, cute answer? Are you willing to open up and expose your thinking and feeling to such a one?

What happens inside you when a leader confides in you about one of your fellow workers in a critical way, or when you see a leader behind the scenes making arbitrary decisions—manipulating the lives of others—and then in public expressing sincere interest in their views and feelings?

Such leadership communicates powerfully the insincerity and egotism of the leader. It also tells you what your limits are. You had better watch out—you may be the next one to get it! How do you know he doesn't confide in others about you behind your back? that you're not being manipulated also? It is impossible to violate a true principle of justice and honor toward one without, in this sense, violating it toward everyone else.

Now consider the opposite. What happens in you when you see a teacher or leader respectfully listen to another or go out of the way to serve another, particularly someone who might be a little obnoxious or rebellious or indifferent? Does it not communicate worth to you also? What happens inside you when this teacher or leader refuses to gossip, label, stereotype, or slander another—when you see someone freed of the need of sarcasm, or cutting humor, of cynicism? Aren't you more willing to trust that person, to open up, to seek help with your problem?

Or if you are a parent, what about your children? Could it be that the key to influencing all of them lies partly in how you treat one of them, particularly the most difficult one, in the presence of the others?

Is the Lord also teaching us that in some sense we all are lost sheep? Considering which commandments or teachings we measure ourselves by, aren't we all somewhat inactive in the Church and, therefore, in need of each other's encouragement rather than labeling? One person may be inactive in his church attendance, or in keeping the Word of Wisdom, while another is inactive in living the law of love or the principle of forgiveness.

Test this principle by using it. Do it at home, in the classroom, in the office, in the planning session, over the pulpit. Think about the one, talk to the one, regard the one, serve the one. If you are sincere and constant, you will discover that gradually your influence with the many will be magnified.

The key to the ninety-nine is the one. Or put in another way, the key to the group is the one individual.
