Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

17

Two Principles in Motivating Others from Within

Parents, teachers, leaders, and employers are all concerned with how to get others to feel and act responsibly and how to increase motivation. I suggest two principles that can be highly effective in developing motivation and a sense of responsibility: involvement and trust.

Involve Them in the Problem Solving

The first principle is to involve the people in the problem and then work out the solution together.

I give three illustrations. First: one night I was visiting alone with my oldest daughter about some of her problems, feelings, and concerns. After I listened for a while, she asked me if I had any problems I wanted to talk about. I decided to open up with a problem that had irritated my wife and me for some time—that of getting the children down and in bed on time with pleasantness so they would have sufficient sleep and we could have a little time for ourselves.

What happened amazed me. She asked a few questions about the problem and sensed my concern. Then she came up with some of the most ingenious ideas and suggestions on what might solve it. But more importantly, she herself became involved in the problem-solving process, and this developed in her a sense of responsibility to help. Since she is my oldest child and has good influence on the others, her responsible involvement literally solved most of the problem.

Prior to this visit we had only "talked solutions" to our children, and consequently we had retained the responsibility to implement them. And this was the problem!

Second: I wanted my two cars in good running order, without having to worry or take time to check up or follow through. That was my problem. What to do? Again, the principle: involvement.

So I frankly shared my problem with the manager of a service station I had patronized and expressed my trust in him and his judgment. The moment he felt involved in solving my problem, he became responsible. And how responsible he became! He took care of my cars as if they were his own—personally servicing, making preventive checkups, giving me the best deals on purchases. Result? Low-cost, trouble-free service without time or worry on my part. The key? My service station man developed a moral responsibility when I trusted and involved him.

Third: An MIA teacher used the principle of involvement one night in her class. She felt physically ill and was struggling with the lesson. The students were noisy and irresponsible. She didn't quite know what to do, so she candidly shared her problem, including how she felt at that moment. Her students immediately became responsible and carried on with the lesson admirably, receiving only occasional direction from their teacher, whom they had sit in the back. Once involved, they became responsible. Once responsible, they became part of the solution rather than part of the problem.

The most enlightened leaders and business managers throughout the country have been adopting this principle in one way or another. They have learned that only when people are sincerely and meaningfully involved, are they willing to commit the best that is within them. When employees identify their personal goals with the goals of an institution, an enormous release of human energy, creativity, and loyalty results.

Why does this principle work? Most know inside what is right, but often they do not feel responsible. However, when they are trusted enough to hear some of the facts of a problem situation that includes them, along with the feelings and anxieties of those who are affected by it, then they want to help, to respond. This honors them, and they feel to give their best ideas, their cooperation, and their support.

But when the solution to the problem is given along with the facts, they feel robbed of the opportunity to do something good on their own, to use their own initiative and creativity, to act rather than to always be acted upon. Thus the responsibility stays with the one proposing the solution.

Consequently, many parents find themselves carrying the responsibility to get their children to bed on time, up on time, to the table on time, to school on time—things that the children can do for themselves if they really want to and feel responsible. And for the same reasons, many teachers and leaders find themselves needing to always check up, to threaten, to motivate externally. They have never learned how to develop internal motivation.

There are certainly many problems and many situations in which parents or leaders or teachers simply do not have time to involve the people. Moreover, the solution often has already been decided upon, and any attempt at involving or democratic problem solving would be ritualistic and insincere—and eventually would boomerang.

However, when the principle of sincere involvement is used in situations of vital and personal interest to the others, a trust develops in the fairness and wisdom of those making some unilateral decisions, and the willingness to cooperate and obey, even without understanding, generally follows. In a sense they say, as did Adam, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." ( [^1].)

Experiment with this principle. It will take genuine humility and honesty, and it must not be used to manipulate someone into coming around to your own viewpoint or decision. You must be open and influenceable; then, ironically, you will also discover an increase in your own power to influence. Remember this—when the nature of the solution requires the cooperation, commitment, and involvement of others, then you had better involve them in the problem in the first place.

Trust

He was just a little boy. Only six years old. And that's a mighty big job—to have full responsibility for a yard that size! And what an interesting three-step process this determined dad went through to teach his son responsibility.

Step 1-training. The father spent considerable time over a two-week period, training his son in exactly what the job entailed: turning on sprinklers front, back, and side each day; hand-watering the shrubs and areas not reached by the sprinklers; and picking up any clutter. Not much, really, but quite a bit for a six-year-old. The boy chose this job himself one family home evening when all the jobs were being volunteered for or assigned.

Step 2-committing. In the middle of the second week of training, the father said, "Son, next Saturday I'm going to ask you if you will fully take this job of keeping the entire yard green and clean just as we've been doing together. It won't be my job anymore. It'll be your job. If I have time, I'll help if you ask. I don't care so much how you do it or when you do it. All I care is that the yard is always clean and green. Okay, son?"

"Okay, dad."

That following Saturday the boy, after another visit on all that was expected, committed himself to take the full responsibility of keeping the yard clean and green.

Step 3-becoming a source of help. When the father returned home from work the following Tuesday, he noticed paper strewn around. And the lawn looked dry. All he needed to do was to take two steps away from the car and turn the water key, and most of the large front yard would be watered. How simple! How easy! But he knew that if he did so, he would take back the responsibility he had given. And his son would have been delighted—for he obviously enjoyed playing with his friends more than tending the yard.

But he stuck to his guns. He did nothing. He said nothing.

The next few nights things looked worse and worse. His son simply wasn't doing his job. The clean, manicured yards of his neighbors were an embarrassing contrast to his own cluttered, yellowing yard. He thought of the expense if things began to die. He even wondered if he hadn't given too much responsibility for one so little. But again he determined that the character growth of his son was more valuable than things, and he refused to take over.

He asked his son if the two of them could walk around to see how things were going. The son agreed. After he sheepishly walked around the yard, he finally exclaimed, "Oh, Dad, it's so hard!" to which the father responded, "Anything I could help you with? I have a few minutes."

"Oh good—wait there," his son instructed, running into the house. When he reappeared, he had two sacks, and he directed his father to clean up a portion of the front while he took the other. A few minutes later the son took the father's sack, thanked him, emptied it in the garbage can, and turned on the front sprinklers. Look at who was beginning to direct whom!

Within two more weeks that son really felt the responsibility. He knew that if he didn't do it, no one would. He knew that his father depended on him—trusted him—and he was not going to let him down. It became "his" yard. His brothers and sisters had better watch out if they "threw stuff" around the place!

He was supervised by his own sense of responsibility, his conscience. There was no need for the father to judge or supervise, coddle or threaten, or worry when away on trips.

It is not always this easy or this simple, but there are some significant principles involved in this homely but true story for us all. Look again at the three steps.

These three steps are interwoven and feed back and forth on each other. Successfully performing them requires considerable character strength, faith, and patience in the leader or parent. Many lack such strength, and many assignees and children are so conditioned to irresponsibility and to hovering supervision that this trust philosophy of motivation cannot always be immediately implemented. Again, it will take time and character strength. But remember, trust is the highest form of human motivation.

---
Notas:
[^1] The training process is essential. Most parents or leaders fall short in this training and delegating process. They reason that it's just too time-consuming, and they assume the assignee clearly understands what the assignment is and wants to do it well. Both assumptions are often wrong. Then, in the long run, this supervisor spends much more time in externally motivating and in clearing up misunderstandings, which often spawn worse problems, such as strained relationships, personality conflicts, and bad morale.
