Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

IV

Communication: A Two-Way Process

18

With God: Prayer

Prayer, or communicating with the Lord, is in many ways similar to communicating or talking with another person. Let us explore five of these ways and then consider six principles of prayer.

It is a dialogue, not a monologue. We all experience from time to time how unsatisfying and boring it is to have a conversation with someone when there is nothing of mutual interest. Words may be exchanged, but meaning is not. One might pretend to listen bur not really listen. Eventually this will become evident.

But whenever we experience a genuine talk with someone, even though it may be about a subject of little importance, if both are interested in it, how satisfying such communication is. It is not the importance of the subject so much as the depth of interest that matters. For instance, two individuals may find questions of war and peace in the world, although terribly significant, of little interest, while the subject of how to tie a fly for fly-fishing may unite and even enthrall them.

Thus, in a communication with the Lord, the first requirement to making it a two-way process is that we have a genuine, real interest in the things that the Lord is interested in. When that interest is mutual, a dialogue will naturally take place. Otherwise, a one-way, mechanical effort or monologue—almost like going down a checklist out of a sense of duty—is inevitable.

People need sufficient dialogue back and forth to be certain that they understand each other. With the Lord also, our communication should result in mutual understanding. We must become open and honest in our expressions of feeling and thought, in our efforts to understand ourselves, to be understood by the Lord, and to understand him. Seeking to know the Lord's will is essential to two-way communication and to mutual understanding. Attention to the scriptures, a true attitude of worship, meditation—these are all helpful in understanding the Lord.

If we are not sufficiently open and honest with ourselves, we may not be able to distinguish between a self-voice of doubt or fear or hope or guilt—or whatever it may be—and his voice. Then we will not be able to understand him and his will for us. Therefore, there will be no mutual understanding, no communication.

When people truly understand each other, they are open to each other's influence; but until people feel understood, they cannot be influenced, because they feel that whatever is told them doesn't quite pertain to them in their own unique situations. For instance, suppose your child is sick and you desperately telephone your doctor, but before you feel you have accurately described the symptoms, he gives you a prescription and some advice. You can't help but feel some distrust toward this advice. It wasn't based upon understanding.

Does this mean that communicating with the Lord is a process of mutual influence, that not only I am influenced by the Lord but that the Lord is also influenced? Yes, I believe it means exactly that. The scriptures are replete with examples of how the Lord's behavior toward us is influenced by our behavior toward him. He indicates that he works with us and through us according to the level of our faith. (See [^1] and [^2].) If we have higher levels of faith, we become just that much better—willing, obedient servants, ones with whom he can work and whom he can use to serve his divine purposes. Therefore, our belief in him, our trust in him, our faith in him, as well as our doings and actions, influence his behavior toward us.

Another highly significant way in which communicating with the Lord is similar to communicating with other people is that communication is not so much a matter of words as it is of relationships. All of us have experienced situations where, because relationships were strained, we had to be very careful about the words we used for fear of giving offense, causing a scene, or being misunderstood. In such situations, how easy it is for further misunderstandings to take place. People become suspicious and distrustful, making a person "an offender for a word" instead of attempting to gather in the meaning of that person's words.

Each of us has been in situations in which the relationships were so unified and so harmonious we could seemingly communicate without words. In fact, so much mutual understanding and good feeling existed that we didn't have to watch our communication techniques at all. Sometimes people can grunt and nod at each other and still have an understanding. I've been in situations in which my relationships were so well established that one word or even a nod or a smile would communicate a world of meaning. I have also been in other situations in which the relationship was functioning poorly and a chapter of words wasn't sufficient to communicate meaning. People who work with words are called semanticists, and one of the basic rules is that meanings are not found in words, they are found in people.

The important thing in all of this as it relates to prayer is that our communication with God is more a matter of our relationship with him than the words we might use. The Savior in both the meridian dispensation and this last dispensation explicitly condemned those who draw near to him with their lips but are far from him with their hearts. In other words, they may say they are interested in the Lord's things, but their hearts are on other things. The relationship is strained. They are like strangers with each other. "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" ( [^3].)

Trust is born by having had experiences with each other that are trustworthy or honorable. If I make a promise to a person and don't keep it, then we don't feel good about each other. When I walk down the street, I try to walk on the side opposite him. If I see him, I don't look in his eye. There has been a strain, and a literal, though unseen barrier has been erected between us. If I repent and go to him to seek his forgiveness and try to make reconciliation, I can do away with that barrier. If I try to rationalize within myself—if I tell myself, for example, that he was untrue to me at such and such a time, so it doesn't make any difference if I don't keep this particular promise—then I will erect a barrier between us, a barrier that will be inside me.

Therefore, in summary, prayer must be a two-way process resulting in both mutual understanding and mutual influence, and it is a matter of relationship, not words, born of having trustworthy experiences with each other. This now leads us to the discussion of six vital principles of prayer or divine communication. By using your imagination and changing the words somewhat, you can see that these same six principles will pertain to human communication.

Principle 1 of Prayer: Preparing

Take out your Pearl of Great Price and read the Joseph Smith story. You'll discover that this young man of fourteen years of age had, perhaps unknowingly, made a tremendous preparation for his first vocal prayer with God, which resulted in the transcendent vision and appearance of the Father and the Son and which opened up this last dispensation. Read carefully his words. As you do so, think of all that his mind might have been going through:

During this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof. . . , though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was. . . to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. . . . In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? . . .

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James. . . . Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again. . . . At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. . . .

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. . . . After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. (Joseph Smith—History 1:8-15.)

What a tremendous process of mental and emotional preparation this young man went through! He developed both a strong desire to ask God for wisdom and the faith that he would receive it.

Four important activities are helpful in this preparation process:

a. Study the scriptures. The scriptures contain the mind and will of the Lord, and if we sincerely and conscientiously read them in an effort to understand his mind and will, not just for the people of ancient times, but for us of this time, we gradually, in a sense, put on a pair of glasses. When we wear glasses, we look through lenses that affect all that we see. If we were to look through an eternal lens at temporal and worldly things, we would see them in an entirely new perspective. If we have the words of eternal life flowing continuously over our minds because we diligently search the scriptures, we are, in a sense, looking through glasses with eternal lenses. We begin to think and feel and see things differently. Scripture study is one of the finest disciplines an individual can cultivate.

b. Meditation. President David O. McKay has called meditation the language of the soul. To take time to reflect, contemplate, and think deeply about the things of God, our relationship with him, and our deep needs, perhaps in an attempt to distinguish them from our wants, is a very subduing experience that prepares the mind and heart for prayer, which President McKay has called "the conscientious moments of meditation."

c. Fasting. An excellent way to prepare for prayer is through fasting, if the fast is done in the right spirit and if it is accompanied with meditation, prayer, and scripture study. Fasting subdues the spirit and makes an individual humble, open, teachable, and aware of deep spiritual need. It serves as a purifying and sanctifying activity, both physically and spiritually, when done with real intent.

d. Repentance. Oftentimes, in preparing ourselves to worship and to pray to God, we become aware of some deficiency or sin that leads us to repent. If we have offended someone, we make reconciliation. We seek forgiveness. Of course, prayer will help us to fully repent, but often before we can pray sincerely, we need to get our hearts and minds freed of some static.

These four activities—diligently searching the scriptures, meditating, fasting, and repenting—cause us to become vitally interested in the things the Lord is interested in and thereby prepare the heart and mind for two-way communication, which is embodied in the next three principles: expressing, listening, and committing.

Principle 2 of Prayer: Expressing

We begin our communication by thanking the Lord from our hearts for his blessings. If we have adequately prepared ourselves, this expression of gratitude is deeply felt and sincerely given. If we have not adequately prepared ourselves, it might be wooden and mechanical. We also (from our hearts) express our needs, our feelings, and our requests for help, direction, guidance, and comfort. In short, we ask for the Lord's blessings. I personally believe in the importance of being specific, both in the things we thank God for and the things we ask him for. To me, at least, this has helped to achieve a deeper level of sincerity, feeling, and concentration in prayer. Some examples: "We thank thee that our prayers were answered and Martha's operation was a success." "Help us know how to give our son Johnny a better concept of himself. Help him feel our love and support." "Please help me gain control over my temper. I feel I lack influence with my children because of this."

I believe that the Lord deals with his children largely in terms of their needs as he perceives them, rather than their wants as they might perceive them. God's will is found in our real needs, while our wills are generally embodied in our wants.

The Lord's Prayer is a magnificent example of the general areas of need. First, our relationship with our Father in heaven is indicated, as we say, "Our Father which art in heaven." We give to him all of our allegiance, our loyalty, and our total being, so we say, "Hallowed be thy name." We desire to see his will done on earth and to see ourselves as instruments in that process, so we say, "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." We are aware of our temporal needs, which enable us to exist and enjoy life, so we say, "Give us this day our daily bread." We need harmonious relationships with our fellow men and need the inner peace that comes from forgiving and being forgiven, so we pray, "And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." We have a great need to lead pure, clean, devoted lives of service and to give the honor to the Lord, to recognize him as the source of our power, and to avoid the evils of the world; therefore we pray, "And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen." (See [^4].)

A person may want to be delivered from hard work, maybe from suffering, but perhaps the growth or need of his character demands exactly these things. A young person might want and therefore will pray to be helped in school even though she did not do her own part in homework, but she may need to learn that if she doesn't sow, she won't reap. This may be a hard and a bitter lesson, yet it is a necessary one.

If the Lord has said, "Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him" ( [^5]), to me this implies that we should attempt to think and pray in terms of our needs and that if we adequately prepare ourselves, we might come to understand more fully our needs or at least his will for us.

Principle 3 of Prayer: Listening

If communication is to be two-way, it must be literally just that. As in any conversation, we talk, then we listen, and then we express ourselves again in terms of what we have heard. If in our conversation we pretend to listen but continue talking along the lines we are interested in, giving no response to what has been said to us, it is a monologue. Listen to young children; you will hear them carry on these collective monologues.

Susie: "I'm going to the zoo. As soon as my daddy comes, we can go."

Mary: "Do you like my red shoes? They're new."

Susie: "I've been to the zoo before, when I was little, only I can't remember."

Mary: "My Mommy said I could choose the color of shoes I like."

Susie: "There's a real tiger, and an elephant too. As soon as my daddy comes, we can go."

Everyone talking and no one listening. Sometimes older people do the same thing, except they pretend to listen; they are actually forcing themselves to be quiet as the other person talks, while in the meantime they are preparing their next speech.

How do we listen to the Lord? In a sense, think of the heart as the ear or the listening instrument of the spirit. From my study of the scriptures, I am convinced that the heart is exactly that, and the Lord's voice is the still, small voice of our own conscience that speaks to our hearts. President McKay has said that the Holy Ghost speaks through the conscience of members of the Church who are in the line of their duty. This still, small voice can pierce to the core and center of a person's soul. It is sharper than a two-edged sword, but it must be carefully listened to, and a person must be in tune in order to hear it: "He hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." ( [^6].)

The Lord indicated in the Book of Revelation that he is always willing to come in and speak to us if we are willing to hear and hearken. "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." ( [^7].)

He didn't say, "I stood at the door." He said, "I stand at the door." He didn't say, "The prophet (or the bishop or the president) hears my voice." He said, "If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me."

I believe that most of us, particularly those who are members of the Church, have an internal, moral guide and compass that literally speaks to us most of the time. I believe that all men have some divine spark that becomes a divine conscience (the spirit, or light, of Jesus Christ). A person might also develop a social conscience out of his environmental upbringing, but I believe the divine conscience may be separate from this. The divine conscience might be dulled and numbed by transgression and the traditions that form the social conscience, but for almost all people, if they are willing to listen, they will hear a still, small, divine voice that speaks to them deep inside. If they would follow that light, they would receive more light, and the voice would become clearer, plainer, and more understandable to them: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." ( [^8].)

In the Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Huck said:

It made me shiver. And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn't come. Why wouldn't they? It warn't no use to try and hide it from Him. . . . I knowed very well why they wouldn't come. It was because my heart warn't right; it was because I warn't square; it was because I was playing double. I was letting on to give up sin, but away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all. I was trying to make my mouth say I would do the right thing and the clean thing. . . . but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it. You can't pray a lie—I found that out. (Mark Twain, 22nd edition [New York: Bantam Books, 1981], p. 205.)

In a sense, Huck Finn was listening to this still, small voice, his conscience, which revealed to him his dishonesty and hypocrisy. He obviously was in need of more preparation, of making his mind up about a few things.

In other words, carefully searching the scriptures, meditating, fasting, making reconciliation, confessing—these activities are often necessary before a person will be open enough to carry on two-way communication with the Lord.

Over the years I have experimented, while speaking to various audiences, with this principle of listening. I have asked people to take a minute to meditate on some of their own spiritual needs, to listen very carefully to the still, small voice of their own conscience regarding things they should do to draw closer to the Lord or to their family members, or the things they should do to more fully magnify their Church callings or their priesthood. I have asked them if they could recognize and hear or feel a distinct voice, not in their ears but in their hearts, giving them specific guidance and counsel—in fact, perfect guidance that they absolutely knew they needed and should follow. The inevitable response has always been that the people do hear (feel) this voice, that it is distinct and discernible, that it subdues their spirit, and that they recognize their needs.

I will never forget my most memorable, inspirational experience with this principle of listening to the still, small voice. I was representing our Church at a "Religion in Life Week" at the University of Arizona at Tucson. A Jewish rabbi, a Catholic father, a liberal Protestant priest, an orthodox Protestant priest, and a Mormon elder had been invited to represent their various religious faiths and introduce their viewpoints to problems and issues of current interest. This was part of an attempt by the university to bring a religious dimension into the classroom and into the social clubs.

On the second night I was invited to speak at a sorority-fraternity exchange at a sorority house on the subject of "the new morality." The house was packed with about one hundred and fifty young people. They were sitting in the front room, in the dining room, in the hallway, and up the stairs. I had a terrific sense of being overwhelmed and surrounded, and I felt very alone.

The "new morality" is a situational ethic based on the idea that there are no absolute truths and standards but that each situation must be looked at in terms of the people involved as well as other factors that might be present. I put forth my point of view and my conviction that there is a God, that there are absolute truths and standards that have been revealed, and that the "new morality" is merely a rationalized old immorality. I sensed throughout my entire presentation considerable resistance and disbelief.

When it came to the question-and-answer period, two articulate students began to express themselves strongly in favor of this situational ethic of the "new morality." One was particularly effective and persuasive and acknowledged to the entire group that he knew it would not be wrong for young people who were unmarried to live together as man and wife. He said that he wasn't advocating any evil thing, but that love is so sacred and so beautiful, if an unmarried man and woman truly and deeply loved each other enough, then a premarital sexual relationship would be logical and right.

Though I sensed considerable support for this point of view, I continued to express my beliefs and quoted some scriptures to support them. I sensed there was little faith in my scriptural support, and to many of these students I was pretty much "out of it." I tried to reason that terrible consequences resulted from breaking the law of chastity. The particularly persuasive student on the front row agreed and indicated that the individuals involved were to be careful and responsible and unselfish but certainly not to be prudish. I asked him directly what would happen if a person were to take poison unknowingly. Would it not still bring on terrible consequences? He answered that it was poor analogy, that I wasn't giving enough value to the freedom that genuine love grants.

I remembered praying inwardly for some help and direction, and I came to feel that I should teach the idea of listening to the still, small voice of the Lord, of their conscience. I quoted the scripture earlier mentioned in [^9] and indicated that if they would listen very carefully, they would hear a voice. It wouldn't be audible, and they wouldn't hear it in their ears, but they would hear or feel it deep inside, in their hearts. I challenged them to listen, to meditate very quietly, and I gave them the promise that if they would do this, they would hear or feel this voice. Many sneered and jeered at this idea.

I responded to this ridicule by renewing the challenge: I asked each person to try it individually, and if each person did not hear such a voice in one minute, the group could immediately dismiss me, and I wouldn't waste any more of their time. This sobered them, and most appeared willing to experiment. I asked them to be very quiet and to do no talking, but to listen internally and ask themselves, "Is chastity, as it has been explained this evening, a true principle or not?"

The first few seconds some looked around to see who was going to take this business seriously, but within about twenty seconds almost every person was sitting quietly and appeared to be very intent in thinking and listening. Many bowed their heads. After a full minute of this silence, which probably seemed like an eternity to some, I looked at the individual at my left who had been so persuasive and vocal and said to him, "In all honesty, my friend, what did you hear?"

He responded, quietly but directly, "What I heard I did not say."

I turned to another who had been disagreeing, and I asked him what he had heard.

He answered, "I don't know—I just don't know. I'm not certain anymore."

One fellow stood up spontaneously in the rear. "I want to say something to my fraternity brothers I have never said before. I believe in God." Then he sat down.

A totally different spirit came to that group, a spirit that had distilled gradually and silently during that minute of silence. I believe it was the spirit of the Lord that they felt inside. It had some interesting effects upon them. For one thing, they became subdued and quiet and rather reverent from then on. For another, it communicated worth to them. They became less intellectual and defensive and more open and teachable. I believe it also met a real need and confirmed some hopes and perhaps convicted others.

It was easy to teach from then on. I felt as if seed was falling on fertile soil. I was enabled to bear witness of the living Christ, the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and the divinity of the Book of Mormon as concrete evidence of this restoration. I invited many to come out to the Institute of Religion, and later inquiry indicated that they had. I was able to loan some copies of the Book of Mormon. Many stayed around afterward merely to talk about this matter and other spiritual and religious matters. I discussed this experience with an institute teacher the next day, and he had experienced almost the same thing that very night.

I sometimes think we attempt to make what is simple and natural into something that is complex, mystical, and mysterious. If we would spend a little more time meditating and listening, we would receive some immediate and perfect moral guidance, which, if followed, would lead us into further light and guidance, and many of our other needs and problems and queries might be answered. But when we wait for a mysterious kind of spiritual intervention to answer a far-out question or to give us guidance on a really pressing problem, but we are unwilling to be true to the light we have at the present, I think we deceive ourselves. God does not work this way.

A short time ago I visited with a student who asked me, his past mission president, for counsel regarding a crucial decision he was to make. He didn't know whether to go on to graduate school and get married or to go into military service and delay his marriage and then go to graduate school later.

The more I got involved in the details of the alternatives, the more I sensed my own ignorance and inability to give good counsel. I asked him if he had "inquired of the Lord" about it. He said that he had and that he had done so frequently. I asked if he had listened carefully to the guidance he was receiving in many other matters, as magnifying his priesthood and keeping the commandments on a daily basis. He knew immediately what I was speaking about and acknowledged that he really hadn't been nearly as faithful as he ought to be.

I then asked him if he wasn't really trying to find a shortcut by coming to me or to others for counsel, rather than living the law of the harvest in obeying the light he had been given, by being true to his present assignment and stewardship, and also continuing to inquire of the Lord over this matter, believing that God would give him guidance in his way and in his own time. He acknowledged that he was seeking a shortcut, that he was really aware of what he needed to do, and that he was also aware that if he did it, he would receive the guidance he needed.

Now what would be the next logical step after listening and hearing the still, small voice give us guidance and direction in terms of our needs on these vital matters? If we are truly engaged in two-way communication, in a sincere dialogue, and if we have expressed ourselves and then listened, would it not be logical and natural to respond in terms of what we have heard? Wouldn't it be logical to tell the Lord that we would obey the guidance he had just given, that we would be true to the light we had just received?

Principle 4 of Prayer: Committing

Once we listen and hear the still, small voice, then we must promise or commit ourselves to obey it, to do what has been counseled. This is often a difficult principle or stage because it implies that our minds are made up, whereas many times they simply are not. We know what we should do, but as the saying goes, "There is a lot of slip between cup and lip."

The doing of it is another matter, and we hesitate to promise or commit ourselves that we will, in fact, do it, when we are inwardly hesitating and uncertain as to whether we really will or not. Consider these examples.

Express: "Heavenly Father. I don't seem to have any influence on my teenage daughter. Please help me to have a better relationship with Annette. This is such an important period in her life."

Listen: (What principle is this blessing predicated upon?) Is Annette really that important to you? Does any double-mindedness exist in your life? Are you willing to take the time to develop this relationship for which you ask? Are you willing to even give up other things that matter less in order to achieve this?

No Commitment: "Bless me to have a desire to get close to her and spend time with her so that she will know of my interest and love and concern for her welfare."

Commitment: "I will make a point to talk to her privately every day this week and spend the afternoon with her and the family on Saturday instead of going golfing at the country club."

***

>Express: "Heavenly Father. Please help me with my new calling as a stake missionary. Bless me to be effective with the discussions, and bless our contacts, Mr. and Mrs. Holbrook, that they will keep their commitment and read the Book of Mormon this week as they promised to do."

Listen: Is there any power in your teaching? Can you expect the Holbrooks to keep their promise and read the Book of Mormon, when you have repeatedly promised your companion and stake mission president that you would master the discussions and twenty-seven basic scriptures and you still haven't done this?

No Commitment: "Please help me to get my discussions and scriptures memorized so I can be a better stake missionary."

Commitment: "I promise that beginning tomorrow I will get up an hour earlier and memorize the basic scriptures and conclusions in discussions three and four."

Again, the overriding importance of principle 1, adequate preparation, becomes evident. If the preparation is deep and meaningful enough, then to promise and commit, having made one's mind up, will be a logical and natural step. If, however, the preparation is superficial and mechanical, or eliminated altogether, then the committing step or principle will loom as a huge, forbidding obstacle.

I believe that the principle of making commitments is central to the entire gospel plan. Another more sacred and spiritual name for a commitment is a covenant or an oath. We are the covenant children of the Lord. Abraham made a covenant with the Lord, and the Lord, in turn, covenanted with him to bless his posterity in certain ways. Those who are either the natural or adopted offspring of Abraham and Israel may partake of these blessings through their own renewing of the covenants.

A covenant is a contract entered into by two parties and binding upon both. In the waters of baptism we enter into a covenant or promise to keep the commandments of the Lord. He, in turn, gives us a promise that if we are true to our promise, he will give us peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. The Holy Ghost is sometimes called the Holy Spirit of Promise, which plants in our hearts a conditional promise of eternal life, regardless of the problems and afflictions that may dog our paths in this world. It is my understanding that if a person is sufficiently faithful and proven in this world, the time might come either in mortality or in eternity when he or she will be given an unconditional promise of eternal life. I understand this to be making one's calling and election sure.

The sacrament renews the covenant of baptism, which has in it the two-way contract or promise. We promise, or witness, unto the Father to take upon ourselves the name of Jesus Christ, to keep the commandments he has given to us, and to always remember him. He in turn promises that if we do so, we will have his Spirit to be with us.

In the theologies and philosophies of men, this covenant-making philosophy has largely been either eliminated or distorted. Generally speaking, salvation is offered for a confession alone either to Jesus or to a priest, and covenants contained in ordinance work become no longer necessary for salvation. In the Book of Mormon, we are told that many plain and precious things have been taken out of the Bible and that "also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away. And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men." ( [^10].) If Satan could eliminate or distort the concept of making covenants, he would achieve his end, for covenant making is a vital part of the divine system ordained in the premarital life for the growth and development of God's children toward eternal life.

Why is it so vital?

We are all conditioned heavily by our past experiences. These influence our present reactions and behavior, and therefore they influence our future, because our present becomes the future. If we become enslaved to our past habits and conditioning, this process will be self-reinforcing and circular, and we will never be able to arise out of it.

But if we become enlightened and knowledgeable about what we should do, and we learn to marshal all of the forces within ourselves and within our hearts and our minds to make a commitment with the full knowledge of what cost and sacrifices that commitment may mean, all the forces within and without us will be unified, and the blessings of heaven will be secured upon us so that we can break loose of the tremendous gravity pull of the past and of past habits.

The successes of the Apollo trips to the moon highlight the influence of gravity and the power necessary to overcome it. Years of effort and billions of dollars went into the preparations before lift-off. It is impressive that most of the power expended on the celestial journeys took place at the beginning, at the time of liftoff, in breaking loose from the gravity pull of the earth. Once the rockets were freed of the earth's gravity pull, little power was expended to move around the earth in orbit, to kick out of orbit and move to the moon, to separate the lunar module from the command module, to return a quarter of a million miles to the earth. In fact, one of the astronauts, when asked how much power was expended when the lunar module separated from the command module to go down and survey the moon, answered, "Less than the breath of a baby."

So it is in life. If our commitment inside can be deep enough and our awareness of the costs and sacrifices involved realistic enough, we can break loose of the past; and even though the energy and power necessary to do this are tremendous at the beginning, once we have broken loose of past habits and traditions and environmental influences, which have so conditioned and enslaved us before, we then have almost unlimited freedom and power to accomplish many things. True freedom, therefore, is internal, not external, as often defined by the world. External freedom is opportunity or the availability of alternatives to choose from, but internal freedom is the capacity and willingness to make such choices. People who are heavily conditioned to one response to a particular situation have no internal freedom. They are slaves to their own passions or appetites.

All of this points to the tremendous value of making commitments or covenants with the Lord. Daily, private prayer is an ideal time to review our promises and commitments and to enter into a new commitment that day to follow the counsel given through the still, small voice. The Lord has told us in our day that we are to enter into promises or vows and covenants on the Sabbath day, but also that "thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times." ( [^11].) My experience with this promising phase of the prayer process has taught me that it will bring more reality and sense of responsibility, honesty, and true humility than can come in almost any other way except, perhaps, by the sheer force of circumstance.

A husband kneels next to his wife in prayer, praying for the blessings of peace and harmony in their home. While he prays with his lips, his heart, the "ear of the spirit," has heard the still, small voice tell him that he hasn't been as kind and considerate and understanding as he should have been toward his own wife, next to whom he is kneeling that very moment. While all blessings from God are predicated on obedience to his laws, he is seeking a blessing but is unwilling to do his part to earn it.

Perhaps out of pride, stubbornness, justification, or rationalization, he hasn't allowed this still, small voice to really have place in his heart and result in two-way communication. He has continued the monologue in a mechanical way, praying for the Prophet, for the general and local authorities, for national leaders, for soldiers, for missionaries, for loved ones, and so on—going down a checklist, fulfilling a sense of duty before hopping into a nice, warm bed. This is hypocrisy. It is prayer without real intent. It brings its own kind of internal dishonesty and deceit, which is a form of damning or condemnation. "Likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such." ( [^12].)

But if, instead, while praying with his wife, he is to hear that still, small voice tell his heart that the law upon which the blessing of harmony and peace in the home is predicated is that he himself become an example and a model of gentleness, understanding, and kindness, and if he has the spirit of humility and adequate preparation in him, he can listen to what the Lord is telling him and acknowledge it and seek his wife's and the Lord's forgiveness. Then, having made reconciliation, he can enter back into the divine communion or dialogue and promise to be more kind, gentle, and considerate.

Unless we are willing to obey the law, should we ask for the blessing? Is that not an attempt to seek a shortcut, to avoid the responsibility, and thus to thwart the Lord's principle of growth?

I learned this principle while working with missionaries and doing missionary work. When we earnestly sought the Lord to help us find a family we could teach the gospel to, and when we thought very carefully about the law upon which this blessing is predicated, we would ask ourselves if we were willing to obey that law. If we were unwilling to make such a commitment, then it was better not to seek the blessing but rather to seek another blessing, perhaps lesser, that we were in need of and to obey the law on which that blessing was predicated.

Feeling and thereby promising to obey the law on which the blessing is predicated caused a level of unity and harmony we had not known before inside ourselves and between companions. We moved forward with sincerity and integrity and obeyed that law, and we learned how the Lord works: he performs his work and his miracles through the instrumentality or agency of his servants. If he has a servant he can trust, that servant will be used in the Lord's way. Those who can make commitments and keep them are the true servants of the Lord, and they can become powerfully effective influences and instruments in his hands for the blessing of many lives. But those who hesitate and vacillate in uncertainty and indecision and fear, who are unable to make a commitment or a promise because of their past experiences and habits, cannot be effective servants of the Lord. They are too much servants or slaves to their own futile ways, to environmental pressures, to their passions, appetites, and unrighteous desires. How can the Lord use such people?

We developed a motto in our mission that capsulizes this philosophy: "Until a person can honestly say, 'I am my own master,' he cannot say sincerely and realistically, 'I am thy servant.' " In other words, until missionaries have great self-control over their bodies, passions, appetites, and desires, and until they are willing to submit themselves to the Lord's will and Spirit, how can they be agents or servants of the Lord and follow the Lord's whisperings and directioning? Thomas Huxley described such a true person as one "who is full of life and fire but whose passions are trained to come to heal by a vigorous will, the servant of a tender conscience."

This process of making a resolution and subsequently breaking it can itself become a habit and can destroy the ability to make resolutions, so that the very thought of entering into honest promises or covenants becomes uncomfortable to us, as we are aware of our own weaknesses and inability to keep our promises. Or we might make them lightly and mechanically, without any real meaning and conviction behind them, and then break them, but remain unaware of the consequences. Or we might make them with other people and then when circumstances change, we break them and rationalize, hurting our relationships with those people. Making covenants is a boon or a curse, depending upon the integrity of the person making them.

The Lord, in a magnificent parable, teaches a great principle: "For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish." ( [^13].)

Part of the preparation process is to sit down first and count the cost. Part of the process of meditating and listening in prayer is to count the cost to see if we have sufficient to finish the job. If we feel we do, we commit ourselves. If we do not, then we might commit ourselves to something for which we do have sufficient to finish—something of lesser importance perhaps, but a beginning step toward that of greater importance. Great things are accomplished by small means. "A thousand-mile journey begins with a single step."

I found that missionaries who were struggling with various kinds of problems, particularly relationship problems with their companions, first needed to conquer some basic schedule and physical problems before they could move on to these higher problems. I encouraged them to enter into covenants, but only when they were sure they would honor the covenants; and they were never to make any promises they would not keep. Rather, they needed to begin making promises and keeping them. Then their sense of integrity and internal unity grew, and they developed the capacity to make higher promises.

I believe that the temple endowment is a magnificent illustration of this principle. Covenants are central to this sacred, eternal ordinance. Almost all else seems to revolve around them.

Principle 5 of Prayer: Believing

The Savior told his disciples on both continents, and in both the meridian dispensation and the last dispensation, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." ( [^14].) "If ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done. But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask." ( [^15].)

To my understanding, the Lord is telling us that our attitudes or frames of mind, heart, and spirit are of crucial importance in releasing the true power of prayer. While this seems obvious, I believe it to not be very common. Too often we place our faith in the seen realities rather than in the unseen God and his promises to us. We then call ourselves realistic.

But with the Lord, nothing is impossible: if the thing we request is right—that is, if it is wise from the Lord's point of view—even though all the seen realities might shout at us that it cannot be done, and if we pray in faith, believing that it can be done and that it is right and put ourselves in alliance with God in doing our part, the Lord will work his miracles. I have come to believe from my own experiences that many times faith in the Lord Jesus Christ just begins when "it cannot be done," when all of the seen realities combine together to hedge up the way, and people mock and ridicule. The doubts of cynics are self-fulfilling and support their cynicism, just as the righteous hopes of believers are also self-fulfilling.

So too in prayer: If preparation is adequate, if there has been sincere expression, listening, and committing, then the person who prays should go forth in a believing attitude, knowing that the Lord will grant the requested blessing if it is right and if the person does his or her part. One person plus God comprise a majority, for God is all-knowing and all-powerful. A miracle to us is to him the operation of a higher natural law.

When the brother of Jared held up sixteen stones for the Lord to touch and make shine, he did it in a believing attitude, and in a sense he testified to God that he knew God had the power to touch the stones and make them "shine forth in darkness." The Lord did so. The brother of Jared then requested to see the Lord himself. The Lord asked him if he believed the words that he would speak. The brother of Jared testified that he knew that God was a God of truth and that he did believe, and the Lord thus showed himself to the brother of Jared. (See [^16].)

I believe that if parents will continuously pray in faith, in the believing attitude, knowing that, if it be God's will, he will bring down a special blessing or opportunity into the life of one of their children, this will take place. But if these same parents offer such a prayer but don't really believe in their hearts, they frustrate the very laws upon which the blessings or requests are predicated. The Prophet Joseph was told by James that he should "ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed." ( [^17].)

Principle 6 of Prayer: Doing

If I keep my promise and if I am true to the commitment made in prayer and then report back at night on my stewardship or my assignment for that day, I will feel inside myself a sense of integrity: the Lord will be telling me that he is pleased with my work.

If I go through all of the other steps but neglect the sixth and last step, I will find myself unable to go through all of the steps again until I have repented and prepared myself for two-way communication. If I go through all of the steps with the exception of commitment, I will find that my "doing" step will be rather easily uprooted by the pressures of environment and the pull of habit and personality. If I do not adequately prepare myself and attempt to go through the rest of the steps, my commitment will be shallow, and I will not be a doer. I need to prepare. I need to commit. I need to do. They serve and reinforce each other. The hand cannot say to the foot, "I have no need of you." (See [^18].)

If I do not live true to the light that I have been given, to the still, small voice of my own conscience, to the voice of the Lord, to the oaths and covenants I have made, then I lose my internal source of light, and I become buffeted by the fickle pressures of circumstance and personality. But if I do live true to that voice and to that light, then I will have an internal source of light that will be my source of guidance and comfort and direction, and, as the scripture says, "he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." ( [^19].)

This is how the Savior can literally become the light and life of our personal lives. We are not hearers only, but doers. We acquire an internal anchorage, a personal relationship with the Lord Jesus Christ, and then he literally becomes our guide and our comfort. "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures. . . he restoreth my soul." ( [^20].)

The doing phase, or the doing principle, because it is the last principle before reporting back to the Lord, in a sense becomes the first or preparing principle for two-way communication. Together, the six principles of prayer—preparing, expressing, listening, committing, believing, and doing—comprise a whole gospel way of life, oriented and centered on God and his Son Jesus Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] True Communication Is a Two-way Process
[^2] Communication Is Mutual Understanding
[^3] True Communication Results in Mutual Influence
[^4] The Crucial Dimension Is the Relationship
[^5] The Key to a Relationship Is Trust
[^6] Daily Work.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
