Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

19

With His Children: The Spiritual Roots of Communication

In a recent interview I heard the voice of a distraught and tearful mother, "Oh, what can I do? What can I do? My daughters are leaving me."

"What has happened?"

"My daughters don't want to live with us anymore. They're going to the university, and they're becoming involved in all of the activities there. They're beginning to stray from the teachings of their youth."

"Are they going to church any longer?"

"No."

"Can you communicate with them?"

"No. We haven't been able to talk together for a long time now."

"Does their father communicate with them!"

"No. There's a real break there. And now they want to take their own apartment and live away from home and go to the university. I don't know what to do. I've prayed about it. I'm just beside myself with worry."

Many of us who are parents of teenagers become very much aware over the years of the tendency to lose our influence with our children. Teenagers tend to listen more to the group they belong to—to their friends—because their friends seem to understand them and sympathize with them. And therefore we, as parents, gradually find that as our children become more and more independent and free, our influence on them lessens. When we begin to see them taking a lower road, we naturally have great anxiety. We want to know what we can do. In our eagerness to do something, we often rush in and take emergency measures. We might even take extreme measures and give strong counsel or reject certain kinds of behavior. As we do this, our children may withdraw a little more from us, and rather than come toward our counsel, they sometimes move away from it. They may even begin to "use" (by turning against) the very things we have taught them—the gospel and the Church, for example—as weapons with which to strike back at us.

It seems to me that there is a common denominator in all of these situations and problems. I became aware of this common denominator while serving a mission in Ireland and watching the lives of several hundred missionaries as they came into the mission field. We also watched the process of conversion in the lives of hundreds of people. As mission president, I wrote each of them, asking the reasons for their joining the Church.

Again and again I came to sense, as a result of these experiences and communications, that a common denominator seemed to lie beneath the attitudes and the behavior of almost everyone. For lack of a better term, I call it insecurity or self-doubt. With such feelings, people doubt their own abilities, their own basic worth, and their righteous capacities.

How do people handle such self-doubt? In various ways. In the mission field, for instance, nonmembers could escape it by simply saying to the missionaries, "I don't want to hear any more." They had tasted enough of it to realize that something was there that might require a change within them, so they would withdraw or fight against it. Many times we would find individuals who really did not want to live the Word of Wisdom, but they masqueraded their reasons: "I just can't accept Joseph Smith and the supernatural revelations he claimed." But again and again when we asked those who came into the Church to look into their hearts and examine the real reasons why they had joined the Church and why they perhaps hesitated for a period of time, they responded by admitting that they had earlier doubted themselves. People were not doubting the Church—they were doubting themselves!

We discovered that an individual would know the Church was true only to the degree he or she was true to the Church. By being true to the Church, they seemed to experience an unlocking from within of a divine sense or a testimony—a conviction that came from obedience.

Once we learned this transcendentally vital lesson, we stopped trying to convince people by persuasion, reason, and the use of scripture alone, for this approach stirred up their self-doubts. Instead, we encouraged investigators to obey, to change, to repent, to pray, to live a commitment, to attend church, to study the Book of Mormon. This approach, when followed, minimized self-doubt.

Some missionaries were sent to a new city to open it up. If one of the missionaries had been bruised in his life—hit too much by criticism, rejection, or maltreatment—he tended to become defensive in order to protect himself. The fastest way to escape the responsibility of finding and teaching was to reject the city and say, "It can't be done here. There's no one here who's really interested. The people are already too committed to their own religions." Or an elder could even reject his own companion, because if he were to open up with his companion and have an honest relationship—a true, genuine communication—he might be hurt, or so he felt. Such people are not quite sure whom they can trust. They have likely trusted before, perhaps, and it ricocheted on them. They were hit, and people who are continuously hit get bruised and naturally grow defensive—and they learn to keep up their guard.

These are some ways of handling insecurity: avoid situations or responsibilities that may reveal one's self-doubting and insecurity; move away and escape; or fight, criticize, and find fault with others—leaders, programs, or self—to avoid confronting the real problems inside.

An enormous responsibility rests upon us to communicate effectively, and because of this responsibility, self-doubts and insecurities within can rise to the surface until one of two approaches is taken: escape and withdraw; or fight, criticize, and find fault. Find the mote (weakness) in your husband's (or wife's) eye and focus on it until that view obscures the view of the beam (weakness) in your own eye. This makes it almost impossible to clearly see or to effectively give help. Or withdraw, saying, "I don't want to communicate. I have nothing to say—nothing to talk about." That is an escape! Or else compensate for your insecurity by focusing on security from the outside—clothes, styling, and membership in select groups—inwardly saying, "These things can compensate for my own feeling of insecurity and make me feel adequate and more secure."

I suggest that none of this works upon the roots at all. None of it works with the underlying causes of strife or of peace. I suggest that the world doesn't know fully what those roots are—those deep spiritual roots that, if exercised, fed, and nourished, could bring about a great internal feeling of security and peace, so that, in turn, out of that internal strength and anchorage will flow the ability to be a peacemaker in our relationships with others, particularly when the storms descend.

In my judgment, too much of present-day thinking regarding communication is based upon a sunshine philosophy. When the sun is shining and things are going wonderfully, people can communicate easily, naturally, and effectively, but the moment the storms descend (and they descend almost every day on all of our lives in one way or another—at least little storms: conflicting expectations, economic pressures, conditions of stress, time pressures, and so on), we lose our temper, shout out, condemn, do some things that we would never think of doing when the sun is shining. Sooner or later when the storms come, our self-doubts surface, relationship problems commence, and communication breaks down.

Henry David Thoreau, the great natural philosopher, wisely stated, "There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root." What are those roots, and how can we stir them deeply within us? Let me tell you a story and see if you can discover what those roots are:

One night as a young family were on their knees in family prayer, the eight-year-old son said, "Does Heavenly Father really love me.'"

The father assured him, "Yes, he does. Pray to him from your heart."

The children had been taught to pray privately but also to pray as a family.

"Does he really love me?"

"Yes.

"No matter what I do?"

"Yes, he loves you all the time. If you ever do naughty things, he even loves you then, but he wants you to change and do good things."

As the parents rose to leave the bedroom, the little boy started to cry and said, "Oh, Mommy! Can we have a talk.'"

"Yes, Son."

So they went into the other room, and for about an hour and a half they visited together. And he began to open up and tell his mother about what was happening in his life.

For about three or four days prior to this little visit, the young boy was having all kinds of problems in the home. He would take out his hostilities on his little brothers and sisters; he would shout; he would wake up angry in the morning, very disturbed, and would disturb the entire family. There was strife in the home, and he was the author of much of it.

His parents could not understand all of this.

But during the talk, he said, "Mommy, I'm doing something naughty in school. Do you promise you won't tell Daddy!"

"Yes, I promise, Son. But maybe you'd like to tell him."

"Oh, no!"

"What is it.'

"Well, we started to get into this one subject." He then told about a subject he was studying in class. He continued, "And as we started to get into it, the other kids were really good at it, and I wasn't. I didn't know much about it. The rest had taken this subject before, but I had never studied it before. Whenever the time came to work on this subject, I wanted to ask the teacher to help me, but everyone else knew it and I didn't, so I felt awfully stupid. I didn't want to ask her. I was frightened to ask her. I asked her once, and she was mean toward me, and so I wasn't going to ask her again. So. . . "

He then broke down, "Oh, Mommy, can I tell you this?"

He had to have reassurance that what he would say would not bring about his mother's disapproval of him as a person. When he felt sufficiently assured, he said, "I'm cheating, Mommy, I'm cheating. And now I've cheated so much that the teacher thinks I'm one of the best students in the class. I just have to keep it up, or else she'll know I've been cheating."

He confided in his mother the various devices he had used to cheat—looking at a book, looking at someone else's paper, and even pretending to go somewhere in the room to get some chalk and other materials while looking at some answers on the way. He had to calculate all this.

He said, "I know I've been baptized. That's why I haven't even wanted to go to Primary and Sunday School lately. I haven't felt good within myself. And, Mommy, that's why I haven't prayed from my heart, because I knew I was doing wrong. I don't know what to do."

Soon he had sufficient courage to tell his father, and later he went to his teacher and confessed what he had been doing. There was a marked change in him after this repentance. He would wake up with peace within himself. No longer was he the great troublemaker and strife producer with his brothers and sisters.

Now if you were to tell someone that the reason this little boy was having such a problem in the home was because he was sinning, they would probably say, "Oh, get off it. To say that little eight-year-old boy was sinning [and that was the core of the real problem] is foolish. You need to communicate with him more and to give him more love because he's feeling a lack of security. Give him more security, more affection, more understanding. It's just a phase."

That is good counsel, I admit. But, nevertheless, the root of the problem lay in his own transgression. As long as that internal strife was there, the eight-year-old merely carried it into the lives of others. When he resolved that internal problem, he had peace within himself, and he carried peace into the lives of others.

James the apostle asked, "From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?" ( [^1].) He suggests that conflicting loyalties and passions within are the cause of human strife. In other words, the real root of peace and effective communication when the storms of life descend is obedience to divine law. This is not the easy answer—in fact, it is the hardest answer of all and yet the truest, for it overcomes self-doubt.

We had problems arise one time in our mission between the mission board and the district board. They were "warring" with each other. Some on the mission board felt that the district board would not cooperate and follow the program they had been given, and the district board felt that the mission board was too authoritarian, too dictatorial. There were many communication problems that went on for months.

We worked on the problem for a while, but we only worked on the surface. We would often counsel: "Let us be one. If we are not one, we are not the Lord's." Then all would momentarily be inspired, but within a few days something else would creep up to con6rm some earlier suspicion, and the communication problem would arise again. Whenever the storms would come, the program would fall apart again; but when the sun was shining, everything seemed one.

"Problems are rooted spiritually and they begin with me," I realized. I had to start with myself, and it was a hard, demanding experience. When I looked into my own heart, I could see that in many instances, in trying to resolve this problem and to work with it, I had not communicated properly. I had not taken the time to build certain relationships that were important. My planning was not as careful or as long-range as it should have been, nor had I been as dedicated in my efforts to communicate respect and love to the members of the various boards. Therefore, before I went to a meeting with the boards, I asked our Father in heaven in the spirit of fasting and prayer to give me the courage to look into my heart and to acknowledge sincerely my own failings in the meeting itself. I did look and so did they, each in his own turn. I had never had an experience quite like that. When each man looked into his own heart and saw the beam within his own eye and confessed it, he committed himself to removing it rather than focusing upon the mote in his brother's eye—"He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone." ( [^2].) And from then on, the roots were being stirred and worked upon. We were repenting—we were deeply changing—and the communication naturally became a peaceful one.

One day a branch president called me and said, "I quit. I can't take this anymore."

"What's happening?"

"Do you know that the district president is actually coming into my branch and interviewing my people? He's asking them about me and then criticizing me, both in the way I run the branch and the way I raise my family."

"No, I didn't realize that."

"He's undermining my entire branch. There's no use in my going on at all. I can't take it anymore. I quit. I resign."

"It's difficult, president, to talk over the telephone. Can we get together so we can really talk it over'."

"What's there to talk about?" he replied. "Do you sustain him or me? I've just had it."

"We've got to discuss this together. We don't want this to hurt your branch."

"Hurt my branch? He's already hurt it, and frankly it's upset my wife and family terribly. I guess I've lost my temper a few times around here. Frankly, nothing's going right. Even my kids are upset, and my wife feels just the way I do. We've tried our best, but now we want out!"

"May I visit with you day after tomorrow? I'm on a mission tour right now. I could certainly come to your home, and we could then visit together."

"There's nothing to visit about! Don't you accept my word for it? Is he right or am I right? Whom are you going to stand behind?"

I tried to reason, but reason and emotion are two different languages. Until I accepted how he felt and did not try to answer all his emotion with reason, he continued to pour forth emotion. As soon as I accepted how he felt, he became reasonable.

Eventually, after I listened to this branch president's full story, he agreed to have a personal visit on the matter and to fast and pray, along with me and his wife, in preparation for our visit.

Two days later, on completing my mission tour, I called at the branch president's home. The cordial greeting, in contrast to the heated phone conversation, evidenced some mellowing. However, just as soon as we discussed the real problems and what this other Church leader had allegedly done, apparently over a period of several months, all the old feelings of justifying bitterness erupted through the surface again. Both of them poured out the venom.

After further discussion, I read from the Doctrine and Covenants wherein the Lord taught the doctrine of forgiveness: "My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened. Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trepasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (64:8-10.)

I asked the branch leader, "Would you go to this brother and ask him to forgive you?"

"What do you mean," he replied. "Him forgive me? You've turned this whole thing around. It's for him to seek my forgiveness."

"Let's read this scripture again," I pleaded. "The Lord here decries the hurtful effects of the unforgiving attitude more than the acts that prompted it."

"Oh, I couldn't do it. Not sincerely. Could you, honey?" he said, turning to his wife.

"I'll say not!"

"You can do it. You are disciples of the Son of God, not of this world. He taught us to go the second mile, to turn the other cheek, to forgive seventy times seven, if necessary. I can check into this problem myself, but you need to get this bitterness, this poison out of you. It's afflicting you, just as the scripture states, and hurting you, your marriage, and your family far more than anyone else. If you pray earnestly for the Lord's Spirit and spiritually prepare yourselves to receive it, the conviction and courage to seek forgiveness will come."

After an extended discussion of what it means and costs to be disciples of the Son of God, they expressed belief and agreed to seriously seek forgiveness.

A few days later he came to the mission home and with tears in his eyes related what happened. "My wife and I did prepare ourselves. We began to see more clearly what had happened, not only about the problem we spoke of, but also about a lot of other problems we face. President," he said, "I now know what it means to have a 'broken heart and a contrite spirit.' I have never seen my own sins so clearly. We came to feel only sorrow, and we sincerely wanted to ask forgiveness."

"What happened?"

"When we called on him he seemed distant and cold, but then we sincerely and humbly asked his forgiveness for our bitter feelings over all these months. He then broke down and said, 'Oh, it isn't for me to forgive you. It's for you to forgive me.' President, our souls became knitted. I love that brother now. We understand so much more now. I guess I'm just beginning to understand what it means to be a disciple of the Son of God."

Much of the world's counsel and solutions to the communication problems between people—and the strife in families, between husbands and wives and parents and children—are superficial. They are not based upon a fundamental understanding that transgression lies at the root of strife and that the only way to work upon that root is through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, covenants made in the waters of baptism, at the sacrament table, and in the temple where there are several essential covenants—each one, in turn, giving the power to obey the higher one. If one is obedient to a lower covenant, more light and power are given. Then comes a higher covenant, until eventually a person is taught how to return to the presence of God and how to commune with him here and now.

Jesus Christ is the way. If people try to take any other way but through him and his holy gospel, they become thieves and robbers of their own souls. They have deceived themselves. There is too much aspirin-thinking or symptom-handling concerning communication problems and too little willingness to look deeply within and to acknowledge where the root of the fault or error might be. For those who take the right way, then from the deep humility and honesty that develop, a spiritual well will overflow with love, sweetness, understanding, respect, and courage.

We live twenty-four hours a day. Could you use one hour or just half an hour seeking the presence of the Savior of this world? If you really knew that 5 percent of your time would influence the other 95 percent of your time, that even your sleep would be more peaceful, more restful, and your communications would be more authentic and peaceful, particularly when the stress conditions come—if you knew really that you would be more successful in 95 percent of your life by being true in 5 percent of your life, would you neglect or superficially use that 5 percent? I don't think you would.

A suggestion: Learn in a daily way to stir yourself spiritually. How? Get to know the Standard Works and love them. Feel the pulse of the Lord through them. Find out how he thinks and how he feels. Get to know Christ. Memorize his teachings. Let the "solemnities of eternity" ( [^3]) distill upon your mind. Let not your inner security come from outer status symbols, from efforts to impress others, from clothing or looks, but instead from a deep, honest, spiritual communion. Those who commune with God can communicate with self and others under conditions of stress. Those who do not so communicate find that when the environment presses upon them and people judge or reject, they usually fall apart because they have no strength within.

I testify out of my own experience that if we will have that kind of an honest, prayerful, studious experience every day and covenant with the Lord to be true to him, we will find a well of water coming up within us to replace self-doubt with a deep internal strength and anchorage. We may have to repent sometimes and confess, we may have to break our hearts—but that is the nature of the spiritual sacrifice required of us today. The deepest need in this world is to be born again, with Christ becoming the Father of that second birth. This, to me, is the spiritual root of communication.

---
Notas:
[^1] Human relationships and experiences are the predicate for divine relationships and experiences. People's concepts of God and his attributes are largely the projection of their own experiences—happy or bitter—with the authority people in their lives. In spite of what they intellectually agree to, or even verbally teach, many feel that God cannot be trusted, that he is unforgiving and unloving and is only to be feared. What is the greatest thing in all the world? A child of God, a human personality.
[^2] People behave more out of their feelings than out of their thinking. Motivation comes primarily from the heart, not from the mind. Many people intellectually know that the gospel is true, but they won't obey it unless they feel strongly about it—feel more strongly about it than they do about other things. There are many competing activities and influences in the Church program, and each of these plays its role in everyone's life. Our youth will follow the Church program if they "feel good" about it and "feel good" about themselves in it. Not only must they feel good, but they must also feel stronger and better about it than about any other source of loyalty, influence, and enthusiasm. What is the greatest way to bless this child of God, this human personality? The gospel of Jesus Christ, as found in the living programs and doctrines of the Church.
[^3] If leaders and teachers in the Church will learn to live the laws of love, they will encourage their people to live the laws of life—that is, to live the "shoulds," to behave as they should behave. The laws of love essentially amount to accepting people as they are, listening to them with understanding, respecting their feelings, patiently and caringly building relationships, and then beginning the teaching process—both by example and by precept. If, however, the teachers and leaders disobey the laws of love—by constantly preaching to, moralizing to, judging, rejecting, manipulating, masterminding, or double-talking to people, or whatever reduces a person to the level of a "thing"—they will encourage disobedience to the "shoulds" or the laws of life. What is the greatest and highest law in the gospel? The law of love. Upon this law hang all other laws.
