Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

20

The Two Languages: Logic and Feeling

Some time ago, a stake leader, on entering a youth dance, was approached by a group of irate teenagers and asked why they could not participate in some of the extreme modern self-expression dances. The questions were put forward more in the form of angry statements, and these teenagers were obviously dead serious.

"We don't participate in this kind of dancing because it's not consistent with the high standards of the Young Men and Young Women program," answered the leader.

"Why isn't it? What's wrong with it? There's nothing wrong with it any more than ballroom dancing!"

"Well, these dances involve more self-expression, and besides they —"

"Oh, go on. You can get as much self-expression in any kind of dance. It's merely up to the individual."

"But that's not really the point, either. The point is that these dances are crude and often very suggestive and —"

"Only suggestive to those who think that way. We don't, and we want to dance that way."

"Well, the Church is trying to set a high standard in dance, as well as in everything else."

"High standard, huh? We think cheek-to-cheek dancing is just downright suggestive. It's far below even our own standards."

"But —"

"And furthermore, we think that the way we dance is a lot of fun, and we —"

The leader, feeling a challenge to his own authority, angrily and summarily cut in, "I don't want to talk anymore about it. The Church policy has been laid down, and that's that! The Church teaches us not to smoke and drink—you don't smoke and drink. Now the Church teaches us dance standards to maintain. If you accept the Church, you should accept those standards."

One teenager chirped in from the outer ring of the ever-growing cluster of kids surrounding the leader: "Do you mean that if we don't dance like you want us to, we can't associate with the Church?"

"Now, I didn't say that. I meant —"

"Well, that's what you said!"

"That's not what I meant. I meant to say that this Church is run by revelation and that the purpose of it is to set a high standard to all the world, and this especially applies to our youth activities. You've accepted other standards of the Church. Why is this one such a hard one to accept? Besides, you shouldn't be questioning these things. What your leaders say should be enough for you. Now, that's what I mean, and I don't want to talk anymore about it!"

At that, the leader tried to break through the grumbling crowd, which had somewhat broken into small arguing, contending groups, each taking different sides of the question.

The leader felt bad. Not only had he failed to get his point across, but he had also developed a mean spirit in the process of trying. He had felt his own authority questioned and disrespected, and he had let loose with that spirit on those teenagers, particularly the ones closest around him, who had felt it and now had good reason to disrespect him.

Immediately out on the dance floor many of the teenagers started bouncing and shaking and twitching. It was a kind of mutiny. The stake leader could partly understand the rebellion from what had happened before, but this made him even angrier, and the desire came within him to close down the whole dance and call it quits. Just then, a young girl who had been close to the stake leader and who had confided in him on several occasions came up to him and said, "Do you mind if I ask you a question?"

"What is it, Judy?" snapped the leader.

"What can we do?" she answered sincerely. "What can I do? I want to do what you say, but I don't know these other dances. Besides, I'm scared."

That last statement was so honest. It stuck like a lump in the leader's throat. He could give no answer. He asked himself, What can I say? I can't just tell her not to be afraid. Maybe these kids really don't know how to do these other dances. They certainly involve a lot more instruction, and when I think about it, they also involve more social skill, the ability to talk to each other while they're dancing, and these kids are new at this. Some of them aren't even members of the Church. Maybe we're just expecting too much. What can I say to Judy? Not to be afraid? But she is afraid, and she's honest. I wonder if I'm that honest. Aren't I afraid? Afraid of my feelings, my own authority, afraid to have it questioned—doubted?

"Well, Judy, let's talk about it for a minute. Come over here and sit down."

Judy and the leader went over to the side and sat down; and for the first time in this entire squabble, two people began to listen to each other. Neither tried to play a role or to put up a mask or a facade. There was no anger, no hostility, no defensiveness. In their place were sincerity and honesty. Neither felt that his or her point of view was the only one, that he or she was right and all else was wrong. Therefore, no one felt bludgeoned into consenting. There was a feeling of acceptance between Judy and the leader as they talked. They accepted each other. They accepted the fact that they thought differently and felt differently. They respected each other. They continued to talk, Judy giving her reasons for her feelings, and the leader giving his for his feelings and the policy of the Church. They found that the earlier fear they had both felt seemed to vanish. They felt rather sustained and strengthened by each other—merely because in their honesty they accepted each other's feelings, each other's expression. Once Judy felt that the leader respected her feelings, she seemed to have the power to deal with them herself and to look objectively at them. Gradually they changed.

Once the leader felt that Judy wasn't questioning his position or that of the Church, he felt sustained and wanted to listen; he wanted to understand. And because he did, he learned. He learned about methods and proper timing. He learned about education and instruction. He learned the absolute futility of using the mind to dominate the heart. He learned that there are two languages—the language of logic, the "shoulds" of this earth, and the language of sentiment, how people really feel. He learned that people behave more on the basis of how they feel than how they think. He learned that unless there are good feelings between people, reasoning intelligently is almost impossible. He learned that fear is a knot of the heart, and to untie that knot is a matter of relationship—of sincere, genuine, honest, affirming relationship.

It was not so much a matter of intellectual understanding at all! Reason didn't seem to stand for much, but acceptance did—acceptance of others, acceptance of the fact that they're different, that from their point of view they are right, acceptance of the value of their feelings, that they truly do feel these ways, and that feeling isn't so wrong.

The leader learned that both he and Judy changed, that both grew and both learned. He wanted to undo the harm he had caused. It seemed vain, considering there were so many involved. Some had already left the dance in disgust. Others were dancing in rebellion, and others were carrying angry feelings in their hearts. The leader went up to one of the chief spokesmen of the group and said, "May I speak with you a minute, Tom?"

"Yes, sir."

The leader drew Tom over to the side, put his arm around his shoulder, and said, "Listen, Tom. I'm sorry for the way I acted out there. I really got to feel mean inside me. Will you forgive me? I was only trying to explain the policy of the Church, and I did it very poorly."

Tom answered, "Me, forgive you? It's more we need you to forgive us. We know we're wrong. We know what we should do, but I guess we just don't know how to do it. It's not that we don't love the Church or not believe it's true; we just got mad and rebellious. We felt you questioned our acceptance of the Church. It's not that at all. I guess we really know that the high dance standards are right. They're reasonable. Sometimes, you know, you get with a group of people, and its spirit kind of comes over you, and you stop thinking very straight. You know what I mean?"

"Sure, I understand, Tom. I understand. Thank you, Tom. I'm glad we talked. I'll see you later."

The leader returned home with his mind and heart full of questions. Mainly the questions were about himself. His accepting, honest relationships with Judy and Tom seemed to give him a kind of courage to look at himself and face clearly some pretty fundamental questions. He asked himself, "How much do these kids really mean to me? How important are they? What is the best way to introduce these changes? I guess the 'How' question is just as important as the 'What.' And the 'Why' question should probably be answered too. Why do we assume so much about these people, thinking that if they just accept the doctrine of the Church, the way of life will be easy to accept?"

In his self-ponderings, the leader could see clearly that human experiences and human relationships formed the foundation for spiritual experiences and divine relationships. He could see ever more forcibly the central truth in the gospel that love is the most powerful and all-embracing principle of all, and that unless there is love, then faith and hope and knowledge and all else are useless. The leader could see clearly that unless people feel that they are accepted and that they have a right to express their feelings without fear of embarrassment or ridicule, all they will do is react and rebel and struggle for their identity—fight for their individuality.

The leader could understand that these people tended to act on the pressure of the moment and that a sense of belonging in the group seemed all-important to them. He could feel with more persuasiveness than ever before some of the real forces that lower moral standards and that force group conformity and a weakening of individual character and integrity.

Oh, so clear were many of the earlier problems in the youth program! For the first time, he thought, I understand why we had a difficult time introducing the new stake schedule with some of the wards. I can even understand why the Barlows and the Monsons didn't want to get into this work when they were called. Why haven't I listened more? Why haven't I accepted people more? Why don't I try to understand more? What's happened to my patience?

Looking into this mirror, asking questions of himself, and talking it over with his wife and a very loyal and dear friend, the leader discovered that he too had feelings and tended to act upon them, rather than merely upon the "shoulds" and "logics." He discovered also that if he could learn to communicate with himself honestly and to listen to himself acceptingly as he just had done, he would find that it gave him a sense of security, peace, and inner strength and helped him to communicate better with others and to understand and accept them more also. He could see a time for the mind to rule and a time for the heart to rule. He could see that one cannot place a priority on a "should" over a "want," on thinking over feeling. One may be right, but the other may motivate and dominare, and unless people feel accepted, they seem either to want to run away from these responsibilities or to fight and criticize.

The leader reflected on the entire situation and decided that he would act on the assumptions that these young people did believe in the Church and that they wanted to do what was right. They had some real fears and self-doubts, feelings of inadequacy, and they needed help, patience, and someone to show them the "hows," someone to listen to them and to appreciate them for just what they were, rather than just to judge and evaluate and moralize and preach to them.

It was one of the greatest experiences and lessons of the leader's life, and he has since found that he must relearn it every day, for if he is a good teacher of others and of life, he must teach it to himself every day.

Fear Dies and Faith Is Born in the Atmosphere of Love and Acceptance

One day a BYU professor visited with one of his students in a religion class. The student had just received a very low mark on a test and was discussing it. In the course of discussion, the student began to reveal some of his real feelings about the class and about religion in general. The teacher probed a little and then opened up a Pandora's box. The student's feelings poured out:

"I hate this religion class. They made me sign up for it on registration day. I didn't know what I was getting into. I can't see why they make you take religion classes. I thought religion was supposed to be a matter of one's free agency—not force. My Sunday School teacher told us that force came from Satan, not God, and yet I'm forced to take this religion class. I've had religion jammed down my throat for so many years, and I'm just fed up."

The teacher wanted to explain the reasons for the school policy and program, to point out, "Can't you see that this is all for your own good? You didn't have to come to this university. This is a Church university, and when you decided to come, you agreed to live and learn within its framework."

But the teacher had an intuitive feeling that this boy had had this type of lesson taught to him dozens of times over the years, and that if he was to be taught it at this moment, after his emotional tirade, it would be another form of rejection—rejection in the name of the eternal "shoulds," in the name of religion. But rejection and true religion—the religion of love—seemed opposite to each other. Furthermore, the teacher didn't feel personally threatened because the student so criticized and condemned his class. He felt only that he should accept the feeling and listen. He said, "William, I'd really like to understand how you feel. Which way are you going to your next class? Can we walk across campus together?"

William immediately felt somewhat disarmed and even felt a sense of importance, that the teacher really wanted to listen, that he was sincerely interested in him and his feelings. As they walked across campus, William continued to pour out to an accepting ear feelings he had held within himself for a long time.

All the fight was gone, and within a few minutes, he started to express his positive feelings about religion classes, "These religion classes really serve a good purpose, and I really know they're best for me, but when I got that low grade, I just couldn't accept it. I had to fight in some way. I can see now that I've fought my parents. I actually am purposely doing things contrary to the Church because I knew that would hurt them the most. But I felt that they had hurt me for so many years by using the Church against me, I guess I just wanted to get back at them."

Over the next several weeks the teacher and his student had several more talks, with the teacher mostly listening and the student doing the talking, and ironically the student changed and grew by just listening to himself in the presence of someone who would accept him. He seemed to acquire a courage and a strength that enabled him to unlearn many of the bad lessons of his life and to act on some new ones. He gradually became one of the best students in the class and seemed to have a completely different attitude about religion. By the end of the semester he called the religion "his" instead of merely "theirs" or "yours."

Important Concepts of Love and Acceptance

For this reason, they're afraid to pray to him sincerely, to really express how they feel. They would rather tell God what they think he wants to hear. Their prayers become phony and insincere; they feel hypocritical; they don't like to pray, except to relieve a sense of duty. Their prayers are merely mechanical ritual—expressions from the lips. Someone may teach them to pray sincerely from the heart. They may even feel momentarily inspired and resolved, but often when they get back into the posture of prayer, the old and niggardly experiences narrow their conception, and they feel rejected and unloved and pray again from their lips.

It is very important for leaders and teachers to understand this. Otherwise, they may find themselves working on the assumption that by merely telling people what to do and how to behave, they will motivate them to behave properly. It is sufficient with some—those who have internally committed themselves to the "shoulds" of religion—but certainly not with most.

Consider the position of a Young Women leader, for example. She must give of her faith in and love for the youth so that the youth "see themselves" in the religion and feel adequate and good about this. Then she can begin to teach them the "shoulds." Once the relationship has been established, the youth see her as a trusted friend, one who accepts them as they are. Then she can teach them almost anything, however demanding, and she will be amazed at their positive responses. But until such a relationship is formed, her teachings may be utterly disregarded and ignored or even rebelled against.

Then, unless the leader is understanding and internally strong, she may take this indifference and rebellion personally and will lose faith in them and in herself. From then on, she may obtain only shallow satisfactions from her Church job and may live up to the letter but not to the spirit of her calling. She will gradually find herself more interested and more involved in other endeavors that seem to carry richer personal rewards.

Then her leaders may wonder what has happened to her, and instead of trying empathetically to understand and accept her feelings by listening to her without judgment, those next tier of leaders begin to preach the "shoulds" to her, the logics. Then they will lose faith in her, and perhaps in themselves, and communicate this lack of faith, no matter how they try to hold it or conceal it. It becomes a self-feeding cycle.

a. The gap between the long-term spiritual picture (eternal gospel plan, Church teachings, Church standards) and the shorter-term emotional picture (group pressures, fears, self-doubts, and need for immediate satisfactions).

b. The communication gap between the youth (feelings of not being understood, appreciated, accepted) and their leaders and teachers (moralizers and preachers of logic and "shoulds").

c. The gap between what the teachers and leaders profess with their lips regarding the laws of love and how they actually behave in living these laws of love.

Leaders or teachers must work on the third gap (c) first and build within their own lives a true relationship with the Savior and derive from that relationship a kind of strength, anchorage, and courage that will give them the power to bridge the second gap (b), the communication barrier. (See [^1]; [^2].) They will have an easier time to accept and understand feelings when they don't take expression of negative feelings as a personal insult to their own position, competence, or authority. By caring, understanding, and building honest and accepting relationships, they will give the courage, strength, and anchorage to the youth to act upon the longer-range "shoulds," upon the logics of religion, rather than upon their shorter-range emotion—the sentiments of life—usually controlled by their needs to belong to their peer groups. (This concept is illustrated and discussed in greater depth in chapter 23: "Communicating with Our Youth.")

Sometimes a higher value is placed on logic or what is practical or "masculine," and a lower value is placed on sentiment or what might be considered a more emotional or "feminine" approach. Such a notion, if continuously followed, would stifle most of the creativity and spontaneous enjoyments in life, and rather than leading to wisdom, would lead to a kind of imbalance and a distortion of life.

What does this mean to you as a teacher or a leader? It means essentially to listen to your intuition, to consult with your heart, to give full opportunity to those in a group who simply "feel" a problem or "feel" the situation or "feel" right about a particular answer to express themselves. There are times when it would be wise to act contrary to logic and to definitely place the higher value on feeling. One of the saddest mistakes some continually make is to disregard those who "think with their hearts" because they cannot express themselves clearly, logically, or with intellectual persuasion. Often their logic is a higher logic, for they feel with their hearts, and in many situations, particularly where the human element is strong, these feelings may be much more trustworthy and dependable than the cold and clear logic of a "practical" person. It has been said that we must think with our minds before marriage (eyes wide open) and with our hearts after marriage (eyes half shut). There may also be truth to this idea in other aspects of life, including Church work. However, at the highest level of maturity, there is no disagreement between logic and sentiment.

The youth of the Church will identify with the Church program, with its leaders and teachers, and with its values if they feel understood and respected in their own personal world and accepted for just what they are. Many of them are plagued with self-doubts, fears, and uncertainties, and unless they feel this understanding and acceptance, these fears may drive them from the Church—not so much because they doubt the Church or the "shoulds" of the Church, but because they doubt themselves.

Let every leader and teacher ask him- or herself four questions and consider the answers given herein:

---
Notas:
[^1] Human relationships and experiences are the predicate for divine relationships and experiences. People's concepts of God and his attributes are largely the projection of their own experiences—happy or bitter—with the authority people in their lives. In spite of what they intellectually agree to, or even verbally teach, many feel that God cannot be trusted, that he is unforgiving and unloving and is only to be feared. What is the greatest thing in all the world? A child of God, a human personality.
[^2] People behave more out of their feelings than out of their thinking. Motivation comes primarily from the heart, not from the mind. Many people intellectually know that the gospel is true, but they won't obey it unless they feel strongly about it—feel more strongly about it than they do about other things. There are many competing activities and influences in the Church program, and each of these plays its role in everyone's life. Our youth will follow the Church program if they "feel good" about it and "feel good" about themselves in it. Not only must they feel good, but they must also feel stronger and better about it than about any other source of loyalty, influence, and enthusiasm. What is the greatest way to bless this child of God, this human personality? The gospel of Jesus Christ, as found in the living programs and doctrines of the Church.
