Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

V

Self-discipline for Parents: Applying True Principles to Life

21

Eight Principles of Parenthood and Character Development

Principle Number 1: Commitment to the Family

President David O. McKay has stressed that "no other success can compensate for failure in the home." President Harold B. Lee has likewise counseled that the most important work we will ever do in this life is in the "four walls" of our own home.

The Church over the last several years, through the correlation programs, has placed increasing emphasis upon the family, on the home, and on the responsibilities of parents. Ward teaching was "escalated" into home teaching. The family home evening program has become one of the most emphasized Church programs. Our leaders have counseled us that the purpose of the Church, through the auxiliaries and the quorums, is to strengthen the home, to build an eternal family capable of exaltation and eternal life. The role of the father as the head of the home has been stressed again and again. He is the patriarch of the home.

All of this renewed emphasis is coming at a time when the home and the family are being ravished and buffeted on every side by almost every institution of society and by all of the evil machinations of Satan. Our direction and counsel are God-inspired, and every father and mother in Zion needs to awaken to all that is happening around us and to the will of God, which has been so clearly manifested through his servants in meeting the situation. It is a revelation to us today, and we ignore it only at our peril.

Therefore, I suggest that the first principle on the subject of parenthood and character development is an honest, clear recognition of the transcendent importance of parenthood responsibility and a personal commitment to this vision. The family is the first obligation in the Church, and if active Church workers will prayerfully and conscientiously organize their affairs, the Lord will give them the power to magnify their callings as fathers or mothers and as Church workers.

While many of us might give lip service to the importance of parental responsibility, often we will give our prime energy, enthusiasm, time, and loyalty to our professions or occupations or to other good and worthy causes. We will approach our secular work with careful planning, using the best systems, keeping careful records, spending time to analyze the problems. But with the character development of our own children, we might go on day in and day out without any real analysis or planning or record keeping, without any intelligent system. The enemy of the best (the home and the Church) is often the good (other good causes).

We often think that the family problem is one of time—that there are only so many hours in the day and so many important things to be done, and we simply don't have the time to do them all. We rationalize by saying, "All well and good, this talk about getting better organized, but when this night is taken for this, and that night for that, and these two nights for that, it just simply comes down to the fact that I hardly have any evenings for my own family."

Though I acknowledge and sympathize with this reasoning, I do not believe that time is the main problem. I believe it is the excuse. I think the main problem is twofold: first, a lack of real commitment to the vision behind this emphasis on the family, and second, the lack of internal discipline to act accordingly. The Lord has told us that he will make our burdens light. (See [^1].) If we will obey true principles, take the time to prayerfully search the scriptures to maintain the larger eternal vision, and carefully plan and organize our days, and then work our plans, most of us will literally be amazed, even astounded, at what we will be able to do and accomplish. ( [^2].)

There are specific things parents can do to teach responsibility, respect, virtue, obedience, work, and other gospel principles. But first they must really commit themselves to parenthood as their highest responsibility and must be willing to give their best time, best thinking, highest loyalty, greatest enthusiasm, and strictest dedication to this task. They will need to analyze carefully and to pray specifically for the growth and development of each child, perhaps to keep careful records, to take special pains to have frequent communication with each, to give proper recognition for performances and achievements, to utilize daily contacts and chores and teaching moments around the home as vehicles to build character—in short, to put more value on character development than on comfort, convenience, pleasure, or material values. "When one puts business or pleasure above his home, he that moment starts on the downgrade to soul-weakness." (David O. McKay.)

As with all other things, there is no shortcut to this process of character development. There is only one law that governs—the law of the harvest. We will reap what we sow. The wheels grind slowly but exceedingly fine.

Principle Number 2: Stewardship

Parents are stewards for the children born into their family. They need to render an honest accounting on this stewardship. Their children are actually begotten children of God, the Eternal Father, and are to be raised by his eternal laws and principles.

Both the father and the mother have separate stewardships, both of equal importance, either incomplete without the other. They must learn to live and work together under the most holy and strict laws of heaven: unity, mutual consideration, kindness, cooperation, and harmony.

The father, particularly one who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood, is to obey God. He needs to use his own priesthood to bless his family in righteousness. He must be careful to avoid the almost universal tendency to exercise unrighteous dominion and to force, coerce, or demand that his wife or children obey him, for if he does not himself obey the Lord and live by true principles, the whole patriarchal concept will be distorted, and the children will grow up in an atmosphere of fear, suspicion, criticism, and inconsistency and will thereby be encouraged to adopt the value systems of the world. (See [^3].) "Ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life." ( [^4].)

Husbands, what is it that most enthuses you and excites you and taps your deepest loyalties and your best enthusiasms? Whatever it is, in a very real sense, is your god, your object of devotion. "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall." ( [^5].)

If your god is truly the Lord, then you will be magnifying your stewardship, but if your god is your profession, your work, your possessions, your sports interests, your social image and pleasures, your political allegiances, or anything that is created, the whole concept the Lord has given us of the family will be distorted. Your wife and your children will have a difficult time following such an unworthy and inconsistent example. Your wife's sense of personal security will be weakened, and her own ability to give herself properly to the children will be lessened. In a very real sense you are her mainstay and support in life, and if you are lukewarm or untrue or unworthy, she will be undermined, and in time you will sorrowfully reap the harvest you have sown.

The wife is to obey her husband in righteousness, which I believe includes her righteousness, for she is not to be his judge. If she attempts to be his judge and to obey whatever suits her fancy, withdrawing her support or obedience when she disagrees, or if she competes with him for leadership and direction, the patriarchal concept will be distorted. If she "punishes him" in one way or another when he's "off base" in her eyes, her husband could likely feel that he has atoned and no longer has to change or repent. The wife is called to love and to sustain the husband, and I believe nothing will do more to encourage and chasten him in his own stewardship than consistent acceptance, unconditional love, and steadfast sustaining. If he is absolutely unworthy, or consistently makes unrighteous demands, then she might counsel with the steward over him, the bishop, but she is not to be his judge and punisher.

Both Paul and Peter have given excellent counsel to wives along this line: "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body. Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in everything." ( [^6].)

"Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands: even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement." ( [^7].)

Children are to obey and honor their parents. Children first need examples or models to follow. They need understanding and respect; they need clear limits, well-established rules, and consistently applied discipline. They need explicit teaching and testifying; they need order, system, and regularity; they need work and responsibility and opportunities to give an accounting; they need time for fun, free expression, and good humor.

I have come to believe from my own experience, as well as my observations of others, that children tend not to obey their parents when the father does not in truth or in deed obey the Lord, or when the wife does not in truth or in deed obey her husband, or when the parents do not have this vision of the patriarchal family concept and at least a deep commitment to their parenthood responsibility.

Principle Number 3: The Emotional Climate of the Home

The most significant aspect or characteristic of a true gospel-oriented family is reflected in the emotional climate of the home. You might call it "the feeling tone." President Ezra Taft Benson said this about that emotional climate:

I would invite you to consider the tried and tested formula that successful families have used over the years to attain love, unity, and loyalty to one another and to understand the principles of the gospel.

Successful families have love and respect for each family member. Family members know they are loved and appreciated. Children feel they are loved by their parents. Thus, they are secure and self-assured.

Strong families cultivate an attribute of effective communication. They talk out their problems, make plans together, and cooperate toward common objectives. Family home evening and family councils are practiced and used as effective tools toward this end.

Fathers and mothers in strong families stay close to their children. They talk. Some fathers formally interview each child, others do so informally, and others take occasion to regularly spend time alone with each child.

Every family has problems and challenges. But successful families try to work together toward solutions instead of resorting to criticism and contention. They pray for each other, discuss, and give encouragement. Occasionally these families fast together in support of one of the family members.

Strong families support each other. ("Counsel to the Saints," Ensign, May 1984, p. 6.)

By far the most important factor in setting this feeling tone is the depth of harmony and unity between the husband and the wife. President McKay has had much to say on this subject. In general conference on April 7, 1963, he said:

Our homes radiate what we are, and that radiation comes from what we say and how we act in the home. No member of this Church—husband, father—has the right to utter an oath in his home or ever to express a cross word to his wife or to his children. You cannot do it as a man who holds the priesthood and be true to the spirit within you by your ordination and your responsibility. You have to contribute to an ideal home by your character, controlling your passion, your temper, guarding your speech, because those things will make your home what it is and what it will radiate, . . . and every Latter-day Saint home should have it. . . .

[We have today] greater responsibility than ever before, as men of the priesthood, as women of the Church, to make our homes such as will radiate to our neighbors harmony, love, community duties, loyalty. Let our neighbors see it and hear it. Never must there be expressed in a Latter-day Saint home an oath, a condemnatory term, an expression of anger or jealousy or hatred. Control it! Do not express it! You do what you can to produce peace and harmony, no matter what you may suffer.

In a priesthood session of general conference, October 2, 1954, President McKay counseled:

Say nothing that will hurt your wife, that will cause her tears, even though she might cause you provocation. Realize that those children are your eternal possessions, treasures of eternity. Do not dare to set an improper example towards them. You are men of the priesthood and you are leaders. Never let them hear a cross word. You should control yourself. He is a weak man who flies into a passion, whether he is working a machine or plowing or writing or whatever he may be doing in the home. A man of the priesthood should not fly into a passion. Learn to be dignified. You cannot picture Christ flying into a passion. Indignant with sin? Yes. Overturning the money changers when they insulted God and defiled the temple. Yes: But so dignified and noble that when he stands before Pilate he makes that leader say: "Behold, the man."

Husbands and wives must learn to talk through their differences and difficulties rather than either taking them out on each other or withdrawing into a silent, sullen world of quiet anger and self-pity.

Principle Number 4: Desire and Time for Husband-Wife Communication and Planning

We can all become so busy following such hectic schedules, tyrannized by the telephone, meeting the small crises, that we may go for days without any deep meaningful communication with our husbands or wives. There is some communication, but it is often rather superficial and focused upon just the practical necessities of day-to-day life. Every person needs someone else to whom he can speak freely without fear of censor, embarrassment, or ridicule of any kind. People need to feel understood, and that comes from being genuinely listened to.

We are told in the scriptures that the spiritual creation preceded the temporal creation and that the spiritual thought or ideal is to underlie all temporal concerns and actions. This points up the need for the husband and wife to sit down together and to carefully plan or, in a sense, spiritually create their own world. Planning isn't easy. It requires thinking, and many of us are often too lazy to do any creative thinking and planning. Yet planning is of overwhelming significance in any endeavor of life, and certainly it must be in the most important endeavor—that of successfully raising a family. It must play a vital, central role.

Such planning involves carefully discussing and analyzing the problems in the home and the process of growth and development of each child. It also involves seeking to understand some of the elements and characteristics of various age levels so that realistic expectations might be set.

If parents have difficulty finding the time in the natural course of events for deep, meaningful communication and creative planning together that involves the Lord, who is the other member of this eternal partnership, they should determine to set aside specific times and to hold them inviolate. Parenthood is our highest responsibility. Why shouldn't other things "go by the board," if necessary, in order to maintain deep, meaningful, two-way rapport and understanding and to reap the incalculable benefits of careful, creative planning?

Principle Number 5: Communication with Children (Teaching, Training)

The only real way to build a relationship or to strengthen a relationship that has been strained is on a one-to-one basis—to go to that person to make reconciliation, to talk the matter over, to apologize, to forgive, or to do whatever it might take. Over and over again I find with my own six children this lesson being taught: When I take a child aside from the others, go where there is some privacy, and give full attention—be completely present—I am amazed how effective my teaching, discipline, or communication can be. But when, out of a sense of time pressure and practical necessity, I attempt to teach, discipline, or correct when others are present, how ineffective I usually am.

Why is this so? Because a one-to-one personal relationship is highly respecting and affirming of the worth of the other, whereas a social situation is charged with many other emotional variables and factors that play upon people's hearts and responses.

In social situations people often learn to play roles. They are fearful of being too open and vulnerable, afraid they might get hurt. They have been hurt before, and they have learned to defend themselves, to cover up. Their responses are more contrived and artificial than they are sincere and natural. Pride strongly enters in. But this is not the case in a personal, one-to-one situation, particularly where time is taken to build rapport, either before or during the discussion of the problem at hand.

One Saturday morning I was sitting quietly in my office, preparing for a meeting, when my wife called in a rather desperate voice. I asked her what was wrong. She said, "Just listen and you'll know." She lifted up the phone, and I could hear screaming babies, quarreling children, and television cartoons. What a nightmare! She asked, "Stephen, can't you come home and help me? Here it is 9:00, and I've got an appointment downtown at 9:30 and I'm not even dressed yet. This place is bedlam."

I answered that I was preparing for a meeting and simply couldn't come home and help. Then I proceeded to give some advice. (It is always easy to sit in a cool, quiet place and give advice to those who are out in the dust and sweat of the arena.) I first asked her to get our oldest daughter, Cynthia, to take over, because she is very conscientious and responsible when she makes up her mind to be.

My wife's response was "She won't cooperate at all. She hasn't done a stitch of work, and I can't get her to help at all."

I knew immediately what the problem was. Cynthia had not made up her mind—probably had her own reasons. Probably one of those reasons was that my wife had not taken the time to listen to Cynthia or to meet a special need or problem that Cynthia had. So I said, "Sandra, take Cynthia into the study for no more than one or two minutes and listen to her. Find out what's bothering her, and I assure you that will solve your problem."

"I don't have time to do that. I've just got to get going."

Then I said something that has come to be meaningful to us both. "Too busy sawing to take time to sharpen the saw?"

She immediately sensed what I was saying and said, "Okay, I'll try," and hung up. Later she reported what had happened. She left the bedlam and took Cynthia into the quiet of the study. She said, "Honey, I'm sorry I haven't paid any attention to you this morning. What's bothering you?" Cynthia answered that she felt her mother had not been fair in granting a particular privilege that one of the other children had had the day before and that when she had tried to talk to her about it, she at first had been ignored and then later had been treated as an interruption.

Almost as soon as the problem was out on the table, as soon as Cynthia was sure that her mother understood, inwardly she was assured that something fair would be worked out at a later time. She then said to her mother, "Go on, Mommy, change your clothes. I'll take care of the kids."

I am convinced that many of our children know what they should do, but their minds are not made up to do it. People don't act on what they know. They act on how they feel about what they know and about themselves. If they can come to feel good about themselves and about the relationship, they are encouraged to act on what they know.

Admittedly it takes some time and patience to "sharpen the saw," but I am convinced that in the long run—and sometimes in the short—it saves time and a lot of nerves.

Principle Number 6: Be Willing to Pay the Uttermost Farthing

Consider the Savior's teaching from the Sermon on the Mount: "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." ( [^8].)

Sometimes in our hearts we know that we have crossed the sensitive line and hurt or insulted or offended another person or a child of our own. We may have felt justified at the time—they may have "deserved" this treatment—but from the Savior's standards as given in the Sermon on the Mount, we learn that we are not to react to the treatment of others but rather to act from within, based on his divine value system. We are to overcome evil with good instead of paying it off.

Therefore, when we hurt other people (and some people actually sadistically get a delight from this at the time), we should go to them and acknowledge it and seek their forgiveness. This, in my opinion, is paying the uttermost farthing, if it comes out of our heart and is not used merely as a manipulative technique.

I found the efficacy of this principle in my own labor with missionaries who were low in desire and irresponsible in performance. I remember one elder who wasn't rebellious; neither was he very enthusiastic. He would just barely go along. I had him labeled thus in my mind, and for a number of months, every time I saw his face and name on my wall board, I would think of him in this way. In the monthly interviews, even though on the surface I would appear interested, under it all he was labeled and categorized in my mind, so in a sense my sin was of omission rather than of commission.

Eventually I reached the point where I knew I had to take some initiative myself and do something else that might help him "get on fire." Once he began to open up and said something like, "President Covey, I know you have a lot of good ideas and advice for me, but could you kind of listen to what I feel like and what my problems are and help me from there?" I did what I could at the time, but my inability to remove myself from the label I had about him was so set that I needed more time to prepare. In the intervening time I looked introspectively at myself and became aware of how I had labeled him and how this label had tended to be a self-fulfilling prophecy. People tend to become like you treat them or like you believe them to be.

I decided I needed to "pay the uttermost farthing," to use the Savior's expression. I went to this missionary, opened up what I believed had happened and how I had played my role in contributing to this situation, and sought his forgiveness. He broke down and acknowledged his role in things also. He paid the uttermost farthing also, in a sense. Our relationship began on a new base at step one, but for the first time it was thoroughly honest. Both of us began to build with each other, and he would use me from time to time as a sounding board to thrash out a lot of his feelings, both negative and positive. Gradually he "came to himself' ( [^9]) and began to build internal controls; then he performed magnificently in finding and teaching families, and he finished his mission supremely happy.

With my own children I have needed to use this principle. I have crossed over the sensitive line and disciplined out of an angry mood, and I knew I wounded feelings. My pride, for a while, has often kept me from paying the uttermost farthing, but eventually I know I must swallow my pride and specifically describe how I offended, then express my sorrow and apology, and seek forgiveness.

What happens when a person pays the uttermost farthing? Assume, to begin with, that relationships are hurt and strained and that you are at least partly responsible. If you merely try to be better and not to confess and ask forgiveness, the other person will still be suspicious. He has been hurt and wounded, and therefore his guard is up. He will be defensive and suspicious of your new behavior, your "kind face," wondering what might happen next. Your improved behavior and manner do not change his distrustful perception. Nothing you can do will change it, because you are behind bars and walls in a prison of his own making (in his mind). The bars and walls are the mental and emotional labels that he has put upon you and that give him some feeling of security (in knowing not to expect much from you).

Only by a complete, full, and specific acknowledgment of your own failings or sin, whether of commission or omission, will you pay the uttermost farthing. This same principle applies in seeking the Lord's forgiveness. We must hold nothing back—must hide nothing—and must surrender completely and totally to his will, his way, and his power.

Principle Number 7: The Prayer of Faith

Sometimes the relationship is so strained that the other individual may not even allow you to pay the uttermost farthing. There may be absolutely no communication of any kind. Often parents are concerned and heartsick about one of their children who is living away from home and totally under the world's influence. They feel that they have tried their best, but they don't know what to do. Many realize past mistakes—neglecting, offending, not understanding, or whatever—and they have even attempted to pay the uttermost farthing, but still there is no change. The influence sources on this wayward or indifferent son or daughter simply do not lie with the parents any longer, so it seems. Now the question is, what now can be done?

This estrangement is not too unlike the relationship between Alma the Senior and Alma the Younger. Alma the Younger became very sinful and rebellious and took an active part in secretly seeking to destroy the church of God. Yet his own father was the head of the church.

"Now the sons of Mosiah were numbered among the unbelievers; and also one of the sons of Alma was numbered among them, he being called Alma, after his father; nevertheless, he became a very wicked and an idolatrous man. And he was a man of many words, and did speak much flattery to the people; therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities. And he became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God; stealing away the hearts of the people; causing much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power over them. . . . He was going about to destroy the church of God, for he did go about secretly with the sons of Mosiah seeking to destroy the church, and to lead astray the people of the Lord, contrary to the commandments of God, or even the king." ( [^10].)

Yet, with all of this, Alma, the father, continued to love his son and to pray for him in faith, believing that the Lord would somehow get through to his son. I imagine he had every reason in the world to give up hope and his prayers, but he also had every reason in the world to keep at them. Eventually, in the Lord's time, his prayers were answered.

An angel of the Lord appeared to Alma the Younger and the four sons of Mosiah, "saying: Alma, arise and stand forth, for why persecutest thou the church of God? For the Lord hath said: This is my church, and I will establish it; and nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of my people. And again, the angel said: Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith." ( [^11]; italics added.)

What is the main point to all of this? Basically it is to suggest that the highest form of influence is God himself; and if a faithful father or mother continues in faithfulness, never giving up on the wayward son or daughter but doing everything in their own power to reach them, then continues in offering the prayer of faith, the Lord may take a hand in the situation in his way and in his time. This doesn't mean he will force anybody, for this would violate his own principle of agency. The appearance of an angel to Laman and Lemuel did not convert them to righteous living, but it gave them a supreme opportunity to know what was right and what was true.

Alma the Younger didn't have to obey the counsel of this angel, but he did. "For, said he, I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit. . . . Nevertheless, after wading through much tribulation, repenting nigh unto death, the Lord in mercy hath seen fit to snatch me out of an everlasting burning, and I am born of God. My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss; but now I behold the marvelous light of God. My soul was racked with eternal torment; but I am snatched, and my soul is pained no more." ( [^12], [^13].)

There are many other illustrations in the scriptures of the power of the prayer of faith. If you are interested in modern examples, I suggest you pick up the Doctrine and Covenants and, using the index, study the various references listed under prayer and faith. You might begin with [^14]; [^15]; [^16]; [^17]; [^18]; [^19]; [^20]; [^21]; [^22].

I don't really know how the prayer of faith works, but I believe in the following principles concerning it: First, in order to exercise the prayer of faith, a person must be living very faithfully so as to feel inside that his or her life is acceptable to God. As James put it, "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much." ( [^23].)

Second, the prayer of faith consists largely of a kind of testimony of the Lord's goodness and power and wisdom, a total commitment that his will be done, an expressed willingness to obey that will and to be used in any way the Lord desires, and the believing attitude that if it be right, the Lord will grant the requested blessing. To a degree a person may be active in the Church yet lose faith in the unseen realities and the power of God in working his miracles of conversion. A positive, believing attitude will never come out of individuals who inwardly have been defeated, who have labeled the person or the situation, and who really believe "it can't be done." Many people, unconsciously perhaps, negatively meditate on people or situations they long to have changed. All of that negative meditation is a form of defeat. There can be no exercise of faith—nothing constructive, nothing creative in it.

Meditate and think deeply on this promise of the Savior, which he gave to the Nephites and which has been repeated in various forms in all dispensations, including this one: "Ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name; and whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." ( [^24].)

To me it is encouraging to know that I must never give up hope, that I must never give up faith, that the Lord loves all his children, including my own, and doesn't want one of them lost. He wants to reach them, just as I do. He has the power to do it, and he usually works through trusted servants who exercise faith in him. He will never violate true principles. I, as a parent, can be such a trusted servant, and if I continue to exercise faith, the Lord may in his way and in his time take a hand in the matter.

Principle Number 8: Practices Consistent with Principles

Practices should follow principles and always be consistent with them. This is also a principle. Otherwise, we are guilty of living a double standard, professing or teaching one thing and practicing another. Some of the Lord's most scathing denunciations focused on such hypocrisy.

Let us consider various practices, with the suggestions that parents should prayerfully develop their own. We can teach true principles, but we cannot tell people what specific practices they should follow to handle this or that situation any more than we can prescribe glasses for eyes we have not diagnosed.

First, the practice of having traditions: Family traditions serve as a kind of emotional grounding for individuals as they go through life. These may be such traditions as those surrounding birthdays and such holidays as Thanksgiving and Christmas, traditions in saying hello and bidding farewell, traditions of planning and preparing for missions, of family prayer, of temple marriage, of the family hour, of Sunday dinner, of Saturday afternoon activities. These are security points in young people's lives, something they can depend upon, something they associate with joy and happiness, pleasure and love, and something they will always be able to identify with throughout their lives.

I have found it useful to also establish special traditions with each child—to have a special experience with a child and then to have a particular object or word represent that experience so that whenever that object or word is used, a flood of pleasant memories returns.

Second, the practice of private visits: While in the mission field my children wondered why the missionaries had the privilege of visiting privately with their father without any interruption, while they didn't. I would sometimes do things with them privately and play with them, but we seldom, one to one, sat down and talked about their concerns and problems and feelings. So they began to ask for these "interviews."

Today it is a regular practice, and whenever they feel the need to talk things over, they ask for an "interview." The basic ground rule in this "interview" visit is that Daddy only listens and tries to understand. It is not a time for moralizing, preaching, teaching, or disciplining—there are other times for those important responsibilities of parents. "Interviews" are a time to merely listen and understand and empathize with. I am honestly amazed at the freeness and the fullness of expression in those visits and also of the nature of the concerns, problems, and feelings. Sometimes I want terribly to move in and advise, teach, judge, or sympathize, but I have inwardly determined that during these special kinds of visits I will attempt only to understand, sustain, affirm, and help them see clearly their own feelings and thinking and alternatives.

I have also found that as they share their problems, they become open to my problems; and many times I share some problems with them and find that when I involve them in family problems, they begin to take more responsibility in solving them.

Third, the practice of "dating" each member of the family: I believe in the one-to-one relationship in various activities, in doing things as well as in talking and visiting together. I have found that if "dates" are established far enough ahead and the child largely plans the content of the date, the very anticipation is, in itself, almost as pleasurable as the date. To take the time to plan a date, to involve the other, and then to carry it out is an affirming and worth-producing experience for children to have with their parents and for wives to have with their husbands.

Fourth, the practice of morning and evening family prayer: Prayer is a privilege, not just a duty, and everything should be done in the home to inculcate a privileged feeling around family prayer as well as private prayer. The attitude of the parents regarding this special prayer or family devotional is the most crucial factor. It should take a little time and special effort. Perhaps it might involve a special place to go. Perhaps it will mean kneeling at the breakfast or dinner table. An effort should be made to gather each person, with no one left out; then the family gains a sense that in the eternal circle no one should be left out. If anyone is left out, he or she is missed. If there are ill feelings present and insufficient time to achieve reconciliation, perhaps those with ill feelings would not participate in this family prayer. It shouldn't come at the end of the rush of various tasks, but rather more at the beginning, when there is more of a sense of timelessness and when people don't feel pressured.

Fifth, family home evening: I have been interested in the kinds of problems people face and the complaints they have with the family home evening program. First of all, I sympathize with them, because I know it's not easy to suddenly have the parents set up a new program in an already crowded and sometimes fossilized family schedule. It is not a matter of just doing a few minor things. It often involves a fundamental reorientation of the family to have successful family home evenings.

I know that some older youth resent being talked down to and sometimes call some of the things "Mickey Mouse." I know that some parents feel that they can't take the time and really don't know how to effectively present and teach the lessons, let alone prepare them. Sometimes the communication patterns in the family are so firmly set that it is downright frightening to try to open up new ones and to look those you live with in the eye and teach gospel principles. Many of the younger children just don't like sitting that long and only want the activity part.

Many parents feel that they already have such a good and healthy relationship or that they are already so heavily involved in church activity that they don't need such an "artificial contrivance" as a specially set-apart evening for lessons. Others feel that formal lessons, even based on the Church's resource book for family home evening, won't meet their particular needs and won't give sufficient opportunity for initiative and creativity.

I don't want to moralize on these feelings, because I know they are real, and I think they explain in a measure why more families do not hold family home evenings than do. Again I repeat the magnificent statement of Henry David Thoreau: "There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root." I believe that all of these feelings and problems do represent the branches, and as long as we think at that level and give answers to these problems and feelings at that level, we will never strike at the root.

The root is spiritual. It involves a vision and a commitment to that vision, plus the discipline to carry it out:

First of all, a successful family home evening program, one that is truly effective, can be one of the most powerful forces to unite a family and keep it on the right track. But it also takes a major commitment and a good portion of time in the preparation. I suggest we accept the Prophet's counsel on this matter and the promises of all of our Church leaders, in faith alone at first, if necessary. By following this program, we will have the blessings of God come to our home and families. Let's not intellectualize or rationalize it away. The time may come in some places when the gospel can be safely taught only in the home.

Second, once parents make a commitment and have the will, then the next important step is deciding how to make home evenings most effective. Unpleasant and ineffective home evenings can undo their purpose and certainly serve to undermine the resolve and desire to hold them consistently.

In support of the helpful suggestions made in the family home evening manuals, I emphasize the following techniques:

First, involve the children in the preparation and presentation of home evening lessons and programs. Also, involve them in some of the problems, and receive their ideas and suggestions. You will be particularly amazed at what will happen to the commitment and cooperative attitude of the older youth when they are meaningfully involved and not manipulated.

The father is to preside at all home evenings, but as in any church meeting, others might conduct and participate—some to lead the singing, others to offer prayers, and so forth. Different individuals may take turns teaching the lessons or part of the lessons, conducting activities, and preparing refreshments. Again, meaningful involvement is the key. What do I mean by meaningful? Essentially, that suggestions and opinions are respected and carefully considered before final decisions are made.

Second, seek the Spirit. The family home evening manual is an excellent tool, a resource. But the primary resource is the inspiration of the Spirit of God, which the parents can receive in directing the content and activities of the home evening.

Third, use visual aids. It takes a little extra time, but they are worth it, particularly if you can get some tapes or videocassettes, a blackboard, and charts. Variety and visualization are keys to maintaining interest.

Fourth, the spirit doesn't have to be tight, rigid, and formal. Successful home evenings can emerge very naturally out of an evening meal's discussion, a family council meeting, or some other family activity. But there does need to come a time in these evenings when the parents look their children in the eyes, do some explicit teaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and bear testimony. These meetings are not just for good social family gatherings and interchanges, which are most worthy purposes in themselves, and which may have to suffice for a time in some family situations. But, in the long run, the lifting power is in the vision of the gospel, in the spirit of the Holy Ghost, in the power of bearing testimony in love, and in discussing gospel principles in connection with real family problems, needs, and concerns.

There must also be a fun and enjoyable spirit around home evenings. Some fun is spontaneous and arises naturally, bur there is also great fun in anticipating a carefully planned family activity that is to follow a home evening lesson. There must be plenty of time for interaction, for personal visits, for family games or activities, and sometimes for a special activity out of the home—something that the youth can look forward to, can help choose and help make successful.

Sixth, saving for missions: There are many other useful practices families have to encourage righteous living. One is the establishment of a mission fund for all the young men and sometimes the young women of the family. When young children earn much of the money they put into these mission funds, the quality of their motivation in preparing and planning on a mission will be far more spiritual than it is social.

I can testify what a difference that motivation makes in those first few months in the mission. While the others thrash about trying to find themselves, filled with their own needs and problems, those who have a deep spiritual motivation, born of years of personal financial sacrifice, plans, and preparation, are dealing with the problems and needs, the eternal needs, of other people.

The Responsibility of Parenthood

The most important point or principle of this entire subject is the first one—that of the transcendent importance of the responsibility of parenthood in the character development of children. (The problem of how to effectively discipline children, which is certainly central and fundamental in this discussion of parenthood and character development, is presented in the next chapter.)

Some may feel that I have overstressed the responsibility of parents and underplayed the responsibility of youth. If I were writing this chapter primarily to the youth, I would discuss their responsibility, their need to obey, to honor, to appreciate, to live true. But since this chapter is not primarily written for the youth, I have focused almost exclusively on the responsibilities of parents.

---
Notas:
[^1] Human relationships and experiences are the predicate for divine relationships and experiences. People's concepts of God and his attributes are largely the projection of their own experiences—happy or bitter—with the authority people in their lives. In spite of what they intellectually agree to, or even verbally teach, many feel that God cannot be trusted, that he is unforgiving and unloving and is only to be feared. What is the greatest thing in all the world? A child of God, a human personality.
[^2] People behave more out of their feelings than out of their thinking. Motivation comes primarily from the heart, not from the mind. Many people intellectually know that the gospel is true, but they won't obey it unless they feel strongly about it—feel more strongly about it than they do about other things. There are many competing activities and influences in the Church program, and each of these plays its role in everyone's life. Our youth will follow the Church program if they "feel good" about it and "feel good" about themselves in it. Not only must they feel good, but they must also feel stronger and better about it than about any other source of loyalty, influence, and enthusiasm. What is the greatest way to bless this child of God, this human personality? The gospel of Jesus Christ, as found in the living programs and doctrines of the Church.
[^3] If leaders and teachers in the Church will learn to live the laws of love, they will encourage their people to live the laws of life—that is, to live the "shoulds," to behave as they should behave. The laws of love essentially amount to accepting people as they are, listening to them with understanding, respecting their feelings, patiently and caringly building relationships, and then beginning the teaching process—both by example and by precept. If, however, the teachers and leaders disobey the laws of love—by constantly preaching to, moralizing to, judging, rejecting, manipulating, masterminding, or double-talking to people, or whatever reduces a person to the level of a "thing"—they will encourage disobedience to the "shoulds" or the laws of life. What is the greatest and highest law in the gospel? The law of love. Upon this law hang all other laws.
[^4] Several important gaps must be bridged: What is the finest expression of the law of love? To accept and respect other people, in all their uniqueness, just as they are, which includes what they may become.
[^5] Sentiment often is wisdom. Men more often than women assume that logic is a greater value than feeling. This assumption is often incorrect. The heart is often much wiser than the mind. A person must learn to listen to his heart, to take counsel from his conscience, feelings, and intuition, as well as to use his mind.
[^6] Daily Work.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
