Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

22

Principles of Effective Discipline

How to effectively discipline children and youth is a universal concern. The study of discipline from the standpoint of the gospel plan of life and salvation is extremely interesting and enlightening.

Chapter 42 of Alma is the most illuminating scripture on the subject of discipline I have ever found, and I suggest a careful study and analysis of the wise counsel Alma gave to his rebellious son Corianton. Alma is attempting to explain the principles of justice and mercy, which are central to discipline. Let us look at some of the elements: first, the importance of law; second, the violation of the law, which is called sin; third, the punishment that logically and naturally follows sin.

"Now, how could a man repent except he should sin.' How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment?" ( [^1].) This is justice. What about mercy? Can mercy rob justice? No. "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Verse 25.)

Then where does mercy come in? On the conditions of repentance. In other words, through the power of the Lord's atonement and vicarious sacrifice for our sins, this plan of mercy can meet the demands of justice to those who repent and exercise faith in the Savior and his atoning sacrifice:

"Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. . . . Therefore, O my son, whosoever will come may come and partake of the waters of life freely; and whosoever will not come the same is not compelled to come; but in the last day it shall be restored unto him according to his deeds. . . .

"O my son, I desire that ye should deny the justice of God no more. Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point because of your sins, by denying the justice of God; but do you let the justice of God, and his mercy, and his long-suffering have full sway in your heart; and let it bring you down to the dust in humility. And now, O my son, ye are called of God to preach the word unto this people. And now, my son, go thy way, declare the word with truth and soberness, that thou mayest bring souls unto repentance, that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon them." (Verses 24, 27, 30-31.)

This may appear to be abstract theology, but it has tremendous significance on the subject of disciplining children. Let us again examine the elements.

First, the importance of law. Many times parents do not clearly establish what the rules are in the home, or if they do establish them, they change them on the mood of the moment, so that often their children never have any secure sense of exactly what the limits are and what is to be expected. Constantly shifting limits and arbitrary rule making destroy the whole concept of justice; and if this concept is distorted, then all that follows—sin, punishment, mercy, repentance, and so forth—will be distorted. "If there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature?" (Verse 21.)

But if there is a law given and a clearly understood punishment affixed, and if repentance opportunity is granted, then children will have a sense of both justice and mercy. "But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God." (Verse 22.)

Second, the violation of the law. Now that a law or a rule has been clearly given, is it accurately communicated so that the children understand it, or is it merely understood by the parents? Is the punishment to be given also clearly understood and is it fair; that is, is the penalty equal to the offense? Children can be trained in this concept of fairness, but I believe they have an innate sense of it. If time is taken to clearly discuss, when the atmosphere is not surcharged with emotions, what the rules, the reasons for the rules, and the nature of the punishment are, good training is effected.

Third, the punishment that follows sin. How do the parents follow through? Are they consistent? When they consistently follow through, the children sense that they "get what is coming" to them, and this reinforces their sense of justice, out of which much of their personal security comes. If the parents are not consistent, but become arbitrary, giving in and indulging one moment and then being strict the next, disciplining on the mood of the moment, the children never know what is to be expected.

With no sense of justice, their personal security is undermined. They will then learn how to escape the natural consequences of their actions. They will learn to find shortcuts, to pretend, to deceive, to get by on appearance and a clever tongue. They will strive to manipulate their parents, to get one parent at variance with the other, and to work on the most lenient one to mediate their battles and wants. This often causes feuding and disunity between the parents, which plays back on the whole emotional tone of the home so that the disciplining chore often becomes bitter and angry and much worse than the original misbehavior or problem requiring the discipline.

I have found in my own family, for instance, that I have a tendency to be more lenient, indulgent, and permissive, and my wife, in order to compensate, leans over backward in the other direction. The children sense this and sometimes try to test "which way the wind blows" and then wrangle to get their own way.

To illustrate how children "test the wind": I returned home late one night and was doing a little work in the study, when, as if from nowhere, my four-year-old son appeared and just stood there staring at me, expressionless. Things had gone well with me that day, and I was feeling good, and I was ever so happy to see my boy, so I blurted out, "Hi, Michael Sean! How are you?" to which he said nothing but immediately whipped around, ran to the top of the stairs, and yelled, "Hey, Stephen, he's nice!"

Can't you just imagine the conversation between my two boys on hearing me come into the house? Particularly after their mother had been "at them" to get back in bed for a couple of hours?

If my wife and I (1) take the time to sit down and carefully plan a unified, harmonious approach to discipline and commit ourselves deeply to consistent follow through, and if we (2) will take the time to carefully sit down and discuss rules and the consequences of honoring or breaking them, and if we (3) are consistent in following through, we are amazed at the way everybody's sense of justice and happiness and learning is enhanced. All of this points up again the supreme importance of parents communicating with each other and planning and then communicating with the children.

Does this mean that these rules are inflexible, that there are no exceptions? Some rules might be inflexible, such as avoiding damage to personal property, but with other rules—such as family schedules and work assignments at home—there would certainly be a place for flexibility. When consideration is given to individual differences and individual situations in these kinds of rules, children begin to feel involved and respected, and then they grow in a sense of fairness and being responsible. They also learn the plan of mercy, that sincere repentance (including restitution when possible) for a particular misbehavior may meet to some extent the demands of justice.

Purpose of Discipline

In a discussion of discipline, the practical question often focuses around forms of discipline that many equate with punishment. Let us first ask, What is the purpose of discipline? Would we not all agree that the purpose of disciplining is to teach, and to teach in such a way that the children learn a correct principle? Let us further ask, What is the purpose of teaching a correct principle? Wouldn't we agree that the purpose is that the children, or individuals involved, learn to apply that principle in their own lives? Isn't that really what learning means? If this reasoning is sound, we must conclude that the purpose of parental discipline is to build internal discipline.

Now we have a clearer standard or criterion by which to judge different methods of discipline: Does this practice or form of discipline encourage my child or the individual involved to exercise self-discipline or internal discipline in obeying true principles? When you think about it, isn't this the whole object of the gospel plan? Isn't this the central test of life?

The purpose of the law of Moses was to serve as a schoolmaster or a form of external discipline to bring the people to Jesus Christ, who taught internal discipline. Much of our school system today is geared to this idea of providing a system of external requirements, or what we would call external discipline, on the theory that gradually students grow and mature to a position where they are capable of using their freedom in increasingly responsible ways. Grade school generally is very structured. High school is also, but not quite as much as grade school. More freedom and alternatives are available in college, but it is still basically an external discipline system at most universities. Graduate school, however, is largely a movement toward internal discipline—to create opportunities for graduate students to apply the skills, tools, and knowledge they have acquired and to pursue courses of study in their own interest.

The Aaronic Priesthood is largely a system of external discipline; that is, certain basic service and social requirements are clearly defined and outlined. The Melchizedek Priesthood, however, involves a specific oath and covenant that each man makes with the Lord, which includes commitment to follow the Lord's direction given both through his servants and through the still, small voice, in magnifying this priesthood (doing more than outlined).

The ward teaching program, in practice, was largely a system of external discipline—a specific message to be given by the ward teachers to families on a monthly basis. Home teaching, however, has moved considerable distance toward a program of internal discipline. No specific message is given, no number of visits are prescribed—only an objective has been assigned. That objective is to discern the family's temporal and spiritual needs and to act accordingly.

Many home teachers would almost prefer to go back to the old ward teaching program, where the demands were not quite so heavy, so they wouldn't have to exercise internal discipline. They would prefer to give a specific message; then they wouldn't have to discern, under the influence of God's Spirit, what the problems and needs are. They could handle it mechanically and then complete their duty. But in home teaching, much more responsibility and freedom is given, and a great deal more internal discipline is required.

It is precisely because most people lack internal discipline, or self-discipline, that we see the rise of many institutions in society. Take installment financing, for example. This is a system of external discipline simply because people do not have sufficient internal discipline to save before they spend. With this system they first spend and then are forced (externally disciplined) to save in order to meet the periodic payments. It not only costs them more money for service and interest charges and the loss of the cash discount, but it also costs them in character growth. They are not learning thriftiness, frugality, industry, careful budgeting, and planning. These great virtues are being programmed for them by outside institutions.

Multibillion-dollar industries have been built around people's lack of internal discipline in the areas of exercise and dieting. With enough will power and internal discipline, people can learn to keep their bodies in good shape and form by following the principles of regularity and moderation in exercise, diet, and rest. But because most persons lack this internal discipline, they buy external discipline exercise schemes and go on one diet after another, forever looking for a simple shortcut to health and figure.

Consider adult education. A high percentage of the population, as soon as they finish their formal schooling, make no systematic attempt to continue on with schooling of a formal or informal variety. This would take internal disciplining. Why read when television can think for you, entertain you, mesmerize you?

Methods of Effective External Discipline

We see, therefore, that many forms of external discipline condition people to increased dependency on external disciplines, which is the opposite of the real purpose of discipline (that of building internal discipline, or self-control).

What forms of external discipline build internal discipline?

First, I suggest that by far the most important form of external discipline is example. Albert Schweitzer once put it this way: "There are three basic principles in raising children: First, example. Second, example. Third, example." I don't personally agree that example is everything, but I do believe that it is most of everything and certainly the foundation on which all other principles can work.

Therefore, before I make up my mind to be firm with my children, I must first make up my mind to be firm with myself and to exercise self-restraint and wisdom, that my discipline may be geared to one purpose—building internal discipline in my children so they learn to choose on their own to obey true principles.

Second, having a fairly firm family schedule is important, with regular hours of rising and retiring, particularly on school days. I found in the mission field how tremendously powerful a daily schedule is. It is a form of external discipline, but gradually it becomes a habit, and once it is a habit, it tends to become internalized. When missionaries learn to work and study according to this very rigorous schedule until it becomes part of them, they find themselves capable of applying that kind of self-control to many other fields of endeavor both on their mission and after it. This is not to say that there is to be no flexibility, but if you set up a firm schedule and decide to follow it, most of the "would be" exceptions go by the board, the entire family becomes healthier and happier, and much more is accomplished.

Third, coupling privileges with responsibilities. For instance, I have found great value in spending time in a family home evening, planning carefully the entire week, particularly fun family activities, where the anticipation of togetherness and of certain privileges is in itself quite an effective form of positive discipline. Children then know what is to take place, what responsibilities are theirs, and they gear themselves accordingly. When people accomplish significant things by their own planning and follow-through work, they have a great sense of self-mastery, achievement, and satisfaction, and this positive spirit diffuses itself into the whole atmosphere of the home.

Fourth, another powerful form of external discipline is an intelligent system of chores or duties around the home. Involving children and older youth in helping to choose some of these chores has great value, as well as perhaps rotating and assigning others that were not volunteered for. I believe in the value of assigning the result to be accomplished more than in assigning the method to accomplish the result. This gives the children freedom and an opportunity to develop internal discipline, initiative, resourcefulness, and creativity.

All members of the family need to understand that certain things must be done to keep a household running smoothly. Use a large chart or a blackboard to help visualize some of these things; then put your own responsibilities as parents on it so that the children understand your role and your part.

If children do not perform their chores, the parents should spend time with them, trying to find out why and perhaps providing a little training, but they should not take back the duty by doing the chore themselves. They should realize that the character development of their children is more important than what other people might think if the lawn is temporarily left uncut or a room unkempt. Perhaps the chore was too much. Perhaps the child is really lazy and trying to get by. Perhaps the child didn't clearly understand. In other words, the parent must focus on the real problem, which may lie with the child rather than with the particular task to be done.

An effort should be made to have some of the tasks or chores pleasurable or naturally satisfying, and if possible to arrange some chores as near to nature as possible, such as gardening, taking care of animals, or preparing food. These kinds of tasks provide natural rewards. Children can actually see what they have produced, which is satisfying.

Fifth, punishment is another form of external discipline. What do you do when the rules have been clearly spelled out and understood and then violated? What is the punishment to be? Generally speaking, I believe in the philosophy of what has been called "natural and logical consequences," allowing what naturally or logically would take place through the violation of a rule to be its own punishment.

For instance, if a child dawdles around in the early morning with the full understanding of the family rule to be at the breakfast table at a certain time and to leave for school at a certain time, then the natural consequences might be no breakfast and/or being late for school. If the parents are setting a good example themselves and giving encouragement and emotional support, then allowing these natural consequences to take place will gradually teach the child to accept the responsibility for living by these rules.

A friend once told me that he had overheard his children talking to each other in the morning, and one said, "If Mommy doesn't get us up soon, we're going to be late for school." This statement forcibly brought to the attention of the parents how they had gradually, even though unknowingly, taken the responsibility from the children to get themselves up on time.

Two divine principles seem to be threading themselves through how the Lord handles his children. First is the principle that he never does for them what they can and should do for themselves. If he were to do so, he would rob them of growth. The second principle is that he seems to work on the basis of natural consequences. If his children abuse their freedom, they lose it. If they disobey the commandments, they gradually destroy themselves. This is not to say that the Lord does not intervene or does not maintain a constant personal interest. He created the universe; he governs it by natural eternal law, and his interventions are entirely consistent with natural eternal law.

One of the real problems in connection with this natural and logical consequence form of discipline or punishment is that we, as parents, sometimes are not really willing to let this process operate, but rather we desire to intervene or interrupt it in a way that robs the child or individual of the lesson to be learned and that often teaches that the only real harm is in getting caught. Sheltering people from natural consequences teaches irresponsibility. Perhaps our love is too possessive and lacks faith in the process of growth and development. If so, we may have never learned these natural laws for ourselves. Perhaps we ourselves never had to deal with the natural and logical consequences of our own actions, and thus we have become increasingly oriented to unnatural and social forms of punishment and discipline.

What are logical consequences as distinguished from unusual consequences? I can see my child's missing a meal because of not being responsible, but I can't allow the natural consequence of my child's running out into the street, or associating with youth of low standards and morals, or reading pornographic material. In some way I should decide on and clearly communicate what logical consequences follow what acts of obedience or disobedience. What might be some of these logical consequences?

If children aren't willing to stay in the yard and insist on running into the street, or if children quarrel and fight with others, then the consequence could be the suspension of the privilege of playing with others until they feel they can stay in the yard or act responsibly with others. If the rules regarding television and other entertainment opportunities are violated, then perhaps the privilege of these opportunities should be withdrawn for a time.

In a sense I am protecting or shielding or sheltering my children from some of the natural consequences, but I have not relieved them of all consequences. I believe this is consistent with the way the Lord has worked with his children from the beginning. He is very concerned with the environment that surrounds his children. The program of the Church itself is an attempt to structure the environment so as to make the living of gospel principles "the thing to do." Gradually the purpose of all of this kind of structuring and shielding is to build internal restraints and disciplines within individuals so that they might be able to deal effectively with the external temptations and compulsions they will inevitably face throughout their lives. It isn't an all-or-nothing matter. It depends largely on the level of growth and responsibleness of the person as well as on environment factors.

Whenever the question of how to effectively discipline in such and such a situation is raised, it can generally be successfully handled if the parents ask themselves, "What are the natural (or logical) consequences of such an action?" and then discipline accordingly. For instance, a mother once wrote me, as mission president, regarding her missionary son and asked that I allocate her monthly check on a weekly basis to her son because he had never learned to handle finances responsibly. Inwardly, I said to myself, Well, is this missionary ready for a mission if he can't even handle finances? How has this mother trained her son? I was upset by the request, and I complied begrudgingly. However, I was unrealistic. You have to hit from where your fist is, and you have to begin where the reality is.

This missionary came into the mission field undisciplined and irresponsible. I couldn't change this fact. I could wish it otherwise, but this wouldn't make it so. I had to accept the situation as it was; and once I became aware of how really irresponsible the elder was with finances, I was more than happy to comply with the mother's request. We began at step one and gradually moved to step two (more freedom, more responsibility), then step three, and so on, until the missionary, by the end of his mission, had become very responsible, filled assignments of substantial trust, and developed considerable internal discipline.

While we should forever work to do the right things for the right reasons, we must never stop doing the right things for less mature reasons. The direction of development rather than level of development is the crucial factor.

I don't believe that the crucial factor is the method or form of discipline or punishment (spanking to some parents is a natural consequence) so much as it is three things: (1) the quality of the relationship between the individuals; (2) whether there is a clear mutual understanding of exactly what the rules are and what the consequences are if there is disobedience or obedience; (3) and consistent follow through with what has been agreed upon.

And, most important, underlying these three factors is the depth of the harmony and unity between the parents on these matters and the quality of their own example, their internal discipline.

---
Notas:
[^1] Human relationships and experiences are the predicate for divine relationships and experiences. People's concepts of God and his attributes are largely the projection of their own experiences—happy or bitter—with the authority people in their lives. In spite of what they intellectually agree to, or even verbally teach, many feel that God cannot be trusted, that he is unforgiving and unloving and is only to be feared. What is the greatest thing in all the world? A child of God, a human personality.
