Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

VI

Self-discipline for Teachers and Leaders: Applying True Principles to Life

24

The Power and Methods of Involvement Teaching

Learning Is Changed Behavior—Your Divine Objective

Teachers! Leaders! Parents! Let this thought permeate your whole soul: the purpose of teaching is learning; learning is changed behavior. Your objective then is to inspire and help the learners to develop Christ-like character through more Christ-like living every day. (See [^1].)

Simple? Obvious, you say? Perhaps. However, carefully reflect on the strong tendencies in preparing and giving lessons to serve other objectives: "to cover material," "to get through the points," "to get the facts across," or even "to stimulate intellectually," "to involve," "to impress."

Divine knowledge or learning, the Savior taught, is a function of living or doing "the doctrine." (See [^2].) The apostle Peter beautifully taught this same vital principle by emphasizing that a knowledge of Jesus Christ was the fruit of living or obeying divine principles, beginning with faith and ending with charity, or divine love. (See [^3].) Knowledge is more than information—it is conversion.

Saturate your heart and your thinking with this lofty eternal aim, and you'll discover it will constantly shape your preparations and teaching methods and dynamically influence your teaching relationships. The most important single ingredient in teaching is your motive, your real objective.

Why Involvement Teaching?

Unless the learner is involved and dynamically participates in the learning process, very little, if any, learning (changed behavior) will result. This principle of growth underlies our entire Church philosophy and tellingly distinguishes us from the professional "one man" approach to religion. The more the whole person—mind, heart, soul, and senses—is involved, the deeper and more permanent is the learning or change.

For instance, to convince others of the importance of a loving, creative, spiritual home atmosphere is most worthy. "But how," a wife asks herself, "when my husband won't cooperate?" How helpful, practical, and motivating it would be to this woman and perhaps to other Church members to develop a step-by-step program, starting with "what is" and moving to "what should be." Of even greater help is to give training in developing the priceless skills of communicating (empathy) with spouses and children, through demonstrations and opportunities for actual practice in the classroom itself.

Unless learners feel understood, feel that their "unique" circumstances and problems are considered and that they themselves are important, liked, and respected, then nothing that is taught quite applies. If you want to maximize your influence, particularly among those you haven't yet reached, start listening and stop judging or criticizing within yourself. Build a relationship—try to feel the pulse and adapt your lesson accordingly.

How to Effectively Involve the Learner

This illustration shows the interdependency and relationship between knowledge, skills, and attitudes. Influencing or changing one will to some degree affect or change the other two. Involvement teaching methods generally aim at all three simultaneously, thus maximizing the influence. People remember most of what they do, little of what they hear.

Reading a lesson manual aloud, lecturing, and conducting an abstract intellectual discussion, although they are useful methods in efficiently covering material, are generally ineffective teaching, or learning, methods. They are often used out of fear or inadequate preparation or out of simply not knowing what else to do.

Effective methods of involvement include such activities as these:

Try new methods. Don't be discouraged or judge first attempts too harshly. Be patient with yourself. Involvement teaching skills don't develop overnight. As with any skill, proficiency comes only with preparation and practice.

Intellectual, Emotional, and Spiritual Involvement

Involvement occurs if the learners' minds and hearts are "in gear," even though they may not express themselves verbally.

Teachers should never underestimate the power of sincere testimony. Bear yours fervently, naturally, frequently. Preaching the word of God has "more powerful effect upon the minds of people than the sword, or anything else." ( [^4].) The Holy Ghost will confirm your testimony in the hearts and souls of the hearers. This is the most effective involvement, for it pierces to the very core and works on the roots of life.

You can do the same thing. Cultivate your powers of observation, imagination, and description. Teach inductively—infer from the specific to the general. Often it's more powerful than deductive teaching—inferring from the general to the specific. Constantly draw spiritual lessons from the "seen" natural and physical processes in life. Let me illustrate:

a. In teaching the divine principles of love, faith, patience, and supportive understanding in relationships, illustrate the seen process of slow, natural physical growth in children.

b. What about the unseen emotional, social, spiritual growth processes? For instance, in teaching justice or the law of the harvest (you reap what you sow), ask an untrained person to play the piano or to sing a solo. Apply the obvious learning to the development of any skill (cooking, tennis, or communication). Observe the farming process from planting in the spring to harvesting in the fall. There is no shortcut in farming, in school, in raising a family, in teaching Relief Society or priesthood lessons, in building relationships, in achieving any real success.

c. In teaching that the things of God, including a testimony, are given by the Spirit of God (see [^5]), pretend blindness and ask others to describe what it means to see. Technical information, analysis, and intellectualization about sight won't help at all. To know God, one must experience his Spirit, which comes from searching, prayer, study, worthiness—not From human reasoning.

d. In teaching that faith is born of obedience (desire, experimentation, diligence, patience—see [^6]), blindfold someone and take an object that belongs to him or her, such as a wallet. Then ask three voices (one true, the others false) to direct the person to the wallet hidden somewhere in the room. When he or she finds it, ask how the person discovered which voice was true and which false. Then try organizing the group into buzz groups to discuss the many additional insights and principles involved.

You are only limited by your imagination in drawing the spiritual out of the physical.

The Roots

Effective involvement teaching isn't easy. It is highly demanding and spiritually exacting. Fundamentally, you teach the quality of your spirit. Therefore, your most vital preparation is spiritual. Learn to first master yourself; then get into the lesson content. You teach what you are, no more and no less, in the long run.

Gethsemane was a private battlefield; Calvary, a public one. Private victories precede public ones. Shallow spiritual preparation, mechanical prayer, and heavy reliance on lesson content and teaching techniques will not deeply influence others to change, though they may be impressed. The important problems you face as a teacher, or in your life generally, are rooted spiritually (though the branches appear practical or technical), and the key to their solution also lies within yourself.

"Out of [the heart] are the issues of life." ( [^7].) Learn to examine your heart. Root out double-mindedness, the father of instability. Repent and covenant. Eliminate hypocrisy. Pray from your heart, privately, earnestly. Study the word of the Lord every day to feel and know the Author and his ways. "Let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds." ( [^8].)

With the Lord as source and support, the results of teaching can be astonishing: "I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing." ( [^9].)

---
Notas:
[^1] Involving the learner helps to bridge the gap between the abstract (theory, principle, theology, "what should be") and the concrete (actual living, "what is"). Why? Because when learners participate, they are bringing reality (feeling, real problems, actual behavior) to ideality (principles, theory). Unless this gap is bridged, application of the principle or lesson to life is unlikely, even though there is a momentary inspiration and resolve to "do the thing." But later, in the midst of the pressing and buffeting realities of life, old habits and attitudes reassert themselves. Something must be done in the learning process itself to inculcate new attitudes and to develop new skills, in addition to acquiring more informational knowledge, upon which new habits of life will be formed. Case discussions of real-life problem situations, embodying certain principles in the lesson and calling for decisions and plans of action. Bear testimony—spiritual appeals. We have all experienced soul-stirring involvement in listening to a powerful, inspiring message of a great leader or teacher. Our minds have been enlightened by the comprehensive eternal plan and view, our hearts softened and perhaps convicted by a spiritual message of repentance, our souls thrilled by a testimony of the living Christ and his marvelous work and wonder.
[^2] Involvement teaching facilitates two-may communication. Communication is mutual understanding, and therefore, it must of necessity be two-way to be effective. This means listening in order to understand. Such listening requires patience and courage, faith in and respect for others. The enemy of honest, unguarded communication is the tendency to judge, label, reject, manipulate. Role plays (spontaneous or arranged beforehand) in which learners live out the plan of action in a simulated reality or learn how to communicate or practice other human skills. Use a physical or natural illustration to teach a spiritual principle. Jesus Christ was a master in this with his use of parables. He would vividly describe real situations from the people's own experiences and draw out divine lessons. Then each time the experience recurred or the scene reappeared to an individual, his divine lesson would be retaught.
[^3] Buzz groups, formed by breaking the larger group into smaller, less restraining groups to achieve any number of purposes, such as discussing the application of the lesson to life, considering practical problems, analyzing one part of the topic, making decisions, and determining a specific plan of action. When people can express themselves without fear of ridicule, censure, or embarrassment, they become more open to influence and change. Small, informal groupings tend to encourage this and to release the creative capacities of more individuals.
[^4] Other excellent involvement techniques include panel discussions, symposiums, tableaus, individuals giving special reports or parts of the lesson, and individuals or groups sharing experiences and testimonies.
[^5] Sentiment often is wisdom. Men more often than women assume that logic is a greater value than feeling. This assumption is often incorrect. The heart is often much wiser than the mind. A person must learn to listen to his heart, to take counsel from his conscience, feelings, and intuition, as well as to use his mind.
[^6] Daily Work.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
