Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

25

The Character Foundation of Leadership

It has been truly said that an institution is merely the lengthened shadow of its leader. A leader's own character, attitude, example, and practice diffuse themselves down through the entire organization and leave an indelible impression upon every person, every practice, every process.

That every Church leader and teacher understand the tremendous, far-reaching influence of his or her own personality and effort is of vital and fundamental importance. More than any other one single factor, the leader will determine the success or failure of a group or project. This is a humbling, staggering thought—almost terrifying, particularly in Church work, where we are dealing with the souls of men. But the Lord has taught us that if we will but come to him, he will make us equal to the demands of our calling: "If they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." ( [^1].)

Study carefully the illustration that follows, to see various ways in which leaders can respond to their callings. First, notice the wide gap between the demands of a calling and an individual's own native abilities. You will observe that in Church work the highest demands of one's calling are spiritual. Without the assistance of the Spirit of the Lord, it is impossible for leaders to succeed. Their human skills, social knowledge, and good minds are simply not sufficient. Not only do they usually feel inadequate, they are inadequate, and the acceptance of that inadequacy should make them humble and take them to the Lord for strength. The Lord even teaches, "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble." ( [^2].)

The Acceptance or Rejection of Leadership Responsibility

Second, you will notice the two general ways in which people who refuse to humble themselves and to deal with the unseen realities respond to this huge gap and to the inevitable feelings of self-doubt the challenges create: (1) flight, or running from the responsibility in one of the many ways specified; (2) fight, or criticism of programs, policy leaders, self, principles, or even the entire Church.

Third, you will observe the Lord's process in making us equal to our callings—that of faith and works. It involves faith in the living Christ, actual belief that he is there, that he cares, and that he will respond to our diligent search for him. It involves the constant ongoing educative process of repenting and making and keeping covenants, or in other words, making promises and commitments to live right, to serve devotedly, and to magnify our callings. Why this process? So that the power of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Lord, will purify our motives and empower us to be equal to the spiritual demands of our callings. With man, many things are impossible, but with God, nothing is impossible.

Character and Motive

Paul taught, "For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?" ( [^3].) If leaders are eager to make impressions and have their eyes on their own reputations, their double-mindedness will uproot their power. In giving forth an uncertain sound, their trumpets may spread the same contagious disease to other leaders and to the people in their organization or group. In their eagerness to be all things to all people, they will end up without respect from others or from themselves. They may compromise the magnificent principles and programs of the organization's purpose, in the name of expediency. They may find themselves exaggerating for effect, struggling for loyalties from others based on false principles, manipulating and masterminding others, becoming hovering supervisors, finding fault with others, and criticizing. This process leads to a loss of faith in others and to discouragement and unhappiness.

Let teachers or leaders examine their motives and exert all their power to develop a single and pure one—to serve God by serving his children through the revealed program. They are appointed agents of the Lord, called by prophecy and the laying on of hands. They do not seek praise, for they are agents, nor are they discouraged by criticism. Let there be no mistake about it—"a double minded man is unstable in all his ways." ( [^4].)

Purpose of the Church

The purpose of all Church programs is to help in the perfecting of the Saints. One of the most basic distinctions between revealed religion and the religions of men is in the nature of God's work and glory. The Lord has told us the difference: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." ( [^5].) Man's growth and development in becoming a "celestialized personality" come from heavy involvement, the give and take of activities, not professionalism or so-called successful "programs" without the extensive participation of others. Each Church leader must think very clearly about this matter, for it is central to everything else.

While many Latter-day Saints are active and strong in the faith, a great marginal group of people exist who are not, and how they're treated and involved may either "make them" or "break them." This group is composed of embittered people, of some rebellious youth, of some offended auxiliary workers, of some "plain Janes" plagued with fear and self-doubt and loneliness. Whoever is tender in the faith, whoever can be easily offended, whoever has a shallow individual testimony—these are they who are in this all-important marginal group. How they "feel inside" matters to them most and will direct their lives.

In planning, organizing, and carrying out plans, leaders must constantly ask themselves what effect these plans and decisions and actions have on those in this group. How will they feel? Liked? Needed? Wanted? How much can be expected of them without overly frightening them? What do they naturally like to do?

This is a matter of tremendous importance, because these people (and they sometimes form a majority of potential participants) are in a period in their lives in which they are most subject to influence, and they literally stand on life's crossroads. Gearing the program to the faithful, solid nucleus is fairly easy, but considering this impressionable group seriously in every phase of planning and activity is infinitely important.

Shepherd: Sheepherder or Sheep?

Good Church leaders are shepherds, and their people are their sheep. The shepherds know their sheep. They know their sheep's voices, for they know their aspirations and fears, their worries and doubts, their families and their problems. Shepherds have genuinely listened to their sheep. Shepherds care for their sheep; they care very sincerely. They genuinely appreciate their sheep. They love their sheep so much that they would lay down their lives for their sheep if they had to. Shepherds show their love in innumerable ways—little acts of kindness, patience, forbearance, understanding, compassion. They'll go the second mile for their sheep. When one of the sheep strays, the shepherd leaves the ninety-nine and lovingly brings it back into the fold. This spirit of valuing the one lost sheep is the same spirit that keeps the other ninety-nine in the fold.

Sheep also know their shepherd. They have heard the shepherd's voice. Shepherds do not pretend to be someone they are not. Shepherds are no "tin gods" who stand apart and are difficult to approach or talk with. Rather, shepherds lead their sheep. They do not need to drive the sheep, because the sheep know their shepherd's voice and will follow it, and therefore the shepherd can go before them, leading them from the front.

Sheepherders have to drive their sheep. They have to push and cajole and beg and hover in order to get things done. They have to drive because they do not know their sheep, and the sheep do not know their sheepherders. Such leaders have never really listened to their sheep and don't really care for them, because they care for their wages. A sheepherder is a hired hand, working from a "what's in it for me" viewpoint. The wages may be glory or honor, or the power and control a position bestows. Sheepherders may even aspire to a higher position or one of greater social honor. Because of their double-mindedness, their voices ring hollow and are the voices of strangers. Such officers or teachers do not need to wonder why their attendance is low, why the activities lack "punch." If they're honest, they'll examine their own hearts and study the roots of the instability.

Then when things don't go well, or when they're criticized (approaches of the wolf), these hired sheepherders leave their sheep. They leave by giving excuses, by asking for other jobs, or by indifference and complacency, or by becoming sheep themselves.

As sheep, they merely "go along," and as sheep leaders and teachers, they may do just what they have to do in order to "get by"—no real drive or enthusiasm or fire anymore! Everything becomes dead-level mediocrity. Then, rather than acting upon this unhappy situation and striving to radiate a new spirit, these sheep rather absorb the existing spirit. They're imitators—not creators. They're victims—not masters. They're sheep—not shepherds. Officers and teachers—leaders! Think on this shepherd, sheepherder, and sheep analysis, and look at your own leadership role.

The most important factor is this: How much do you really care for your people? How much do you feel this deep inside, this sincere caring for each of the individuals in your Sunday School class, in the Scout troop, or whatever class or activity or group your assignment is with?

Leaders are often tossed and turned by every wind of new leadership doctrine. (See [^6].) Should they be more democratic or more autocratic in action? Firmer or more permissive? Tell more or ask more? What are the best techniques for getting things done through people?

These questions are important and must be considered, but they are secondary questions. The primary question is, How much do you really care? If you answer that question affirmatively, you can make some mistakes on the other questions and still be very successful. But if you answer it negatively, you may have all the right answers to the other questions, but you cannot succeed.

To become a shepherd, follow the true Shepherd. (Study [^7].)

Two Vital Dimensions to Every Group—Task and Relationship

Everyone is excited about the great dance coming up. It's going to be a smashing success. That's the first dimension—the task. The dance committee members get along well with each other, except for Tom and Richard, who don't get along at all. That's the second dimension—relationship. The Church leader must be constantly concerned with both sets of problems—getting the job done and enhancing the relationships between the members of the group doing the job. To neglect either challenge or problem is to neglect both.

It is easy for task-oriented leaders just to keep pushing things along and unintentionally to ignore the feelings that are aroused and the relationships that develop in the process. Leaders must take time to look at this dimension—even if it seems that it isn't related to the task. Leaders must take time to see that people are properly informed on "what is coming off," on what is expected. They must also take the time to listen to the people they work with; and the feelings and problems of those people must be important to their leaders.

Good leaders must be humble enough to admit that they can't perform all these leadership functions by themselves and that they need others to help them initiate and support ideas, make decisions, and carry out those decisions. These can be called task leadership functions. Group-relationship leadership functions would include harmonizing, understanding, communicating, and doing everything that will enable each individual to find personal satisfaction from his or her contribution to the job.

If there is no personal satisfaction and no personal reward, then individuals simply will not contribute. People do not invest themselves if there is no hope of reward. Rewards come in various forms. Friendship and warmth are real social rewards. Recognition and the opportunity of self-expression and participation in decisions that affect themselves are real and important psychological rewards. Leaders must constantly see that there is opportunity for both social and psychological rewards, as well as for spiritual and self-fulfillment rewards.

Leaders must concern themselves with an intangible called the "climate." This is the working atmosphere that reflects the morale of the group—the group spirit, the sense of cooperation and teamwork. Leaders must concern themselves with people's feelings and with relationships, because they really care—not just because they're supposed to. If they take an interest merely because they should, they will be both wrong and unsuccessful. They will be wrong because regard for people should be seen as an end in itself. They will be unsuccessful because they will be "found out."

Leadership Must Be Flexible to Adjust with Reality

There are different patterns of leadership for different situations. Some will be effective in one situation but ineffective in others. For instance, a committee has planned a traditional spring party. Planning requires creativity, and creativity demands a free, spontaneous, and permissive atmosphere under a more laissez-faire kind of leadership ("hands off"). However, this isn't the kind of leadership called for during the opening exercises of Mutual. The leader will direct and control the meeting by following prearranged plans. This is authoritarian leadership and serves its rightful purpose. There are also times and situations that demand another style or pattern of leadership that involves widespread participation and also some direction and control by the formal leader.

In determining the leadership pattern to follow, if we are to be good leaders, we should analyze the situation, the time pressures that people are under, and the nature of the problem or project being worked upon. Also, we must consider what our own leaders expect from us and what has gone on before. What about the members of our group? What are their abilities and aptitudes? What are their interests? What do they expect from us as leaders? What do they expect to contribute? What do they want to contribute? What about the forces within ourselves? How much can we delegate to others and still feel comfortable? What about our strengths and weaknesses? What things can we do, and what things can't we do?

All of these questions are important, and answers to them will be good guides in determining our leadership patterns. We must be flexible. We can't play golf with a tennis racquet or tennis with a golf club. We can't build a house with a hammer alone. We need several tools—each one to serve its own purpose. "The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee." ( [^8].)

Generally speaking, however, the more others are involved and the more widespread the participation is, the greater the individual growth. Therefore, the greater the purposes of the Church will be served.

Participation Versus Manipulation

Participation encourages involvement of others. It is based on faith in others and on their creative potential. Manipulation, on the other hand, involves masterminding others or creating subtle pressures and forces on others, so as to make them conform. This philosophy is based on an absence of faith in others. It places faith in one's own leadership techniques in getting things done through people. For instance, do we allow others to participate in setting their goals and objectives in an area where the Church or our leaders haven't already set them? Or do we set them ourselves and then try to sell our objectives to others? They may passively go along, but where there is no internal commitment, don't be surprised when the objectives aren't achieved. A sense of personal responsibility flows naturally from honest participation.

What about evaluating the performances of people? Do we do it only through reports? Have we ever considered encouraging them to evaluate their own performances?

We will discover, if we allow people to help set their own objectives, perhaps with some consultation with us and others, in such a way that they can really say, "These objectives are mine," they will often set them higher and be far more rigorous in their evaluation of their own performance than we would ever dare to be.

Do we ever go to a meeting with our minds made up as to what we want done, then ask for an open discussion and use subtle directioning to bring the group around to our point of view? This may work fine for a while, but eventually people will sense that we aren't really interested in their feelings and opinions. Then we'll wonder why they don't participate as frequently and as spontaneously as they once did and why they have little sense of personal responsibility. We must believe in people, be honest with them, genuinely listen to their contributions, appreciate them, learn from them, and change our minds sometimes, so that literally our people do exercise a real influence in making the program successful.

People are not lazy or indifferent by nature. Their natural and spiritual endowments give them boundless energy and enthusiasm. Every day we see these qualities manifest in activities that carry personal meaning and significance—such as creating a business or a hobby, preparing for a vacation. Theoretically, church service should have more personal meaning and eternal significance than anything else, but often leaders rob others of this feeling of meaning and significance by turning followers into robots, or by leaving people with little opportunity for creative expression. Healthy, maturing people resist being treated in immature and childish ways, and often their resistance takes the form of passivity, indifference, and even subtle forms of resistance and rebellion. When we see these signs, we must be careful not to just look at the outside. We must study our own leadership processes and see if we first don't have to change.

It has been proved again and again that where a real opportunity for creative participation exists, the release of energy and intelligence and resourcefulness and other human potentials is frequently unbelievable! Why? Because we are literally children of God, our Father in heaven, and locked within our systems is Godlike potentiality.

Psychology Is No Substitute for Basic Morality

If the auxiliary secretary prepares her reports poorly and she knows it, the principle of justice and honesty is violated if she is complimented for her fine performance in the name of "good psychology." It is violated if the Young Men's president expresses his "heartfelt appreciation" for the wonderful work and support of all of the officers and teachers, and then later that night privately criticizes certain officers and shows a basic dissatisfaction with the way things are going. It is violated if ward officers resent the "unwanted intrusion" of stake board leaders and express their unhappiness with the policies and directives of their own leaders, then a little later, in the name of good human relations theory, give inspiring talks to their own officers and teachers on the need for greater unity and loyalty and to avoid faultfinding, backbiting, and the questioning of those in authority.

James McDonald taught, "To be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved." Leadership is not so much a matter of techniques and practices as it is fundamental character and integrity, humility and morality. Great developments in the field of leadership psychology and human relationships have taken place in the past twenty years, and this is all to the good, as long as the greatest emphasis stays with the development of the fundamental virtue: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." ( [^9].)

Two Kinds of Results: Quantity and Quality

Statistics reflect quantity but not necessarily quality. Study carefully the quality factors behind the statistics—factors that are difficult to report, the kinds of results that many people never learn about. Therein is our greatest reward.

Learn to get both kinds of feedback to our fellow Church workers. Teach them how reports are and can be used as a great tool in planning and decision making. This report consciousness develops a sense of accountability, which in turn encourages the attitudes of humility and mutual respect. People then are constantly reminded that this is the Lord's kingdom, not theirs, and that their calling is divine, not human. The benefits of this constant feeling are self-evident.

Church leaders must constantly realize that they are dealing with the souls of people and that spiritual salvation is at stake. The more they can build the program around the living Christ and the principles of the gospel, the more sure they will be that their foundations are secure and that they will grow to become responsible adult parents and leaders in God's kingdom. If, on the other hand, they turn this encouragement and motivation into mere contests, gimmicks, and cheerleading sessions, they'll gradually discover that even though these have a certain punch for a time, they gradually lose that punch. Then one day, "when the chips are down," spiritual shallowness will be evidenced. The program, the teaching, the leadership must be Christ-centered.

The Good Leader

Note again the teaching of Solomon: "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out orbit are the issues of life." ( [^10].) Good leaders in the Church are ones who look frequently into their own hearts for many of the answers to the problems and dilemmas in front of them. They know that they need to be shepherds in helping to bring others to the true Shepherd. They know that before they can lead, they must follow. They know they must care for their sheep. They must learn to know their sheep and their sheep's voices and give opportunity for the sheep to know their shepherds and their shepherds' voices.

They know that they teach only what they are—no more and no less, that what they really are matters far more than what they say or even what they do. If they are firm with themselves, they can effectively be firm with others. If they genuinely sustain their own leaders, they will teach that attitude to their followers, who will in turn sustain their leaders. Good leaders know that to live by the sword of criticism is to die by the same sword.

Good leaders know what real sincere prayer is—prayer from the heart—and that kind of knowledge is "caught" by their associates and members in their classes. Such leaders know that unless they really come to their own meetings prepared, with plans well laid out, they will teach their group members the shortcut philosophy of just "getting by." They must be the supreme example of preparation and excellence in planning.

So on with every trait. As with the leader, so with the people. Over the long run, you teach exactly what you are.

Good leaders are humble enough to accept their own agency and not to behave like little tin gods who throw their weight around in order to have a sense of domination and control. They are good leaders because they are the servants of all and are accountable to the ones over them. This attitude of agency and accountability is tremendously powerful. "He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him." ( [^11].)

Good leaders use their intelligence. They think and reflect. They read the feedback and strive for understanding. They learn to listen. They adapt to differing situations by using different patterns of leadership. If their problems are fluid and changing and dynamic, their tools are creative and multiple. If their problems involve Church policy and procedure, then they give clear instruction and unswerving directives in such a way as to inspire immediate obedience.

Throughout and in everything, true leaders are constantly reminded of the ultimate purpose of the Church, and they place the highest value on the work of the individual, testing his or her decisions and activities by this criterion: What does it do to the individual and to the possibility for divine growth, to dignity? This single-mindedness builds strong lives, brings stability and a sense of purpose and direction in group effort, and inspires loyalty and confidence in relationships. Each individual then finds a real sense of personal satisfaction, purpose, and self-fulfillment—a divine kind of fulfillment—in his or her contribution to the "task." (Study [^12].)

---
Notas:
[^1] Review: Last meeting's minutes read, assignments reported on, vital correspondence discussed. Important verbal communication, particularly of assignments, is to be followed by clear, written communication, with all involved receiving a copy. Then adopt a consistent reporting practice on these assignments. This system of assignment and reporting is divine and will instill a sense of divine stewardship and agency in your entire organization. It will breed unity, spirituality, sustaining support, and the attitudes of obedience, humility, and respect. (Keep accurate, current files of all written communication, assignment sheets, agendas, and reports for future reference.) Your finest follow-through tool is a checklist that includes all the items that must be considered in fulfilling an assignment or project. It should be as detailed as possible. For instance, a monthly dance would include such assignments as publicity, physical arrangements, entertainment, refreshments, music, decorations. Each of these in turn can be broken down into greater detail. Assume good faith on the part of others. Don't impugn their motives. Assume that they are right from their point of view. Assume they are trying to do their best as they see it, although this may not be as you see it. When communications break down and bad feelings develop, assume that others mean to do their best, and then go to them and talk it over. Clear the thing up. Don't believe rumors. Go to the source yourself and talk it over. People stop fighting when they are accepted as they are. Defense drops when they sense your sincere interest and desire to understand and help rather than to judge and reject.
[^2] Short-range detailed planning on the activities and problems of the week or month: Who to do what? when? where? and how? When changes and adaptations in the program are necessary, make certain special communication to all involved is sent out in sufficient time. Then everyone will feel fully informed and know what is expected. Otherwise, some will feel neglected or slighted or lose faith in the integrity and consistency of the program and its leadership. Personal upsets and disappointments to those tender in the faith can turn them away altogether. The second follow-through tool: Fix responsibility on one person. "What is everybody's responsibility is nobody's responsibility." This person can hold other assigned people responsible to follow through, but you will be the only person who will follow through on that person. Don't bypass unless you want the responsibility back. This person will feel respected and trusted and sustained. Trust is the highest motivation. Assume that every negative situation or trouble can be turned to the Lord's advantage. When you encounter a complaint, obstacle, or problem, ask, "How can we turn this to the Lord's advantage?" Then seriously discuss it. You'll find yourself thinking and speaking positively about a so-called "negative" situation. The accomplishing power of a positive mind is unbelievably great. It is like the mind of the Lord, the great Creator. The evil one inspires negative thinking and defeatism. Just as faith without works is dead, so also is works without faith.
[^3] Long-range planning by looking at the basic question: What are the root problems we face? How can we better train? Get more involvement? Increase unity? Spirituality? Third follow-through tool: Learn to use visual charts and graphs that give a clear picture of all progress as well as future plans. This will motivate and foster a sense of achievement. Why visual charts and graphs? You'd be amazed at how little understanding some people have of what is expected and of where you're going. Rather than "appearing stupid," they often sit silently back, and then you assume they understand. People remember far more of what they see than of what they hear. All problems ultimately are spiritual, not technical, financial, or practical. (See [^1].) Since the ultimate problem is spiritual, one of desire and faith, the ultimate solution must also be spiritual—more conversion to the gospel, more trust in the stake and ward program. This involves teaching, having patience, bearing testimony, and expressing love and appreciation. Expecting too much and judging too harshly discourage people from trying, from getting involved, from striking out because these efforts involve the mistake-making process of growth and possible criticism. They then feel that doing nothing is safer. Remember that the greatest of all things is the human soul; the Church, the gospel and its principles, and the stake and ward programs are all developed solely to assist the human soul in its divine growth. Never confuse means and ends or become more focused on programs than upon people.
[^4] Your problems begin first in your own heart. "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." Have the courage to look into your own heart first. Earnestly seek the Lord. Ask him to reveal to you your weaknesses. (See [^2].) This takes deep, sincere, private prayer born the heart. More than all else, your sincere humility and great courage to look into your own heart and turn the key found therein will inspire others to look inwardly and turn the key in their hearts.
[^5] Sentiment often is wisdom. Men more often than women assume that logic is a greater value than feeling. This assumption is often incorrect. The heart is often much wiser than the mind. A person must learn to listen to his heart, to take counsel from his conscience, feelings, and intuition, as well as to use his mind.
[^6] Daily Work.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
