Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

26

Four Great Keys in Successful Church Leadership

Leaders, stand back. Take a long look at the problems you face. What fires are you trying to put out? Any conflicts? A lot of last-minute scurrying about? Chasing down details? Someone let you down? Most of your pressures, headaches, and frustration are but the branches of a great tree. Too many communication breakdowns. Too little long-range planning. Too much "leadership by crisis."

Instead of working on symptoms, what if you could work on the roots—the causes? Would you like to apply preventive rather than remedial medicine? Your real problem exists and will be solved in the underlying process of leadership and administration. These problems are not seen but rather are unseen, like the great iceberg, most of which lies under the surface of the water.

Look into your own heart and measure yourself against the following four great keys of stake and ward leadership and administration. Are you willing? It will take tough-mindedness. It will involve developing new habits and attitudes, requiring concentration, patience, and dogged persistence in their practice. It won't be easy. For a while, you may stand alone.

But take fresh courage. And in humility turn these four keys in your own heart. You will discover over the weeks and months that you are truly hacking away at the roots of your problems.

First Great Key—Planning

"Wars are won in the general's tent."

Planning must be of two kinds—long range and short range. Long-range planning must be done first and is of the greatest importance. If it is done correctly, short-range planning will flow naturally and easily.

First, plan your overall calendar for the year. What are the major events? The minor events!

Second, plan what kinds of preparations must be started now (where? why? who? how?) so as to avoid big frustrating pushes to meet deadlines.

Short-range planning includes details and preparations for meetings. Carefully work out the meeting agenda. Send copies to those who will attend the meetings several days prior to the meeting so each can come prepared to report and to discuss wisely. After meetings, send complete and accurate minutes with assignments to each participating member.

Unless you follow this agenda process, you will discover the hard truth of Parkinson's first law: "Work expands to fill the time available for its completion," and also another of his famous laws, "The time spent on a matter is in inverse relation to its importance."

Your meeting agenda should include the following:

Long-range planning is creative. It requires concentration and a real belief in its value. The natural tendency, often a habitual tendency, is to get bogged down in details and neglect this essential creative, mental activity. "Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least." (Goethe.) Planning is a skill. As with any skill, you become good at it only through continuous practice. Then practice planning—your results will literally amaze you.

Second Great Key: Communication

Remember first this principle: Unless communication is two-way, there is no communication. Communication is simply mutual understanding. For stake and ward leaders, communication is the bread and water of activity. You must cultivate the ability to understand and to be understood. Most human problems are communication problems or misunderstandings.

More important than the techniques of communication is the attitude of communication: the willingness and desire to listen for understanding. Avoid snap judgments. Use the third ear, which can hear the feelings of the heart.

Third Great Key: Follow Through

Cultivate a follow-through philosophy. Develop the spirit that "there are no excuses," that excuse making, buck passing, and complaining are worthless, negative activities. In report meetings, develop the spirit that each person would either state, "I have accomplished the assignment" or "I have not accomplished the assignment, but will by (a certain date)" rather than "Well, this came up" or "Brother Jones let me down" or "I didn't know." Over a period of time, if this philosophy is consistently applied, it will develop a deep sense of responsibility and almost force long-range planning and effective two-way communication.

Sometimes we hear the complaint, "They let me down" or "They just aren't dependable." This is the very reason you are a leader—to train the undependable. If people were already dependable, they wouldn't need training. It is because they're often not dependable that they need your training, help, and leadership.

Planning, communicating, and following through are interwoven with each other:

One cannot be successful without the other. To successfully do these three things, you must change habits—thinking and doing habits—that are deeply ingrained. This is not easy. Understand why there may be resistance, fear, and self-doubt. Many people have simply never learned to plan even for their own future. Many have simply never learned to communicate with their spouses or family members or even with themselves, let alone with an entire organization. Many have never carried responsibility and been held accountable. This new planning, communicating, and following-through leadership can frighten and offend—or it can help tremendously! It all depends on the application of the following key—by far the most important.

Fourth Great Key: The Attitude of Faith, Understanding, Appreciation, and Involving

The natural reaction to situations in which responsibilities exceed abilities is either fight or flight (escape). The gospel's answer: faith plus works.

In stakes and wards, your spiritual responsibilities are always greater than your natural ability, because you are dealing with spiritual forces and purpose. Faith often begins when it "can't be done."

As a stake or ward leader, understand why people criticize, offer excuses, or take various escapes. Do not yourself become critical or escape your responsibility to understand, train, educate, inspire, help. Understand that people can act only out of their own experiences. You must help give them spiritual experiences with divine attitudes. Criticizing, finding fault, labeling someone as "incapable," or judging someone as being "this kind" or "that kind" of a person are all futile activities.

You will exercise your faith in God if you believe in his children and their limitless potential. Your duty is to learn the processes of releasing that potential. These processes are spiritually demanding on you. They involve a real, continuous effort to understand. This takes time and patience and the attitude of humility.

You must learn to listen and to empathize (to see the world from another person's point of view). This involves accepting people as they are, appreciating their every effort, recognizing work well done, and affirming their right to be individuals, to feel and think differently. Learn to involve people in the decisions from the planning stage on. Only sincere participation in the endeavor will tap their greatest potential and desires. Accepting, understanding, appreciating, and involving comprise a divine experience that will lift and edify.

If you give another human only the experience of judging, criticizing, or rejecting, what have you done? Built barriers of defense, communication breakdowns, fighting and flighting, and bad feelings. In contrast, attitudes of faith and respect are self-fulfilling prophecies. As Goethe put it, "Treat people as they can and should be and they will become as they can and should be."

Leaders, do you want a glorious experience? For one month, act on four assumptions and watch what happens. You'll be joyfully amazed.

These four great keys or activities will probably take no more than 20 percent of your time, and yet they will dynamically influence 80 percent or more of the success of your stake and ward program. Make your mind up to use them. Make it a habit.

Sink your spiritual roots deep by drinking deeply from the divine fountain of daily sincere prayer and scripture study and by "starving" yourself from the worldly fountains of life. Then when the times of stress or storm come, you will not be uprooted or blown away. With deep spirituality will flow a power from within to love your people, to have faith in them, to involve them, to appreciate and understand them. From this you will develop the powerful leadership skills to plan, to communicate, and to follow through. Thus, you will work on the roots of success rather than on brush fires, deadlines, crisis, and frustrating details. You will rediscover the central spiritual truth: You teach what you are.
