Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

27

Ten Basic Principles of Effective Missionary Work

Principle 1: Teacher or Salesman?

Are you a teacher or a salesman of the gospel? There is a difference. A vital difference. Let us explore it.

For salesmen, their product is apart from their person. For teachers, it is not. Their product is their person. They effectively teach only what they are. It is "caught," it is felt, it is sensed, it communicates, it edifies. Christ said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." ( [^1].) In the very person of Christ was embodied the fullness of every teaching he uttered. There was no separation. To attain a knowledge of his utterance and his divinity meant that we too must become like him. Knowledge is a state of being. True conversion, true testimony is found only in what you are—not in what others think you are or even what you hope others will think you are.

The Motive

Salesmen are motivated for some kind of gain, whether it is a sense of achievement or a form of recognition. Gospel teachers are motivated by genuine regard and a sincere valuing of others. This is what the Greeks termed agape, love, or selfless love. This is what the Savior meant in his question, "Lovest thou me?" ( [^2].) It isn't the fact that Peter loved Jesus Christ that mattered so much, but rather that Peter would feed his sheep or his lambs (and thus demonstrate the quality and depth of his love of Christ).

The Product

To gospel salesmen, the product is baptism. In their self-justifying manner they may label their baptisms as convert baptisms or conversions; nevertheless, they have essentially sold when they baptize. This brings them the recognition of the sale, which thereby satisfies their motive. They lose interest immediately afterward in the fellowshiping process, because this does not feed their motive. Their morality is a statistical morality. People become numbers.

To gospel teachers imbued with a sense of sacred responsibility and a true understanding of conversion, the product is a changed life. The product is a soul committed to the higher level of living, committed from within to keep the commandments of God and to follow in the footsteps of the Christ. Gospel teachers know that such a commitment must come from within. They also know that this eternal commitment can be nourished and cultivated from without by their own love, testimony, patience, understanding, faith in the man, and "inside" eternal power to commit and to come unto the Lord's kingdom. Gospel teachers would never manipulate their investigators into commitments, for that would mean that the teachers had made the commitments for the new converts and that shortly thereafter, when the teacher leaves, the new member will leave the Church. When the first storm comes, the member's testimony, being built upon sand will be washed into the sea.

Gospel teachers are constantly aware of not only the quality of the convert, but even more important, of the quality of the conversion. This is particularly so with youth who can more easily be "talked into" the Church. With them, gospel teachers make doubly certain, take extra pains to see that the youth are properly taught, that they learn how to pray, and that they do pray. Teachers know that young persons' mentalities and environments are such that it wouldn't take much for a storm to wash them out to sea even after baptism. Teachers therefore guard their students' castles with strong wills of protection, support, and fellowshiping, so that the foundations of the castle will become granitelike through continued commitments, activity, attendance, and service.

The nature of the product that gospel teachers have is interwoven with what investigators literally become. The greatest part of conversions come after baptism under the influence of the Holy Ghost, through the years of study, prayer, and service, but to gospel teachers there must be an internal commitment that converts have freely made. To choose the way of life and salvation is the free responsibility and privilege of each.

Baptism becomes a prize, something of greatest worth to become worthy of, not something to be "talked into." Teachers strive to help contacts to become worthy of this "pearl of great price." ( [^3].)

Technique

Gospel salesmen earnestly strive to develop their skills, to increase their knowledge in using those skills, so that they might effectively sell their product. As they confront everyday realities, they learn the principle of expediency; that is, do what you must do to get your product sold. Therefore, the end, selling the product, would justify almost any means, including subterfuge, deception, various forms of subtle pressures, creation of different kinds of social obligations, misuse of scripture, misquotation, or almost any other "small thing."

Gospel teachers are honorable to their core and know that the means and the end are inseparable. They know that manipulation hurts the quality of the conversion. But it isn't because they know this that they don't manipulate or use deception or pressure, but rather because anything dishonorable is so foreign and alien to their own honorable natures that it simply would not flow out of them. It is repugnant to their sense of decency and virtue. Being whole-souled, they can use their knowledge and skills only as literal parts of themselves and not as things they "put on themselves," like a coat or an affectation so as to leave "the right impression" upon another. Because of what they are, they simply can't use a gimmick approach. They couldn't use subterfuge at the door. They wouldn't attempt to "psych" contacts up to a fever pitch so they would "buy."

The teachers' underlying fundamental attitude of love and regard of a human soul makes their knowledge and skills really effective. As they testify, people sense their whole-souled integrity, and the Holy Ghost burns within them. Teachers teach what they are. How polished their techniques or how finished their conversation or how eloquent their speech or how impressive their knowledge matters little. What does make the difference is that they teach what they are.

What They Are

Gospel salesmen believe that they are an important part of an important process in selling their product. How they live or what they do to sell it really matters little. All that matters is that they sell it and win the praise. It almost reminds one of an early salesman of long ago who tried to sell a product (salvation) and desired that all of the honor be his. (See [^4].)

Gospel teachers have the assurance of their own divine ordination, that they are called "by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands" ( [^5]), and that through honor and truth alone will they successfully prepare the souls they teach for conversion by the Spirit. Regarding the honor and the glory, they feel to say with Christ, "Father thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" ( [^6]), or with Paul, "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that gave the increase." ( [^7].)

Are you a gospel salesman or a gospel teacher? It is both a matter of degree and also a matter of principle. May the Lord bless you to climb continuously upward toward the noblest calling of all: gospel teaching.

Principle 2: You Teach What You Are

One of the strongest convictions coming out of my own observations and experience is this: You teach no more or no less than what you are; that is, what you are as a person becomes that most powerful essence of your message. For instance, if you are unable to make promises and to keep them, in all likelihood you will discover that your contacts do not make and keep commitments.

When your contacts apparently have problems with the lessons, ask yourself, "Do I lack faith? Vision? Am I obedient to mission directives? Do I live the schedule?"

When we teach people the Word of Wisdom, to honor the Sabbath day, and to pay an honest tithing, we are essentially teaching them a discipline. This becomes a self-discipline in which people learn to make moral choices between alternatives. They have the freedom to fail or the freedom to succeed. This freedom is basic to responsibility, and this responsibility is basic to all human growth.

We teach what we are. We can teach people the discipline spoken of above only if we ourselves are disciplined. If we are unable to discipline our lives into an effective program of work, study, and prayer, regardless of how we might teach otherwise from the lips, what we are really teaching is the lack of personal discipline. In a sense, this teaching is "caught" and not taught.

Even though we might express love to our contacts, if we do not feel and express it toward our companion, we tend to teach a lack of love and a lack of faith. If we ourselves are double-minded, we teach double-mindedness. If we are concerned with worldly concerns, we communicate these same concerns.

The key to your families is in your heart. From the Proverbs of Solomon we read: "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." How true! How precious an insight!

For an answer to the questions you have regarding the families you find, teach, and desire to bring into the Church through the waters of baptism, examine your own heart. What do you find there? Regardless of the words you use and technical perfectness of your discussions, the most powerful and compelling message of all is exactly what you are.

Are your families slow to hearken to your teachings? Are you slow to obey the directives and programs of the mission? Look into your heart.

Do your contacts hesitate to pray with all their hearts? Look into your heart. Do you pray with all your heart? Sincerely? Specifically? With all your heart? Privately as well as with your companion? Look into your heart. Do your contacts do their homework? Do they study the tracts carefully? The Book of Mormon? Do you do your homework? Do you honestly prepare every morning for that day's labor through companion and private study and planning? Look into your heart.

Are your contacts socially aspiring, and do they see Mormonism as a faulty rung in that social ladder? Are you aspiring? Are you genuinely happy with successes and recognitions of others? Do you fear the opinions of men and "worship" at the altar of praise and public opinion? What is the supreme object of your devotion? Is it the true and living God or self-improvement? Do you love God first?

Have your contacts faced their moment of truth—that is, the moment of truth about themselves? Have they looked at their rationalizations and pretenses, fears and sins, and acknowledged them to be such? Have they come face to face with the truth that they desperately need the gospel, that it is indeed their Father's divine plan for their happiness and eternal growth, that they need help from you and from the branch and from God, and that they want it with all their hearts?

Have you faced your moment of truth, in which you have honestly acknowledged to God and to others, if offended or lied to, your weaknesses, your procrastinating spirit, your slothfulness, disloyalty, impurity of heart and mind, or aspiration for the honors of men? Have you taken these matters to the Lord and with all your heart asked him for forgiveness, relying upon the atonement of the Savior in faith and granting forgiveness to all who have offended you, that you also might earn that forgiveness? Have you then forgotten the past and gone forth with a renewed vigor and determination and courage to make it a new day for yourself, relying upon God's help?

The Prodigal Son faced his moment of truth. After he had spent his inheritance, he "came to himself" ( [^8]), realized he had offended both heaven and home, and remorsefully returned. Likewise, one young missionary realized he had fooled and pretended his way through the first several months Of his mission. He had spent his inheritance. Then he "came to himself' and to a desire to return, and with God's help he returned and succeeded.

Let each of us look into our own hearts at least once a day in a private, personal prayer to our Father in heaven and therein discover the answers to the problems of our families. May the Lord help each of us to be true shepherds, who care terribly much for the sheep, and not to be sheepherders, who work for wages, who care little for the sheep, and who leave the sheep when the wolf approaches; neither let us be sheep who "merely go along."

We are here to teach and not to be taught. The shepherd leads because he cares. The sheepherder cannot lead. He does not know, neither does he care; therefore, he must drive. No man can be driven back to the Father. This is what Satan wanted to do, and his wage was his own glory. This is why he was cast out. (See [^9].)

Our Lord, however, was what he taught. He embodied perfection. He didn't say, "This is the way." He said, "I am the way."

Principle 3: We Must Become Christ-like

Proposition 1: We only trust our own experience.

Trust and faith are almost synonymous here. We act in terms of our own experiences. So also do our contacts.

We believe in Joseph Smith's experiences because we have had, in a sense, an experience with Joseph Smith. We have seen his work and fruits, read his testimony, and received in our own hearts the Spirit's confirmation of its truthfulness. Therefore, we have trusted Joseph Smith's experience and found him trustworthy, and we have had an experience with God's Spirit and found it good.

The only experience of many people with Mormonism has come from anti-Mormons or from social disapproval. It's easy to understand their first reactions. They merely trust their own experiences. Can they do anything else until they have a new and different experience?

What is the reason, then, for a lack of faith in revelation or a revealing God in the world today? Answer: simply because few, if any, have had divine experiences with God. Why? No revelation, no vision, no priesthood, false creeds: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." ( [^10].)

Proposition 2: Our highest responsibility is to introduce people to divine experience.

If people will actually experience the things of God and the Spirit of God, then they will trust this experience. At first theymay mistrust it or suspect it, because their past experiences have taught them to do this. How can we introduce them to divine experiences?

First, by being an example of deity ourselves. We must be true servants of God and of the people we teach. Alma taught his wicked son, "O my son, how great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words." ( [^11].)

Second, by showing intrinsic love to them. We do this in the way we treat each other as companions first, and then in the way we treat them and their children. As we would like to be treated, so we treat others. You can see the futility of criticism. Fruit comes by "abiding in the vine" (a divine relationship or experience).

Third, by giving them the vision of the restored gospel. We share with them our testimonies in the spirit of meekness and in solemnity of our hearts, and as we do so, the Holy Ghost will witness to them of its truthfulness. This is a divine experience.

People to a degree must first be converted to the messenger before they will become converted to the message. They must believe the messenger to be true. The only scripture many of your contacts ever read is your own life. Paul wrote to some Saints he had just left and said essentially, "Forget what my reputation was. What was your experience with me?" (See [^12]:12.) Christ taught his Nephite disciples: "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." ( [^13].)

Proposition 3: A person will know the truth to the degree he or she is true to the truth.

People's experiences in obeying God's commandments gradually make them over, and they become "partakers of the divine nature." ( [^14]; see also [^15].) The divinity within them is released. Their own natures testify to them of God, and they feel God's love and feel that they are children of God.

What is true to you is truth to you. If your contacts do not yet know the Church is true, it is because they are not yet true enough to the Church. Perhaps you must first be more true to them so that they will have sufficient trust in you as a messenger to believe and obey your message.

Proposition 4: You mill encourage obedience to the laws of life if you will live the laces of love.

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if you have love one to another." ( [^16].) Truth begets truth. Pride becomes the natural defense people develop against the possible hurt of new experiences. They resist change. They count costs and consequences of change. They feel that if they jump off the treadmill they are on, the new ground will upturn them.

Your responsibility is to give them new experiences with this ground to show that it is secure and firm and that they enter into a new, glorious friendship and fellowship with the Saints and the Spirit of God.

It also follows that if you disobey the laws of love, regardless of what message or testimony you give, you will encourage disobedience to the laws of life. Why? Simply because people will only trust their experiences, and if they have an experience with lovelessness, force, manipulation, sarcasm, light-mindedness, impatience, or unkindness, they will trust that experience and reject your testimony.

Proposition 5: You are "as God" to your contacts.

The true and living God, who is the Father of our spirits, is a stranger to most people. You must introduce him to his children by first showing what he is like in your own life.

If you listen to others with real respect, empathy, and caring, they will come to believe God will also listen. They will pray with faith. If you refuse to listen with understanding (lack of empathy), they will likely pray mechanically without faith, for their human experience will teach them about the divine experience.

If parents are unkind to their children or show prejudice and favoritism, or if they are moody and selfish and constantly changing, then this becomes the concept of God that children will grow up with. They will live in fear of an arbitrary, changing, mean, selfish, noncaring God. They will pray only out of duty, never out of desire. If they sin, they are never quite sure that they are forgiven, even after sincere repentance. They carry regret, fear, and guilt all their lives, and this stifles their personal growth and creativity, freedom and capacity to love and enjoy others in the world. They become grasping and selfish, eager to accumulate the facades and symbols of success in order to better cover up their deep self-fears and self-doubts.

If we cannot be trusted, and we are to show God to them, "How can I trust God?" they may reason. If we can be trusted, our contacts will be encouraged to begin to live the commitments. Faith is born of obedience and contact with the Spirit (unseen reality). Then they will begin to have a divine experience that can be trusted and that will motivate a higher and higher order of obedience, eventually leading them back into the presence of God their Father.

Proposition 6: "The child is always father of the man." (Wordsworth.)

This means that the first few years of childhood become the dominant influence on the entire life. It is a true statement, but it is an incomplete statement, for it does not consider the possibility of the second birth.

A person can undergo the second birth with Christ as the new Father, and this childhood will become the dominant influence of an entire new life. You are the midwife in this second birth process. You are a shepherd to lead people to the true Shepherd. But at the present you are the only shepherd they know, and you must be a true shepherd, for they will not follow strange voices, nor will they follow double-minded sheepherders who tend sheep for what's in it for them. Nor will they follow sheep, for the sheep follow them.

Proposition 7: Every person you meet is as Christ.

"As ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." ( [^17].) As you treat your contacts in terms of their unseen, divine potential and divinity within them, it will to that degree spark a release of that divinity. "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." ( [^18].)

Your own divine attributes will reveal God to them, both in you and within themselves.

Proposition 8: You essentially bring three things: vision (testimony), love (empathy), example (divine experience).

Example must come first, for they need to have a little trust in the giver before they will believe in the gift (the vision of the restored gospel or your testimony).

Love must come second, for there must be a relationship of caring and sincerity before they allow a teaching experience. After this, message or testimony (vision) can be given. Then the three mingle continuously together, providing a great and divine experience that will bring people to a new well of trust and faith and knowledge, peace, joy, and happiness. If they drink deeply of the waters from this well, they will never thirst again.

When you empathize, you receive a person to yourself. When you testify, you give a vision to that person. As you live uprightly, you provide an experience with divine attributes (divinity). Testimony gives truth. Love motivates. Example breeds trust.

The root cause of all human problems is estrangement from the Father, which began at the time of the Fall and continues each time any of us transgress the Father's laws. The root solution to this problem is found in the atonement of Christ. He atoned for both the fall of man through Adam's transgression and the fall of each individual through transgression, if we will receive his gift through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel.

Principle 4: We Reap Only What We Sow

The apostle Paul forcibly teaches an eternal and immutable law. Study it carefully and apply it personally: "Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." ( [^19].) The lesson contained in this marvelous scripture is taught us again and again, just like a recurring theme throughout the scriptures.

We literally reap as we sow. This means if we sow a good morning's preparation, we will reap a good day of contacting and teaching. If we sow enthusiasm and positiveness in our hearts, we will reap enthusiastic responses at the door and positive commitments in discussions.

If we pray sincerely and devoutly, we will begin to reap the works and the fruits of the Spirit; and if we think about physical and material and worldly cares, we will reap the works and fruits of the flesh. Misery and happiness are inevitably the output of what is put in.

Do you want to increase your teaching hours? To reap this result, you must sow adequate preparation in terms of contacting and mastering discussions as well as living for the Spirit with its fruits of love and faith and courage and conviction and confidence. There is no mystery in this work. It is very simple. We merely reap what we sow.

Make Up Your Mind

There are only two things to do, and those are to decide what you really want and to be willing to pay the price to attain it. This is what we mean by making up your mind. Don't make up your mind only to succeed, but also make up your mind to pay the price of success. Don't make up your mind to be well prepared, but rather make up your mind to get up at 5:55, have your prayer, and have a well-organized period of study and concentration. Don't make up your mind to get twenty "golden contacts," but rather make up your mind to ask the golden questions so many times today or to knock on so many doors today. Then there is no question about it—you will have your twenty "golden contacts." No missionary can escape or dodge the truth of this law. Let a missionary say, "No living the schedule for me. I set no high and strict aims ahead of me. I see an unrestrained and easier missionary life." Has he thus escaped the law? No—he has plunged headfirst into the most terrific self-denial in missionary life!

Henry Emerson Fosdick wisely taught: "If we will not deny ourselves for a Christian home, we shall deny ourselves a Christian home! What more appalling self-denunciation can there be? If we will not deny ourselves a loose and unchaste life, then we shall deny ourselves self-respect and a conscience fit to live with. If we will not deny ourselves bad temper and a wagging tongue, then we shall deny ourselves friendship—God pity us! If we will not deny ourselves those habits of thought and life that keep divine fellowship away from human hearts, then we shall deny ourselves God. In short, if we will not give up evil for good, we shall surely give up good for evil."

The law of growth and success is acceptance of personal responsibility to obey laws. Convert baptism blessings are predicated on obedience to the basic laws of missionary work. If you obey the laws, the convert baptisms will inevitably follow. Disobey and no conversions will take place. The Lord is bound by our diligence. If we do our part, he will always do his.

The laws of missionary work are all summarized and embodied in the following revelation: "See that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength." ( [^20].)

From this it's obvious that missionary work is not a short-range social pressure system of gimmicks and cheerleading; it is a sober, mature, spiritual, and intelligent effort to do God's eternal and majestic work among his children. "I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." ( [^21].)

We reap as we sow. This is the fact of all life.

Note the following diagram illustrating both the man-made "law of the shortcut" and the natural, God-made "law of the harvest" as applied to life and missionary work.

Divine Law of the Harvest vs. Man made Law of the Shortcut

Can you now understand why the Lord told the boy prophet, Joseph Smith, that the creeds of the world were an abomination in his sight, that they teach for doctrines the commandments of men? Worship that does not change and transform and dynamically lift the worshiper is vain worship. Man-made churches all teach shortcut philosophies to salvation, either through "confession" or through the sacraments of the church. Deathbed confession in most churches today supposedly saves. This heretical man-made doctrine makes a mockery out of God and deceives his children. It attempts to palm off a counterfeit in the name of God and salvation, only to teach the shortcut philosophy of "something for nothing."

"He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber." ( [^22].) Thief? Of one's own soul.

Fellow missionaries, you alone have the true and complete teachings and revelations of the Lord that will lead the faithful to salvation and exaltation: faith plus works plus the saving and exalting ordinances of the restored gospel are God's law of the harvest of souls. Mormonism is the message of the Father given in this dispensation. Patience is the heart of faith. Faith is born of obedience and perfected by works. Faith in the unseen powers comes from contact and experience with these divine powers.

Principle 5: Prayer

"What men usually ask for when they pray to God is that two and two may not make four." How true this Russian proverb often is! We tell our contacts about the four steps in prayer. Let us also teach them about the spirit side of a successful prayer, not only about its letter and form. There are three simple points on the spirit of prayer that comes from a sincere heart:

Phillips Brooks taught, "God looks not at the oratory of your prayers, how eloquent they may be; nor the geometry of your prayers, how long they may be; nor the arithmetic of your prayers, how many they may be; nor at logic of your prayers, how methodical they may be; but the sincerity of them He looks at."

If you want an improved relationship with your companion, tell the Lord specifically what you will do to improve it. If you want the ability to master the missionary discussions, tell the Lord how you are planning to study and specifically what you will do that day. As Brigham Young said to the early settlers, "Pray as if all depended upon the Lord and work as if it all depended upon you." Two and two will never equal five. Neither will half-hearted prayers and half-hearted work bring full success and full achievement.

Teach your investigators the same three things about prayer. Teach them how to pray from their hearts sincerely and to learn the great law that we reap as we sow. Teach them to tell the Lord what they are willing to do in acquiring the knowledge of the truth that they specifically desire and request and what they will do in order to get the courage to stop their smoking or jealousies or whatever obstacle they encounter. Teach them to prepare their prayers by way of thinking through what truth means to them and what they are really willing to pay for it.

Our great blessing and assurance is that we know that God does live, that he has given us his truth, and that he loves his children and therefore will direct them and answer their prayers. We don't have to manipulate people or talk them into anything. We have nothing to fear. There is neither force nor enemy that can successfully oppose our best efforts. If we are on the Lord's side, the Lord is always on our side. He never leaves us. We only leave him sometimes.

How blessed these assurances are. How terrible and unthinkable trying to do this work without these assurances would be. With these assurances we can literally depend upon the Lord to bring the conversion to anyone who will put his or her life through the conversion process of desire, study, prayer, church attendance, and application of gospel principles in life.

Principle 6: "I Will Do It"

You and two others are entering into a partnership to purchase a business. Each is to invest $25,000. One of the other two says, "I hope to pay $25,000," or "It is my intention to do the best I can," or "Somehow I'll try to get my $25,000."

Would you put your $25,000 down on that kind of a promise?

As an insurance executive, would you unconditionally promise to commit the resources of your insurance company to a man who could not unconditionally promise to pay his premium?

Think seriously about this. Its significance to you in the mission field is profound and far-reaching. A contact is a covenant. It is another word for a promise to perform on an obligation.

This gospel is a gospel of covenants. We make lower covenants, and by obeying them, our capacity increases to make and obey higher covenants, until eventually we become sanctified and perfected and enter back into the presence of the Lord.

When we make covenants in the waters of baptism or at the sacrament table or in any of the holy ordinances of the priesthood and of the temple, they are all based on the idea that "I will do it." To say, "I will try my best," or "This is what I hope I will do," or "What I am trying to do" is to make no covenant at all. Saying deeply within you and meaning it, "I will do it," gathers together all of the powers within yourself and focuses your energy and your discipline on your objective. It also pulls down from God his divine power, for he is bound by his contract or covenant with you to enable you to fulfill your part. (See [^23].) And he will not let you down!

Think about it. One of the finest and highest ways we can demonstrate our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is to make an unqualified pledge or covenant with him to do one thing or another that we know must be done, particularly when it is something that we know we cannot do by ourselves. Thereby, we demonstrate that we have faith in his integrity to honor his promise to us and also in his power to enable us to do things far beyond our own capacities.

Unless you promise what you will do (in specific acts), you have no contract that will be valid. The Lord promises only when you promise. In other words, if you don't promise, you have no promise. When you do promise, then you have all his promises.

Do not promise something you will not do. But focus and organize the forces within you so that your mind is truly made up, and then enter into a contract or covenant with him—a covenant to make any sacrifice to be successful. Then you can trust him entirely, for as you honor your covenant, he will honor his, and you "shall be endowed with power" (D&C 43:16) such as you have never known before. You will speak with authority. You will find that God will "disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." (21:6.) You will have "the power of God unto the convincing of men" (11:21), and he will be "with you at every time of trouble" and support you "against all the fiery darts of the adversary." (3:8.) He will "go before your face." He will "be on your right hand and on your left, and [his] Spirit shall be in your hearts." (84:88.) The greatest blessings and promises of eternity are yours when you promise unconditionally with a mind made up by saying "I will" and then doing it. (Study slowly and carefully [^24].)

I. To obey

A. Law of Moses (schedule, tracting, teaching)

B. Law of Preparation (prayer, planning, study)

C. Law of Christ (consecration, humility, integrity)

II. To sacrifice

A. Worldly pleasures

B. The course of least resistance in testifying and teaching

C. Too much time in your room or in activity without accomplishment

D. Pride, selfishness ("What's in it for me?")

E. Mediocre effort

F. Light-mindedness

G. Criticism and murmurings

H. Unvirtuous thinking

If you make and observe your covenants, you will teach covenant making and obeying—or in other words, you will lead others toward baptism. Remember, we teach what we are. If we refuse to make and obey covenants, and since baptism is a covenant, what then are we teaching our investigators? We are teaching them to not make covenants, or put in plainer terms, we are saying to them, "Don't be baptized."

What is your honest opinion of investigators who will say that they will "try to pray?" Or that they "hope" to make it out to church? Or that they "hope" to quit smoking? What would you think of an individual who would say at the time of the marriage covenant, "I'll try," or "I hope to," or "I'll do my best," instead of "I will," or "I do"?

We really don't have to look anywhere for answers as to why certain areas don't produce. We should look to our own hearts. The Lord's power will be with us only if we obey his laws. The Lord tells us that we may partake of the waters of eternal life freely if we will. Many missionaries are discovering and are often amazed by this great covenant-making power. Others have not really taken it into their personal lives yet, but merely think about it.

This is the answer to bring down the fullness of the Lord's blessings upon our heads: If we will make covenants and observe them by sacrifice, we will teach others to make covenants, and we will bring many truly converted souls to the waters of baptism. "He that repenteth and exerciseth faith, and bringeth forth good works, and prayeth continually without ceasing—unto such it is given to know the mysteries of God; yea, unto such it shall be given to reveal things which never have been revealed; yea, and it shall be given unto such to bring thousands of souls to repentance, even as it has been given unto us to bring these our brethren to repentance." ( [^25].)

Study the scriptures and your patriarchal blessing; pray earnestly for the spirit of covenant making, and make only those covenants you know you will keep. By so doing you will grow in faith, power, and integrity, and your capacity to make greater covenants will increase.

Principle 7: Five Keys to Make Your Devotion Effective

Effectiveness means convert baptisms. Effectiveness means to teach good discussions to good people. Effective activity brings accomplishments, results. Ineffective activity (busyness without results) brings frustration and can breed discouragement and an unbelieving or defeatist attitude. Effectiveness—accomplishment—success: one and the same thing.

Learn well this idea: 80 percent of your success comes from 20 percent (or less) of your activities. That 20 percent will give life and meaning to the other 80 percent.

What are the five great keys of effectiveness or success? These five keys will take less than 20 percent of your time, but they will make all of your time effective. If you use this 20 percent right, the other 80 percent will also be right, and you will baptize converts.

First Key—Communicate

To communicate means to understand and to be understood. Keep your communications in order so that they are truly honest, humble, and sincere with three persons: (1) with God in earnest daily prayer—particularly the private prayer of faith, the believing prayer; (2) with yourself in meditation, in listening, and in making up your own mind; (3) with your companion. If these communications are in order, a sweet, secure, and powerful spirit will be in you when you tract, work through members, and teach. The best way to have your own heart understood is to truly strive to understand the hearts of others, including the Lord's. Have empathy.

Second Key—Plan Ahead

Plan your week; plan each day. Plan where you want to spend your time and with whom, doing what. Planning is faith. Planning is setting goals and a program to achieve them. Planning is thinking. Planning is serving "with your mind." Half an hour in daily, careful planning will double or triple the effectiveness of your ten hours of work. Planning requires mental discipline, patience, and a lot of practice. Do not become discouraged in your initial struggling effort to develop the planning skill. Stay with it in faith. Plan your study class carefully, and you will double its effectiveness. You will master more discussions, memorize more scriptures, keep on top of the mission's study guides. Plan your work; work your plan. Use daily planning cards.

Third Key—Simplify

Simplify means to eliminate nonessentials. As the saying goes, "Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least." Simplification means to continuously bring your contacts back to the fundamental discussions. The best evidence of the Apostasy is the Restoration. The best evidence of the Restoration is the Book of Mormon. The best evidence of the Godhead is the First Vision. The best evidences of Joseph Smith are the Book of Mormon and the fruits of Mormonism. The best source of testimony is obedience. (See [^26].) Scriptural and doctrinal arguments are futile and evasive, for they evade the responsibility of a personal quest for truth in repentance, in earnest, humble prayer, and in obedience. That's simplification. Put first things first.

Fourth Key—Be Strong

The main goal of the baptismal challenge is to set a good baptism date. That's being strong. Faith is born of the Spirit of the Lord, which comes initially in your fervent testimony. Repentance means to live commitments. Commitment teaching means teaching to repent (change of heart—conversion). Be strong in love on commitments. A spirit of love and empathy is the essence of teaching to convert.

To be strong with others, you must be strong with yourself, for you teach what you are. Command your own body—for instance, be up at 5:55 A.M., to bed at 10:30 P.M., out at 9:30 A.M. and again at 6:00 P.M. President N. Eldon Tanner has said, "Self-discipline is doing what you know you should do when you don't want to do it."

Being strong is making a covenant, and covenant makers baptize covenant makers. Being strong means to mentally concentrate in your prayers. (Praying out loud may help discipline the mind and increase concentration.) Being spiritually strong is to accept your role as an agent of the Lord (eye single to him) and to give to him, the principal, all of the glory and the honor. (This "plan—simplify—be strong" formula is the personal philosophy of one of the world's great missionaries, Elder Franklin D. Richards, a former Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, who helped in the supervision of several missions.)

Fifth Key—Multiply Yourself by Using Members

One team feverishly works to loan ten copies of the Book of Mormon a day. Another team spends part of the day committing members to loan copies of the Book of Mormon. They end up loaning fifty and arranging several group meetings. Members loan these books to golden families with whom a relationship has already been established. They are then committed to help fellowship them during the teaching process and after baptism. They help shepherd their referrals through their Gethsemane moments in conversion and help them live the Word of Wisdom. While you bring a family to church, your committed member team workers bring families also.

Learn to be effective by using these five great keys. It won't take more than 20 percent of your time, but the spirit of them will burn like fire through the other 80 percent. Communicate, plan, simplify, be strong, multiply yourself.

Principle 8: Bring Along the Husband and the Wife Together

"It's okay for my wife if she wants to join the Church, but it's not for me. I'm really not interested or religiously inclined. She can do as she likes." Is this attitude atypical, or maybe the opposite: "Well, if my husband wants to join, that's fine for him, but I have some real doubts myself".

Let's listen to these two individuals, in not too atypical fashion, six months later. Take the first couple. The wife has joined the Church. Listen to the husband: "You and your church! You're always putting that church ahead of me and the kids." And listen to her retort: "It's the only satisfaction in my life. If you'd only have the courage to give up smoking and listen to the elders, you'd know what I mean." Nag, nag, nag.

Take the second couple. The husband belongs, the wife doesn't. Things went okay at first, but then the Church became a real competitive force in the family. The husband feels unsustained and lacks the courage to carry through and has become inactive. Kicking against the pricks within himself, he rationalizes his inactivity by expressing doctrinal doubts.

I offer five observations:

What should you do if they simply don't come along together? Beware of baptizing a woman without the consent and sustaining influence of her husband. Likewise, try also to gain the consent and sustaining influence of a wife if the husband wants to be baptized and is worthy.

The basis for judgment is this: If you sincerely believe that by baptizing either the wife or the husband, assuming permission of the other is given, the Church will become a source of help and inspiration in making the baptized member a better wife or a better husband, one with more love and respect and acceptance of the other, and a better father or mother, then go ahead and baptize him or her. If, on the other hand, you see the Church becoming a new source of competition and of disunity in the home, you would be wise to struggle more with the family, to take more time in teaching them and trying to bring them together. There may be some impossible situations where baptism now of one of the family members is best, but if you have the above frame of mind and you work and pray earnestly to that end, I believe you will bring in more complete families than ever before.

Principle 9: Don't Ever Let the Ninety-Five Teach You about the Five

Past experiences often act like chains on the present and the future. Early impressions become lasting impressions. Habits work themselves into ruts. A mental attitude that "nothing will happen here" or that "it can't be done here" becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Never let the ninety-five teach you about the five.

It has always been the case that the gospel of Jesus Christ will appeal to a relatively few selected souls. In all likelihood these are souls who committed themselves in the premortal existence to the acceptance of the everlasting gospel during their earth life. Those who are of the blood of Israel come from such a spiritual heritage; and when they hear the voice of the Lord as the missionary teaches and testifies, they feel something eternal, some divine spark, that cries out "Abba, Father."

Don't ever let those nine doors that reject you and your message teach you anything about that tenth door. Go to each door with a lively, fresh, eager, positive, and spiritual approach, believing that the Lord is with you, that his Spirit will go before you and soften the hearts of the hearers, and that at "this door" you will find one of those selected few who are sufficiently humble, open, and honest so as to hear the voice of the Lord calling to them. How they treat you, they may have treated the Savior.

Don't ever let the ninety-five people you meet in the street survey who pass you by indifferently teach you anything about the five who will respond to the survey and show interest. Don't let your past experiences blind you to the promise of the present moment.

From what source, then, do we find our learning, if not from our own human experiences? That source is the Spirit of the Lord. Over and over again we learn that this is an essentially spiritual work, and to try to involve ourselves with anything more or less than this misses the mark by a wide mile. (See [^27].)

"Again I say, hearken ye elders of my church, whom I have appointed: Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; and ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken." ( [^28].)

This is exactly the meaning of faith, or "the assurance of things hoped for, the substance of things not seen." (JST, [^29].) You hope. You believe that somewhere among those thirty people you will contact this morning, there will be one or two families who will positively respond. The unwise missionary will learn lessons from all those who reject him to the effect that he will believe that no one will accept, that the area is sour and no good, that it has been "tracted out" or that the people (as if one could make broad, sweeping generalizations about all of the people) are simply "not interested."

There are people who are interested. Go about with the philosophy of searching, and believe that there are people the Lord would have in his church and who will come into his church if the gospel is properly and spiritually presented to them.

Faith, courage, and the worthiness to be taught from on high are the sources of your knowledge—not people, not the area, not some disillusioning experience. Never let the ninety-five teach you about the five. Let the Lord teach you about them. "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." ( [^30].)

Principle 10: Be Strong in the Hard Moments

There are certain crucial moments in any human endeavor that, if excellently used, become the determining moments. These moments will determine the course of future events. This is doubly valid in divine endeavors.

"For this cause came I into the world." ( [^31].) The Savior's entire earthly ministry, the establishment of his church, the teaching of his gospel, in fact, his entire eternal role was to be climaxed and culminated in the great atoning sacrifice that took place in Gethsemane and on Calvary. The entire plan of life and salvation revolves around the crowning act in which the Savior performed the vicarious sacrifice that not only guaranteed immortality and resurrection to all mankind, but also opened up the way to eternal life. Everything that the Savior ever did is and was hinged upon his atoning sacrifice. All of human history will revolve around this single transcendent event. Jesus rebuked Peter for smiting off the ear of the high priest's servant (in order to protect his Lord from arrest) and said, "Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" ( [^32].)

Can you and I not ask ourselves the same question? When it comes to those crucial moments when the real work of our ministry is performed, ask yourself, "Shall I not drink?" These crucial moments, ironically, are also the hardest moments of our missions. That is, they are moments when we find a powerful conflict between what we should do and what would be the easiest thing to do (the course of least resistance, or what we might consider to be the more natural and human thing to do). We must also say with the Savior, "For this purpose came I into the mission." Or a strong companion (senior or junior) must say to his weaker companion, "The cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?"

I suggest there are three crucial moments that in a sense comprise the Gethsemane and the Calvary of your mission—three hard moments when the cup must be drunk if your mission is to succeed and if you are literally to find the kind of joy and fulfillment that is possible there. These three moments are (1) getting up at 5:55 A.M., (2) the initial contacting, and (3) being strong with love in commitment.

The Latter Stages of Conversion

The latter stages of conversion begin mainly with the Word of Wisdom, tithing, and other practical applications of the gospel, when the people really begin to realize the impact the message is going to have on their personal lives. This is their Gethsemane moment, when they are essentially faced with the great personal question, "Whose will shall be done—mine or thine?"

Don't back off from this moment or allow some obstacle to disturb you. Learn to be strong in this moment, for this is the very moment that you were sent to be strong in. This moment is when you are to be a shepherd, when you are to give the most support and love and pour the most faith in.

I am convinced that we give up on more people than give up on us. By this I mean we give up too early when they begin to throw up objections or to balk a little or to seek some escape. We often say, "They gave up on us." But I wonder if we simply didn't "give up" our responsibility in this hard moment.

If you yourself are an example of the Gethsemane attitude, and if you have successfully surmounted your hard moments, you will understand deeply their feelings in their hard moments, and you will be willing to "die with your people" as they go through these hard moments.

If you abide in the vine, and if the Lord's words abide in you, you will begin to bring forth a little fruit. Then the Lord will purge you and give you the power to bring forth more fruit, and you will successfully bring people through these hard Gethsemane moments, and they will prepare for their baptism. (See [^34].)

Conversion literally means "a change," and unless a behavioral change has taken place, there is no conversion, and if there is a baptism without a change or conversion, then almost inevitably the new member becomes washed overboard by the first wave or wind that smashes into the boat. We inherit all of our own workings. We cannot avoid it, though we may like to do so. The Church will grow no faster than the quality of the conversion, and statistics cannot reflect quality—only quantity. Numbers do not reflect quality. Numbers can be very deceptive, and they may suggest something that is absolutely not so. Quality is eventually reflected in branch (or ward) growth, branch activity, branch attendance figures, and the quality of branch meetings.

I urge upon you a sense of personal responsibility, a sense of personal commitment, of urgency, of dedication. I urge the Gethsemane spirit. I urge partaking of the cup the Lord has given us to drink. Let us be strong in the hard moments.

---
Notas:
[^1] You must prepare yourself for your prayer through meditation and scripture reading. Make a reconciliation with those offended; strive to clear up internal confusion and double-mindedness. Think through the temple ceremonies and other glorious spiritual experiences, or whatever activity or thinking process subdues your spirit and sobers you and prepares you to enter into the presence of the Lord. What about my homecoming talk? Tell people about your mission area, about its people, spirit, and ways. Tell them about the mission, about the responsibilities missionaries need to carry, about the growth and development of branches and Saints, about missionary and proselyting programs and strategies. Relate personal experiences on your mission that have given to you an internal conviction of the principles of the gospel. This is the most powerful way to bear testimony and to teach. And teaching is infinitely preferred to preaching, particularly at your homecoming. Give the experiences in detail and point out exactly how you learned various principles of the gospel, and he who has ears to hear will hear.
[^2] Ask the Lord for specific blessings and express gratitude for specific blessings so that you avoid vain repetitions and meaningless generalizations. Let the things you ask and thank him for be things you deeply feel and mean in your heart. What about the armed forces? It is important to recognize an important obligation to serve one's country. Generally I would suggest trying to serve the country as an officer and with as much education behind you as possible.
[^3] Pledge to him the specific laws that you promise to obey, upon which the blessings you request are predicated. If you take this idea seriously, you will find yourself hesitant to ask for certain blessings whose laws you do not intend to obey. This will force self-honesty and objectivity, and you will gradually discover that such self-understanding and self-honesty will give you a true basis for growth and a basis to know other things outside yourself as well. How soon after a mission should I go to school? Individual circumstances vary, but I believe the sooner you get into school the better you will be able to retain the excellent work and study habits developed in the mission field, and you will become so busy in meaningful activity as to minimize adjustment difficulties.
[^4] Learn to listen in your prayer. Don't just talk all the time. Empathize with the Lord, with his thinking, with his feelings, with his ways of doing things. Meditate, ponder, consider, value, appreciate, love, worship. Let the affections of your heart be placed upon him. Be open, sensitive, and receptive to his inspiration and heavenly impression. Keep your mind open and believing. Other than going on another mission, how can I serve the mission field? First, by exercising righteous influence on other young men to go on missions. Many young men are susceptible to influence, and the right kind of relationship, counsel, assistance, and interest at the right time can often help a worthy young man who feels lonely, or has some doubts, or has a tendency toward waywardness, or has a very poor relationship with his family or with ward leaders to go on a mission. Take every advantage to influence young men in this way. A kind word or act is often a key. Be interested in young men. Go out of your way to serve and help them, to inspire and assure them.
[^5] Pray in the believing attitude and realize the power of the prayer of faith, that truly the Lord has promised that whatsoever you ask of him in righteousness, believing that you will receive, if you ask it in the name of the Savior and if it is right, you will receive it. How can I help bring my non-Mormon family members, relatives, or friends into the Church? First and foremost, by an example of sincerity, love, and appreciation. Don't preach or judge or reject. Second, build honest, affirming, accepting relationships with them. Third, you might be able to do some actual teaching. At least you can share your feelings about your experiences, and these will generally be appreciated. Be patient and remember the tremendous power of example.
[^6] Don't rush out of his presence when you conclude your prayer. Stay there, and think, ponder, and appreciate. Rise off your knees, committed, inwardly resolved. Your mind is made up. You are fully aware of the forces and realities that will surround you that day, or that did surround you that day. In either case, you will have won your private battle. It is now merely a matter of living out those decisions and victory in public. The private making up of one's mind in the presence of the Lord is a great and necessary act that will guarantee public success. Private failure is merely the prelude to public failure, but a true private success guarantees public success.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
