Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

28

Advice to Returning and Returned Missionaries

In the mission field you experienced a quality of spiritual life and service likely unknown to you before. Many of you felt after leaving home that you had left the Garden of Eden and gone out into the "lone and dreary world." But gradually, as the months passed, and through the divine process of missionary work, study, and prayer, your heart and your world changed from a physical, social, self-centered one to a spiritual one in which all of your energies and enthusiasm and time became focused on one grand goal—that of bringing souls to the Lord and his restored gospel and church.

This is why to a great degree you felt far more wrenched on leaving the mission field than you did on initially leaving home. Your heart had changed, and so had your world, and more than before you felt you were truly leaving your Garden of Eden to go back into the "lone and dreary world." And now a major question looms on your personal horizon: How can I maintain the sweetness, the purity, the simplicity and beauty of spiritual life and work when I leave the mission field and return "into the world"?

Many other major and subsidiary questions follow in the wake of this dominant righteous desire. How much Church work should I do when I go home? What about education? What should I go into? Where's the money going to come from? What about courtship and marriage? What about the sweetheart I left behind, or who left me behind? How will I know when I'm in love? How will I know who is the right one to marry? When should I get married?

How is my family going to accept me? Will they recognize and appreciate my mission experience? Will they allow me to be changed? How can I build close relationships with them? How can I keep my testimony alive and active? Will I have a difficult adjustment? What should I say at my homecoming?

Many anxieties and emotional feelings rise to the surface. Fears and self-doubt, confusion and uncertainty are among these feelings. Sometimes a desire to stay in the mission field is prompted by the urge to escape responsibilities of family life, education, work for a livelihood, the challenges of a "cold, cruel outside world." In the "secure world" of the mission field you don't need to earn a living by the sweat of your brow; many of your personal needs are continuously met by others; a great brotherhood and friendship is fostered; the work is deeply satisfying and joyful; love and appreciation are given and received in sincere, simple manners; you are able to labor single-mindedly, receiving the admiration and the support and love from those abroad and at home.

From "listening" to both modern and ancient church leaders, I see threading through their counsel five points, or five great principles, which, if honored and obeyed, guarantee to you that you will maintain the Spirit of the Lord, that your faith and testimony will be alive and active, that Christ will continue to be the light and life of your life, that you will have the internal stamina and spiritual strength to resist worldly encroachments of physical, social, and intellectual temptations, and that, from a long-term perspective, will lead to temple marriage, a long life of faithfulness and service, love and happiness, joy in your posterity and eternal life with the Father of your spirit.

Point 1: Pray Daily, Privately, and Sincerely

Seek for the Lord earnestly to understand his will, and make your mind up to obey it—every morning and every night. Take time to meditate and think about your blessings, the greatness and goodness of God, and express your gratitude with all your heart.

In your mind's eye think through the pressures and temptations of the day, and internally commit yourself in that private mental battle to the principles of righteousness. Fervently ask in a believing attitude for God's Spirit to assist you in resisting temptations and in giving you the power and the peace within you to grow, learn, obey, contribute, serve, and love, and to remain humble and spiritually minded.

If you will spend a half hour in the "presence" of the Savior of this world every day, you will spend eternity in his presence. He will become your friend and your Master. You will have a natural association, for he will be no foreigner and stranger to you. He will provide the motive power behind your life. You will walk in his light. On leaving this life, you will find it natural to want to spend eternity in his presence, and you will do so because you spent much of your earthly life in his presence and found it natural. How can this be? Simply because you obeyed his laws, feasted upon his love, and drank deeply from his fountain rather than from the worldly fountains of this earth, and you discovered for yourself the priceless truth he told the Samaritan woman: "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst." ( [^1].)

To pray sincerely in public and in private is often a great test. You will often feel tempted not to do so, and you will often feel no great need to do so. Your circumstances may be such that, if you are really honest with yourself, you don't feel a need for God. You aren't forced to be humble—you will have to be humbled because of the word—the word of God. (See [^2].) This is why you must stay very close to the scriptures and let the words of the Lord flow continuously over your mind.

You learn in the mission field the difference between prayer from your heart and prayer from your lips. You learn that prayer thus involves the following principles for maximum effect:

In a sense you are defining your belief in God. You are bearing your testimony to God of his goodness and power and greatness, of your inner assurance that he can and will grant the blessings you desire if they are right for you. Then when you rise off your knees, you will need to act as if those blessings were granted, which will show forth your believing, faithful attitude, nothing doubting. As you pray in the name of the Savior, do it in the full realization of his divine role as Advocate and Mediator, and as the Holy One of Israel who atoned for your sins, who suffered, bled, and died for you that you might find life and freedom.

You will have to work at your prayers. You have to yearn in them. You have to yearn for them. You have to bring self-discipline into your prayers to make certain that you pray regularly and that you mentally concentrate. It may help to vocalize your feelings in your prayers, for to speak out loud forces the kind of mental concentration that often is necessary when your mind has a tendency to jump around or when it is preoccupied with earthly forces, pressures, and fears.

To pray alone is vital in developing sincerity and in growing in personal faith. The first thing the Savior taught about prayer is that it should be alone, in one's own closet with the doors closed—that you should pray to your Father in secret, and he will see and hear in secret and reward you openly.

Point 2: Study the Scriptures Every Day

Study them from the point of view of personal edification and insight to understand the will of the Lord for your own life. Don't study them only from the point of view of intellectual understanding.

In a sense your soul can become confused by diverse pressures and aspirations of life. You need an instrument to interpret the real needs of your soul. Just as the Urim and Thummim served the Prophet Joseph Smith as a divine instrument in translating the reformed Egyptian language, so the holy scriptures can become your Urim and Thummim to translate the will of the Lord and the needs of your own soul, to reveal your pride and double-mindedness, to motivate repentance and learning, to foster clarity and spiritual sureness and internal commitment to the principles of righteousness. By thinking daily on the word of the Lord, you will seek your honor from him rather than from men.

You will realize that the law of the harvest is an immutable law, that you will reap as you sow, and that it is impossible to do otherwise. You will realize that your spiritual life and happiness are not subject to human judgment, appreciation, or recognition, but that the Lord knows and cares, and all you need to worry about is that you live your life according to true principles and trust in him for the outcome.

Get into the habit of studying the scriptures for a few minutes before retiring and for a few minutes every morning, so that your mind is spiritual before your sleep and spiritual on your awakening. This will become as food to your soul, and just as sleep unravels the jangled-up nerves and tired tissues of your body, so will prayerful and earnest meditation on the scriptures unravel a tempted soul or the internal weariness that comes from earthly desires and double-minded living.

"Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." ( [^3].) In order to study and pray sincerely, you must live sincerely. An understanding of the scriptures will be revealed to you to the degree that your life is of the quality as to receive the Spirit of the Lord. Otherwise, the scriptures or the word of the Lord will have no natural appeal to you. You will prefer to read other things more naturally interesting and stimulating. The scriptures will be boring to you, and the Lord will gradually become a stranger to you, just as anyone with whom you do not communicate sincerely over a long period of time becomes a stranger. You both begin to live in different worlds, to feel different feelings, to think different thoughts, and you have very little in common anymore. If you are not continuously careful, such a relationship can arise between you and the Lord.

Remember that duty can bring you to desire. If you find yourself slipping, if you find the scriptures are starting to lose their natural, spontaneous appeal, then "gird up" the loins of your mind, and out of duty (to begin with) get back into the regular habit of daily scripture study. Stay right with it. Go back to them on a habitual daily basis and drink deeply from them, and you will gradually discover the natural loveliness and sweetness of God's word and prefer it infinitely to man's word and man's ways and thoughts.

The scriptures will become to you a checklist on your spirituality. They will become a divine interview. If you earnestly seek to discover your weaknesses through the scriptures, as suggested in [^4], you will come closer to the Lord. Your weaknesses will be revealed, and if you "stay in there fighting" in faith and faithfulness, your weaknesses will become your strengths.

Point 3: Honor the Sabbath As a Day of Worship and Service

The one great opportunity to bring back the sense of single-minded spiritual service of your mission days is the Sabbath—one full day out of seven set apart for nothing but worship and devotion and renewal of your covenants.

Organize your affairs so the "pig doesn't get into the mire" on the Sabbath and so you don't need to do any studying at all for your school work. If necessary, in order to meet some special Monday morning deadlines or to prepare for a Monday test, miss that date on Friday or Saturday night, but do not violate the sanctity of the Sabbath day. You will do far better in school and have much more balance and joy in your life by following this counsel than you will if you try to cram and study on Sunday. You will enjoy neither your study nor the Sabbath.

Retire to your bed at least by midnight Saturday night so that you can get a good night's rest, and go to your church meetings refreshed and grateful. Rather than napping for the rest of the day or joy riding, serve in your Church office in some way, or study the scriptures, or in some other way have uplifting relationships that edify and strengthen yourself and others. Bear brief testimony frequently in fast and testimony meeting.

Avoid "social" dating on Sunday. If you take a date to church or a fireside following sacrament meeting, do so with a single-minded intent to worship and to learn and to continue to honor the Sabbath.

If you partake of the sacrament righteously, your soul will be filled and will not hunger for the world's things and ways, and your perspective in life and your purpose will be regained.

The Sabbath is truly the key day in maintaining a depth of consistent spirituality, and each of the other six days will be richer and more productive because of honoring the Lord's day. If you have any question about what can and cannot or should and should not be done on the Sabbath, ask one question and sincerely answer it: Is it worshipful?

Point 4: Keep Yourself Morally Clean in Thought and Action

The natural biological temptations are there. Today's worldly atmosphere is saturated with sensual suggestiveness, and this requires you to exercise great self-control toward those situations or temptations that come in such rich doses. Read clean literature. Avoid trash. Go only to uplifting, entertaining movies. Avoid the sick ones, which appeal to man's baser motives and lower nature. You may be surprised how many movies this eliminates.

Avoid sitting alone in cars late at night. Promise yourself and your God that you simply will not do any necking and that you will regard a kiss of affection as sacred, not to be participated in frequently and promiscuously. A kiss of passion or desire and a kiss of affection are completely different, and each person knows the difference within.

If you can control your thinking in your heart and maintain purity, your actions will be also pure. If you do not, you will be led to necking and then to petting, and perhaps to a complete loss of virtue. This will destroy, unless later sincerely and sorely repented of, the spiritual strength and divine power acquired in your missionary labors.

Often the best way to resist temptation is to remove it. "Lead us not into temptation," the Lord told us to pray. ( [^5].) Double date; go in groups; get in fairly early; have private prayer, and when appropriate, prayer with your date. Watch out for the beginnings, and you will never have to worry about the endings.

Keep in your mind a vision of purity and cleanliness and a temple marriage. Never let anything mar that vision. Go to the temple at least once a month to regain that vision, to set your path straight, to recommit yourself, and to perform a great vicarious labor of love.

If you become serious about someone or become engaged, have an agreement and understanding on absolute purity. Develop a relationship founded on respect and sincere friendship. Virtue is lost a little at a time, by degrees, just as righteousness is acquired here a little, there a little, line upon line, precept upon precept. Beware of rationalization, thinking all is right "in the name of love," or thinking nothing is really wrong unless you "go too far."

Be honest with yourself and honest with your God in your private prayer. Your inner heart knows. Down deep where you live, be clean and pure. Resist and overcome temptation, and you will absorb into your character the strength and fury of those temptations and be made that much stronger each time. This will pay dividends to you and yours the rest of your life and throughout eternity.

Point 5: Magnify Your Church Responsibilities

Magnify means to do more than what is minimally required, more than what is asked of you. It means to go the second mile. It means to serve anonymously. Service for social rewards and recognitions may be fine to begin with, but that kind of service will not sink your spiritual roots deep into God's soil, and when the day of stress and storm comes, you will find that you can be uprooted. On the other hand, works of righteousness done and kept in secret and all other forms of anonymous service, beyond the blessings they confer upon others, build a deep reservoir of spiritual strength within you. When the stresses, strains, and storms of life come, you can draw upon this reservoir and receive internal succor. "Out of your own belly shall flow rivers of living water." ( [^6].)

Go to all the meetings asked of you, including leadership meetings. Give excellent preparation in your assignments. Sustain your leaders, regardless of their weaknesses and inadequacies, and give them your loyal, dedicated, humble support.

Of course, you will keep the Word of Wisdom absolutely and pay a full and honest tithing. If there is a portion of your money over which you do not exercise control, then pay tithing on that portion of your money over which you do have control. Pay it regularly. Pay it willingly and gladly, and great blessings will come to you. Everyone can at least pay tithing on their spending money, even when supported by others in school. Remember again—rationalizations are no good; there are no excuses.

Fast two meals on fast day in the true spirit of fasting and prayer. Pay your fast offerings and bear your testimony.

Go to the temple frequently, at least once a month. Go with others who feel as you do (fellow returned missionaries—a regular group perhaps) so that you can have spiritual conversations before and after the sacred vicarious work. Renew your dedication and your understanding of the great laws and covenants. Look beneath the symbol level to the level of eternal meaning, and then strive to translate those eternal principles and truths into real practices of everyday life. Go spiritually prepared, hungry and thirsty, having the faith that you will be filled. And you will be.

Simply be that kind of person of whom the bishop will say out of your presence: "This is someone who is truly consecrated to the Church, on whom I can depend absolutely. This is someone who is faithful and pure and powerful in righteousness."

These Five Points Are Interrelated

If you violate one of them, you will find that you will violate to some degree all of them. You will need to honor them all in order to honor fully any one of them. Sincere spiritual life is a fruit, and the roots of the tree that bears the fruit must be deep in God's soil. This is why avoiding evil companions is so important; why you associate yourself, particularly in social activities, with those of high standards and spiritual thoughts, with those who will lift you and edify you, with those whose conversation is free from coarseness, vulgarity, slang, swearing, taking the name of the Lord in vain, light-mindedness, impure practices, cutting sarcasm, cutting speech, social falseness. Cultivate authentic friendships in which you understand one another, and strive to maintain and deepen your commitments to the principles of eternal life.

Watch out for the gradual erosion of your testimony through pride, vanity, and intellectualization. Watch out for sophistication, which is worldly wisdom. Worldly wisdom is foolishness to God.

Remember that faith in any system but Christ's is pride. True faith in Christ will bring humility. Humility is the opposite of pride. Pride is the mother of all vices, and humility the mother of all virtues. Build your foundation upon Christ and his true principles, and no storm can tear you apart or expose rotten two-by-fours behind a shiny facade.

Remember the three temptations of Christ—to the body, to pride and vanity, to worldly aspirations. Remember the divine instruments given to you to overcome them—your body itself, your companions and family members, and your opportunities to serve others anonymously. Remember the great covenants you have made, the temple laws you have agreed to obey. Each is built upon the other, and only through obedience to the lower law may you obtain the capacity to obey the higher law.

Unless you are your own master, you cannot become a consecrated servant of the Lord. You first must master your body and mind. You need to develop a reservoir of power, strength, and inner peace so that you are not policed by the opinions of others and your own fear of disapproval and hunger for human approval.

Look carefully over the five points. Talk with friends or others who have similar interests and desires. Visit with your bishop and other spiritual advisers. Counsel with them and receive admonition from them. Avoid the spiritual decay of intellectualization, of double-mindedness, of materialism, of sensuality.

What about Education?

In today's complex, specialized world, it is most important that you get as much education as possible. If you have strong enough desires, you will find that the means will be provided, and marriage or finances need not stand in your way.

Do not shortcut your long-range career by refusing to sacrifice and build an investment within yourself. The main value of education is not financial or occupational but personal and spiritual and character-building. You can become a better husband and father, wife and mother, citizen, church worker. You learn to think analytically and creatively. You learn to write and communicate clearly and persuasively. You learn how to read with discrimination. You develop a way of thinking about life and problems. Your basic knowledge is deepened and expanded, your horizons lifted. Your ability to sympathize and appreciate is increased. In every way you can become a fuller and more integrated, more capable, wiser human being.

But you will need to work very hard at school, and self-discipline must be your motto so that you follow a regular study schedule consistently and avoid the law of the shortcut. Remember, you reap as you sow, and cramming sessions deceive no one—certainly not yourself. People can get a degree if they are skilled in certain intellectual and social techniques and memorizing capacities, but they do not get an education unless they have consistently obeyed the law of the harvest and applied themselves day in and day out to their studies.

Don't let anyone force or pressure you into selecting your major or a career before you honestly feel within yourself that you are ready. The first year or two of college can be used to satisfy general education requirements and to get a broad, liberal background. Expose yourself to different fields of human endeavor to get to know yourself. It is an advantage to be open and uncommitted at this stage, to explore various fields, even those that don't seem to arouse a natural interest in you, rather than to merely go into those fields where you are already strong, for this can often make your strengths your weaknesses through a loss of balance and wisdom.

Seek to understand different fields and yourself in them rather than to judge prematurely. Once you understand, you will have a basis for wise judgment. And if you are prayerful, the Lord will guide you, for the career you choose will be one of the most important decisions you will ever make in this world. You will give the best hours and the best thinking and the best enthusiasm of everyday life, five days a week, for the next forty years of your life. You would certainly want this great gift of your life to be given to that which is right and uplifting and noble and which would be self-fulfilling.

If you like doing something, if you are good at it, and if it is the kind of thing that the world really needs—then you have found a good career. It must bring you happiness and a sense of personal meaning and contribution, or your job will gradually become a means to an end rather than having the qualities of an end in itself.

Remember in your studies that most of science is merely the knowledge acquired by man without faith in Jesus Christ, so beware of placing your entire faith upon any science or any philosophy of man. Use the scriptures and the modern oracles as the standards by which you judge life and other learnings, rather than the other way about. Beware of rationalization, which is often prompted by intellectual pride and personal transgression and a gradual inversion of values within you.

Be open to further growth and development. You can learn all that life can give to you, and it will serve you well as long as you are true and faithful to the eternal principles, to that learning which comes from God alone. Wisdom comes from humility and obedience, while learning may come from schooling. "To be learned is good if [you] hearken unto the counsels of God." ( [^7].)

Don't belittle yourself or take the course of least resistance. Don't settle for mediocrity. Don't lose your vision of your great divine potential and what you can contribute. You need a good solid education. Your ability to contribute in life will be largely influenced by it, and those who do not have it often feel inferior and somewhat defensive inside, even though they may hide it well. It isn't the most important thing, but it is a very important thing, in my opinion, that you get as much education as is possible, hopefully a college degree, regardless of the circumstances or financial difficulties in which you find yourself. A way will be opened up and means provided if your desire and determination are strong enough.

I would hope that your spouse recognizes education's value and that you encourage each other and are willing to make the sacrifices necessary. To receive dividends in life, you must be willing to make the investment.

Family Relationships

Remember, because of your experiences on your mission, you carry the responsibility to a great degree to inspire and unify your family. You are not to respond to the moods of others, but to radiate divine attitudes. Regardless of the difficulty, express your love and appreciation and warmth to your family. If you ever feel rejected, use self-knowledge and understanding of others; do not reject back. Watch out for self-pity. Draw from your spiritual reservoir, from your mission experiences the capacity to adapt and to turn every situation to the Lord's advantage. Expression of warmth requires practice, and practice makes perfect. Surely you will make some mistakes, but that is to be expected. So does the pianist before he becomes proficient.

Remember the H2O analogy. H2O can stand for liquid, gas, or solid, depending on the outside temperature and pressure. Almost every situation you are in or person you meet is like H2O. They are in a constant state of radiation and absorption. If you will draw from inside your spiritual reservoir spiritual attitudes, you will radiate those and others will absorb them, and you will lift and edify. Otherwise, your spiritual life will be shallow, and you will absorb the radiation of lesser spirits. Rather than being the master of circumstances, you will become the victim. Rather than acting, you will be acted upon. There will be no true joy in this kind of life.

Your family carries with it a lot of emotional feelings developed over the years. You can become very subjectively involved in your own feelings, and this often compounds the problems. For this reason you must seek out and use self-understanding and sincere prayer more than ever before so that you serve and bless your family, that your brothers and sisters are inspired to serve missions and be married in the temple, to live righteously.

Do not wear your religion on your sleeve and preach to your family, relatives, friends, or other people. Do not find fault with or judge your parents or others whose lives are not what you expected or hoped; be humble and live quietly the principles you believe in. Simply believe in the power of example. It is infinitely greater than precept, particularly with your own family. There will also be opportunities to do some teaching. Remember that example must come first, then sincere relationships of love and acceptance, and only then can you be successful in giving the vision of the restored gospel of our Lord.

What about Dating, Courtship, and Marriage?

For a while following your mission, do not trust your emotions too much. You will be going through an adjustment process and learning to define yourself in a completely new world and environment. You may find that your moods will range from moments of great elation to feelings of self-pity and depression. It would be a sad thing indeed to make eternal long-range decisions on either of these extreme moods. Wait until you get to know yourself a little and your moods level out a little before you make too many judgments and decisions, particularly when they have long-range consequences, such as engagement or marriage.

If you seek the Lord earnestly and live righteously, he will guide you in these matters and will give you a feeling of rightness within your being. Of all moments in your life that are important, this one is, and the Lord will not leave you alone. But you have to agree to live his law and to avoid playing cat-and-mouse dating games where people become skilled in manipulating each other's emotions.

To trust in the Lord means to follow true principles and to leave the outcome in his hands. To trust in the arm of flesh is an attempt to manipulate the forces of life so as to get the outcome you desire, whether that is the Lord's desire or not. You do not always know what is best for you. God does. Trust in him. Have a believing attitude, regardless of what others might think or say. God is a God of truth and integrity; his promises apply to you through your faith and faithfulness, and he will never let you down.

In your dating get to know each other under many different kinds of situations and circumstances. Don't just go to be entertained or to watch a movie, but engage in various activities and have rich, sincere conversations. Until you are certain of the "one and only," go with several and get to know them well.

Often when you return home, you feel a little insecure and may have the tendency to grasp for any source of security or certainty. Many become engaged before they really should, because of this search for security, or they become victims of certain social pressures and obligations. They will inwardly resent this, and this resentment will come out in various ways. This is why it is so important to be very honest with yourself and others and to obey true principles, trusting in the Lord and leaving the outcome in his hands.

When you have found the one for you, and you are certain, through sincere prayer and righteous living, that she or he is the one, then get married and begin your family and fulfill your divine obligations.

If you have the will, you can raise your family as you go to school. I don't believe the question of whether to have children or not is one of financial or practical difficulty nearly as much as it is one of desire and faith and spiritual determination.

Watch out for quick judgments when you return home, in one way or another, either for a particular person or against a particular person. Get settled and get to know yourself until you can trust yourself in this new environment, until you can trust your feelings.

I do not believe any time limit can or should be given to returning missionaries as to when they should get married. It depends too much on the people involved and their degree of maturity and responsibleness. It also depends somewhat on their circumstances of life. However, I would subordinate the latter to the former. Trust in God and act on true principles. Be patient. Don't expect perfection overnight. Be honest and have sincere dating and courtship relationships. Make your courtship a spiritual one. Pray with each other. Before marriage go to the temple several times, if this is possible.

Make certain that the temple marriage is your greatest goal and value and that it is not eclipsed by all the temporal "do's" and preparations for marriage. In a Mormon community, temple marriage is sometimes perceived only as one of the social increments of the wedding—the "thing to do"—and is made secondary to the trousseau, to the tea, to the wedding dress, to the parties, and to all of the other preparations. Be careful. Keep the temple central so that your enthusiasms and interests and loyalties are focused primarily upon it. If they are not focused upon it, I would adapt whatever is necessary in order to maintain that focus.

Other Important Points

When you get married, establish early the tradition with your children to go on missions. Start savings accounts for missions. Furthermore, you can always help missionary work by making contributions to missionaries and perhaps combining with others to send missionaries into the field.

Your mission has been the greatest spiritual experience of your life. In it you learned the eternal lessons of life. You learned that happiness is a by-product of selfless service. You learned that you found your life to the degree you lost it in the lives of others.

Remember, your life is a mission, not a career. You were not placed here on earth to serve your own selfish desires and ambitions. Look upon your entire life, your education, your marriage, your family life, your career as a mission, and they will become a mission to you. Everything, if done with the right motive and an eye single to the glory of God, can be a spiritual activity. It is only when we lose this point of view that temporal labors and school work become selfish and self-serving and spiritually unsatisfying. "Unto the pure all things are pure." ( [^8].) Then you won't need to hearken back to your missionary days. You won't need to live on the sweet memories or on a resurrected testimony for the source of your spiritual life. When you were released from your mission, it was merely a transfer to another district to serve God in a different way, but still through the service of his children.

Remember to keep your scriptures at your bedside. Study them frequently, for the word of the Lord is the rod of iron that will keep you along the unmarked straight and narrow path, which will be obscured from time to time in your life by the mists of darkness or the temptations of Satan. Holding firmly to the rod of iron will carry you successfully through those mists, and you will partake of the tree of eternal life.

Develop your own personal study guide and follow it, using a checklist. Let self-discipline in every phase of your life bring you to Christ-like motives and works of wisdom, humility, love, and service in each of these phases of life.

Believe in the Savior. "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." ( [^9].)

---
Notas:
[^1] You must prepare yourself for your prayer through meditation and scripture reading. Make a reconciliation with those offended; strive to clear up internal confusion and double-mindedness. Think through the temple ceremonies and other glorious spiritual experiences, or whatever activity or thinking process subdues your spirit and sobers you and prepares you to enter into the presence of the Lord. What about my homecoming talk? Tell people about your mission area, about its people, spirit, and ways. Tell them about the mission, about the responsibilities missionaries need to carry, about the growth and development of branches and Saints, about missionary and proselyting programs and strategies. Relate personal experiences on your mission that have given to you an internal conviction of the principles of the gospel. This is the most powerful way to bear testimony and to teach. And teaching is infinitely preferred to preaching, particularly at your homecoming. Give the experiences in detail and point out exactly how you learned various principles of the gospel, and he who has ears to hear will hear.
[^2] Ask the Lord for specific blessings and express gratitude for specific blessings so that you avoid vain repetitions and meaningless generalizations. Let the things you ask and thank him for be things you deeply feel and mean in your heart. What about the armed forces? It is important to recognize an important obligation to serve one's country. Generally I would suggest trying to serve the country as an officer and with as much education behind you as possible.
[^3] Pledge to him the specific laws that you promise to obey, upon which the blessings you request are predicated. If you take this idea seriously, you will find yourself hesitant to ask for certain blessings whose laws you do not intend to obey. This will force self-honesty and objectivity, and you will gradually discover that such self-understanding and self-honesty will give you a true basis for growth and a basis to know other things outside yourself as well. How soon after a mission should I go to school? Individual circumstances vary, but I believe the sooner you get into school the better you will be able to retain the excellent work and study habits developed in the mission field, and you will become so busy in meaningful activity as to minimize adjustment difficulties.
[^4] Learn to listen in your prayer. Don't just talk all the time. Empathize with the Lord, with his thinking, with his feelings, with his ways of doing things. Meditate, ponder, consider, value, appreciate, love, worship. Let the affections of your heart be placed upon him. Be open, sensitive, and receptive to his inspiration and heavenly impression. Keep your mind open and believing. Other than going on another mission, how can I serve the mission field? First, by exercising righteous influence on other young men to go on missions. Many young men are susceptible to influence, and the right kind of relationship, counsel, assistance, and interest at the right time can often help a worthy young man who feels lonely, or has some doubts, or has a tendency toward waywardness, or has a very poor relationship with his family or with ward leaders to go on a mission. Take every advantage to influence young men in this way. A kind word or act is often a key. Be interested in young men. Go out of your way to serve and help them, to inspire and assure them.
[^5] Pray in the believing attitude and realize the power of the prayer of faith, that truly the Lord has promised that whatsoever you ask of him in righteousness, believing that you will receive, if you ask it in the name of the Savior and if it is right, you will receive it. How can I help bring my non-Mormon family members, relatives, or friends into the Church? First and foremost, by an example of sincerity, love, and appreciation. Don't preach or judge or reject. Second, build honest, affirming, accepting relationships with them. Third, you might be able to do some actual teaching. At least you can share your feelings about your experiences, and these will generally be appreciated. Be patient and remember the tremendous power of example.
[^6] Don't rush out of his presence when you conclude your prayer. Stay there, and think, ponder, and appreciate. Rise off your knees, committed, inwardly resolved. Your mind is made up. You are fully aware of the forces and realities that will surround you that day, or that did surround you that day. In either case, you will have won your private battle. It is now merely a matter of living out those decisions and victory in public. The private making up of one's mind in the presence of the Lord is a great and necessary act that will guarantee public success. Private failure is merely the prelude to public failure, but a true private success guarantees public success.
[^7] Faithfulness to the Light.
