Stephen R. Covey, Spiritual Roots of Human Relations ( 1970)

Afterword: A Beginning—Spiritual Aerobics

My, he looked good! Pleasant, tall, determined! His chest had somewhat "gone to pot" over the intervening years since his outstanding athletic achievements in college, but he'd been active in sports and he still looked good.

"Two lengths, Ed—as hard as you can go. Come on now," I challenged.

In he dived. He gracefully thrashed through the first length, turned about, and went as hard as he could on the second. Halfway back he suddenly gave out, paddled over to the side, rested, and then slowly crawled up on the bank. He just lay there—no motion, just breathing very deeply.

"What's wrong, Ed?" I asked, running up.

"I don't know. I feel dizzy and kind of sick."

He was nauseous all that day. He learned something about himself. He couldn't run faster than he had strength. He had better not overdo. He couldn't kid himself—he had to build up gradually.

Jogging has become a national craze. Why? What's behind all this active exercising, this jogging, running, walking, bicycling, swimming?

"Aerobics" stands for an active exercise program based on the idea of incrementally building up the reserve power in the body (heart and lungs) to supply the necessary oxygen through a healthy, developed, open circulatory system.

Take someone (probably, though not necessarily, older) who has been leading a sedentary life (very easy to do in our modern, mechanical, automated, gadgetized society today) and put him or her under physical strain. Running for a bus, shoveling snow, hunting in deep snow in the mountains—the body cries out for oxygen. But the oxygen can't get through: the vessels and capillaries are undeveloped, clogged, or closed. Oxygen deficiency may bring on clotting, which may result in heart attacks, coronaries, or strokes (blood and oxygen deficiency in the head). The same kind of thing happens when we put too much "juice" on a limited electrical circuit. We blow a fuse.

Evidence shows that those who build up and regularly jog, swim, do whatever will not only feel and look fitter, but will also sleep better and work longer and more efficiently than they otherwise would. Such exercise as jogging or walking takes no special equipment, costs nothing, and takes only a few minutes a day. The only requirement: self-discipline. A very rare requirement.

Spiritual Aerobics

There is also an emotional or spiritual aerobics. It is a daily exercise of emotional and spiritual fiber and muscle, which, if regularly followed, will result in building reserve capacities of "spiritual oxygen" to be called upon in times of stress.

Most of us, under emotional strain, tend to "blow a fuse." We're tired. It's been a hard day. The children are noisy. They're pressing their own needs. They're beginning to "bug us." We find ourselves irritated, angered. We lose patience and then watch out! Our intemperate spirit explodes! We fly into a rage! We say things we don't mean—things that wound and hurt and strain.

We've just had a spiritual coronary! And the healing, repairing process will take time, patience, and humility.

Or take this instance: You and your spouse just don't see eye to eye on the matter of family finances (or child discipline, or touchy in-law situations, or whatever emotionally charged issue brings out differences in upbringing or temperament). A situation comes up that demands a decision. In discussing the matter, you find yourselves unable to really listen to each other, to give and take. You're right—your spouse is wrong. Now to prove it! Feelings become strained. Eventually one or both lose their tempers or withdraw. No communication—no understanding.

A spiritual stroke!

Again, healing is difficult. Sometimes it's not even attempted. The wound congeals and lies deep inside, buried by new defenses of cynicism, sarcasm, and bitterness. It may fester and then, under another provoking situation, "break out" and provide new ammunition for the next round. Good marriages thus often deteriorate, little by little, fed by pride (fault-finding and self-justification), moving from one of deep meaningful communication to one of accommodation, then toleration, and finally hostility (either open or subtle).

What is this daily exercise, this spiritual aerobics? I suggest it is largely found in a daily effort to do two things: first, to gain perspective, and second, to make some decisions in light of that perspective.

Of all God's creations, we his children alone have the capacity to transcend ourselves, to rise above ourselves and our own immediate situations—in short, to gain perspective on what's happening (present reality) and what should be happening (purposes, ideals, values).

We need to take time daily to reflect, to think, to meditate, to plan, to study God's word, and to hear with our heart the preachments of our conscience. Then we need to make some decisions regarding what we are going to do in light of this understanding. Private prayer is the perfect time to recommit ourselves to an eternal perspective and to some specific practices for that day, such as patience, integrity, diligence, purity. President McKay taught:

We have today. . . greater responsibility than ever before, as men of the priesthood, as women of the Church, to make our homes such as will radiate to our neighbors harmony, love, community duties, loyalty. Let our neighbors see it and hear it. Never must there be expressed in a Latter-day Saint home an oath, a condemnatory term, an expression of anger or jealousy or hatred. Control it! Do not express it! You do what you can to produce peace and harmony no matter what you may suffer." (Improvement Era, June 1963, p. 535.)

This daily exercise of meditation, scripture study, planning, and prayer may generally take thirty minutes. That half hour will increase the quality of the other twenty-three-and-a-half hours, including the depth and restfulness of sleep.

As with physical exercise, those of us who say we haven't the time for "spiritual aerobics" are making excuses, and we will find ourselves, whenever the situation calls for strength beyond our reserve, incapacitated by self-doubt, envy, jealousy, pride, fear, anger, bad tempers—all indicating a lack of spiritual oxygen.

We must never become too busy sawing to take time to sharpen the saw.
