One day Lincoln’s friends told him that they had pretended to put money into the school’s pencil machine. They told the secretary that they didn’t get a pencil, and she gave them one. Lincoln decided to give it a try.

At recess Lincoln sat on a bench and looked at his free pencil. He felt very sad inside. He wanted to do what was right. He told the secretary what he had done and gave her the pencil. Lincoln felt better.

Have you ever done something wrong and wished you could make it right? Heavenly Father wants us to return to live with Him, but no unclean person can live with Him (see Moses 6:57). Heavenly Father knows that everyone will make mistakes, so He has given us a way to become clean again. We must repent.

Jesus Christ suffered in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross to pay the price for our sins. He suffered so we would not have to suffer if we repent (see D&C 19:16). Because Jesus Christ paid for our sins with His suffering, when we do our part by repenting and not making the same mistake again, we can be clean again.

1.  Mount page F5 on heavy paper; then carefully cut out the five pieces of the mobile.

2.  Draw or glue a picture of yourself on the back of the square piece.

3.  Fold along the dotted lines, glue the backs of the two oval pieces together, and punch holes where indicated.

4.  Use string to connect each piece (see illustration). Tie a loop at the top; then tie a knot at the bottom.

5.  Once a day, read a scripture listed under a picture of the Savior.

I Can Repent and Live with Heavenly Father
“I am the way” (John 14:6).
“I am the way” (John 14:6).
Jesus Christ is my Savior. He atoned for my sins.

Luke 2:1–16

Luke 2:40

Matt. 3:13–17

Matt. 7:28–29

Luke 18:16

John 12:13

Matt. 26:17–35

Luke 22:41–44

Luke 23:32–46

John 14:6

1.  Write each word of Article of Faith 1:3 on a wordstrip. Post the wordstrips in the wrong order, leaving out the “Atonement” wordstrip. Sing a song or hymn about the Savior. Review Article of Faith 1:3. Display the wordstrips, and act dismayed that something is wrong. Tell the children you are going to need their help. While the pianist plays softly, let children exchange two wordstrips to “fix” the article so it is in order. When the article is complete (except for the “Atonement” wordstrip), tell them something is still wrong. Add the “Atonement” wordstrip. Repeat the Article of Faith together. Liken this experience to how we can repent to correct something but we need the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Ask the children to share how the Atonement blesses their lives.

2.  Display five boxes or envelopes with the following scriptures inside: (1) Mosiah 3:16; (2) Matt. 9:35; (3) John 13:15; (4) 2 Ne. 9:21; (5) Jacob 4:11. Have the children pretend they accidentally broke a very valuable object. How would they feel? What if they couldn’t afford to pay for it? Explain that your earthly father and mother would help you because they love you. They tell you that if you are truly sorry, are obedient, and pay what you can, they will help you by paying the difference. When we break a commandment, we also need someone to help us. Jesus Christ paid for our sins and made it possible for us to repent and return to our Heavenly Father. Write on the board “What Jesus Did for Us and Why.” Talk about and list the following: (1) He atoned for Adam’s sin so little children can be saved; (2) He gave us the gospel so we can live with Him; (3) He showed us how to live so we can be happy; (4) He suffered for our sins so we can be forgiven; (5) He died and was resurrected so we can be resurrected. Divide the children into groups. Let each group open one of the boxes or envelopes, and match the scripture with one of the listed items.
