Página web, de Citavi 4.1 convertida a PDF 28/08/2013 12:24 p.m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto al original.

This is not an official website of the LDS Church.

Language: English Go!

Welcome Guest Login or Signup » LOGOUT

Forums Personal Beliefs Videos Blogs Groups News Gallery Home Mormon Beliefs

HOME RESOURCES SITE RULES IM INTERNET SAFETY BROWSE POLLS QUIZZES EVENTS MY ACCOUNT GETTING STARTED HELP

LDS Social Network Forums > Gospel Boards > Scripture Study Forum

User Name User Name Remember Me?

Alma 10:1-12 Amulek begins to speak

Password Log in

Register FAQ Community

Calendar Today's Posts Search

Notices

Welcome to the LDS.net forums. If you are a member of LDS.net, please login now.

You are currently viewing our boards as a guest which gives you limited access to view most discussions and access our other features. By joining our free community you will have access to post topics, communicate privately with other members (PM), respond to polls, upload content and

access many other special features. Registration is fast, simple and absolutely free so please, join our community today!

If you have any problems with the registration process or your account login, please contact contact us.

Thread Tools Display Modes

04-10-2008, 12:55 PM

#1 (permalink)

Join Date: Apr 2006

Location: United States -

Religion: Mormon / LDS / Christian

MaidservantX

Posts: 1,225

Thanks: 597

Senior Member

Thanked 246 Times in 147 Posts

Laughs: 0

Laughs at 4 Times in 4 Posts

Alma 10:1-12 Amulek begins to speak

As I was reading these verses I was struck -- I don't know that I'd ever thought of this in this exact manner -- that the Book of Mormon presents to the modern reader an example of every kind of possible person each of us might be -- meaning, there is at least one person (and their story) in the Book of Mormon with whom we can identify; particularly as it relates to weaknesses we might have. Amulek is (among other things) one of those presentations. Not only that, but he may be the person/ story with which most of us identify most easily with.

As Amulek starts speaking to the Ammonihahites, we learn or realize several things:

But Amulek has a deep and subtle realization -- the crux of his weakness. Those of us who have studied these chapters before will find these phrases very familiar.

v6 "Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times,and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart"

I find this very interesting for a couple of reasons. I ask myself again -- exactly what is Amulek's wickedness? What lesson is it for us? There is no indication in the story of whether Amulek "went to church" or "paid his tithing" or "offered sacrifices" (law of Moses) or "did his home teaching" or "date night with the wife" or "refrain from eating pork" (law of Moses dietary) or anything of that nature. In fact, he may well have been doing all of those things. (We simply don't know.) For me, I think it is implied that he had a loving family and did a lot of good things in his community and that he had a great deal of faith tradition (to be able to recognize an angel?). But for a person like this -- what is the next lesson then? What is the next step in following God?

What is the "wickedness of [the] heart"? Is it any different than wickedness of deeds done in the body? What does Amulek mean? What couldn't he hear? He knew, but he would not know. Hmmm. So -- we do need to be *soft and clean-hearted; * we need to hear when called; *we need to embrace what we know -- maybe?

In Amulek's case, the change that he made was to receive the prophet (holy man, chosen man of God) into his house (and feed him), and allow the prophet to instruct and bless his family. That is an interesting proposition. He allowed the prophet to dwell in his house.

Can we do the same? (I think I need to do more of that, myself.)

Last edited by MaidservantX; 04-10-2008 at 01:04 PM.

04-10-2008, 01:09 PM

#2 (permalink)

Join Date: Aug 2006

Posts: 2,404

Thanks: 112

tomk

Thanked 713 Times in 432 Posts

Banned

Laughs: 2

Laughs at 6 Times in 4 Posts

6 Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was acalled many times and I would not bhear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would

not know; therefore I went on rebelling cagainst God, in the wickedness of my heart, even until the fourth day of this seventh month, which is in the tenth year of the reign of the judges.

Footnotes

6a 2 Chr. 33: 10.

10 And the Lord spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would not hearken.

Isa. 50: 2.

2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

Alma 5: 37.

37 O ye workers of iniquity; ye that are puffed up in the vain things of the world, ye that have professed to have known the ways of righteousness nevertheless have gone astray, as sheep having no shepherd, notwithstanding a shepherd hath called after you and is still calling after you, but ye will not hearken unto his voice!

b D&C 39: 9.

9 Nevertheless, thou hast seen great sorrow, for thou hast rejected me many times because of pride and the cares of the world.

c Acts 9: 5.

5 And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

I enjoyed your comments.

If we stop for a moment, and "humanize" this a bit -- what are we really talking about? What is "wickedness" and what is "righteousness" in the eternal "God's View" sense of those words, especially when you remember that we were, and still are, one great big family. Whether we are pre-existant spirits waiting to come down, or here in mortality (at various levels of progression and "gospel maturity") or in the Spirit World, or like Christ or Abraham, have gone on to receive our exaltation --we are still family -- and we are family in every intimate sense of the word.

What Amulek was describing in himself is pure "terrible two's" in God's eyes. He doesn't look upon us with any less love. In other words, He lets us have our "tantrum" and when we come to our senses and come looking for Him again, He is there. A Faithful Dad with infinite patience and longsuffering.

Those are my thoughts.

Last edited by tomk; 04-10-2008 at 01:11 PM.

The Following User Says Thank You to tomk For This Useful Post:

MaidservantX (04-10-2008)

04-11-2008, 08:51 PM

#3 (permalink)

Join Date: Feb 2008

Location: United States -

Religion: Mormon / LDS / Christian

Posts: 15,452

Hemidakota

Thanks: 4,011

Banned

Thanked 3,294 Times in 2,433 Posts

Laughs: 808

Laughs at 349 Times in 238 Posts

Quote:

Originally Posted by xhenli

As I was reading these verses I was struck -- I don't know that I'd ever thought of this in this exact manner -- that the Book of Mormon presents

to the modern reader an example of every kind of possible person each of us might be -- meaning, there is at least one person (and their story) in

the Book of Mormon with whom we can identify; particularly as it relates to weaknesses we might have. Amulek is (among other things) one of

those presentations. Not only that, but he may be the person/ story with which most of us identify most easily with.

As Amulek starts speaking to the Ammonihahites, we learn or realize several things:

through character traits most of us would say were good. (But had it become his "gospel"? and shouldn't have? hmm)

learn from a prophet, or et.

degree that he was soon able to teach his neighbors with great testimony and articulation -- some of the loveliest and most plain and powerful

passages in the Book of Mormon.

But Amulek has a deep and subtle realization -- the crux of his weakness. Those of us who have studied these chapters before will find these

phrases very familiar.

v6 "Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times,and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would

not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart"

I find this very interesting for a couple of reasons. I ask myself again -- exactly what is Amulek's wickedness? What lesson is it for us? There is

no indication in the story of whether Amulek "went to church" or "paid his tithing" or "offered sacrifices" (law of Moses) or "did his home

teaching" or "date night with the wife" or "refrain from eating pork" (law of Moses dietary) or anything of that nature. In fact, he may well have

been doing all of those things. (We simply don't know.) For me, I think it is implied that he had a loving family and did a lot of good things in his

community and that he had a great deal of faith tradition (to be able to recognize an angel?). But for a person like this -- what is the next lesson

then? What is the next step in following God?

What is the "wickedness of [the] heart"? Is it any different than wickedness of deeds done in the body? What does Amulek mean? What couldn't

he hear? He knew, but he would not know. Hmmm. So -- we do need to be *soft and clean-hearted; * we need to hear when called; *we need to

embrace what we know -- maybe?

In Amulek's case, the change that he made was to receive the prophet (holy man, chosen man of God) into his house (and feed him), and allow

the prophet to instruct and bless his family. That is an interesting proposition. He allowed the prophet to dwell in his house.

Can we do the same? (I think I need to do more of that, myself.)

Something you find interesting, he was quick to repent. Even those who already had visitations of Angels or the Godhead make mistakes over time. Some even fall away from the church; later would return repenting of their own mistakes. They still retain that bedrock testimony of the truth but not doing the works as they are called.

«Previous Thread | Next Thread »

Posting Rules

You may not post new threads

You may not post replies

You may not post attachments

You may not edit your posts

BB code is On

Smilies are On

[IMG] code is On

HTML code is Off

Trackbacks are On

Pingbacks are On

Refbacks are Off

Forum Rules

All times are GMT -6. The time now is 11:23 AM.

New Posts

-- Default Style

Contact Us - LDS Social Network - Archive - Top

Powered by vBulletin® Version 3.8.3

Copyright ©2000 2013, Jelsoft Enterprises Ltd.

Content Relevant URLs by vBSEO 3.1.0

TERMS & CONDITIONS | HELP | CONTACT US | INVITE | Jesus Mormon ABOUT LDS.NET LDSTALK BLOGS GROUPS PERSONAL VIDEOS SIGNUP

RSS FEEDS | ABOUT US | GET INVOLVED | ARCHIVE Prophets GALLERY Church MORMONISM EMAIL EMAIL

Christ

BELIEFS

*** LDS Social Network ***

Copyright © 2013 Copyright © 2013 More Good Foundation. All rights reserved.

Header art used by permission of Mark Mabry and Reflections of Christ.

LDS.Net is not owned by or affiliated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (sometimes called the Mormon

Church or LDS Church). The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the position of the Church. The views

expressed by individual users are the responsibility of those users and do not necessarily represent the position of the More

Good Foundation. For the official Church websites, please visit LDS.org and Mormon.org.
