I am the eighth of 14 children in a large family of seven girls and seven boys. I am married to Brother Patrice M.W. Mukendi.

In 2001, I was converted to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ and joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, leaving the Methodist church.

The scriptures teach us that through small and simple things the Lord accomplishes His work. (See Alma 37:6). Several simple and attractive things have helped strengthen my faith in Jesus Christ and develop my testimony of the restored gospel. The list of things could be long, but I have chosen to share a few that have been most important for me, my brothers and sisters in Zion.

From my first days in this Church, the organization and the order of the Church by which each task or responsibility is accomplished captured my attention. Seeing a young women’s class with teachers and advisers with planned lessons was amazing to me. I will always remember my Young Women President, the first one who mentored me, Sister Sunguza Kyu, a thoughtful teacher who increased my desire to participate in all Church meetings and activities with topics that were appropriate for young women of my age.

In the true restored Church of Jesus Christ, brothers and sisters are called by inspiration of God through established leaders without regard to the level of education or social rank, but by the desire to serve and help others to progress, because we are all equal before the Lord. (See Alma 1:26.)

The love between brothers and sisters creates an environment of mutual support and strengthens our desire to magnify selflessly the callings that we receive.

The callings that I have accepted and selflessly magnified, with love, have truly strengthened my faith in Jesus Christ and developed my testimony of God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ and the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Every time we seek the companionship of the Holy Ghost in fulfilling our callings, the Holy Ghost guides us, inspires us, accompanies us and fills our hearts with joy. (See Doctrine and Covenants 11:13.) The love I have for my God and for my neighbor has helped me to magnify these callings and has consequently strengthened my faith in Jesus Christ and my testimony.

Our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and our testimony can increase and be strengthened as we prepare and qualify, being worthy to acquire a temple recommend, and enter the Lord’s holy house to perform ordinances and make covenants with Him.

As a young woman, I learned that by the power of God’s priesthood we can be sealed to our husbands, children, and family members for eternity. We should make a personal goal to receive our temple ordinances no matter the cost.

I have experienced the true joy of going frequently to the temple, which is the House of the Lord. After several visits to the temple, my husband and I have decided to strive to make our home a temple, a piece of heaven on earth, a home where the Holy Ghost can dwell, a house of order, a house of prayer, and a house of God. (See Doctrine and Covenants 109:8.)

I know that it is through simple and attractive things such as the organization and structure of the Church, the inspiring callings that we accept and selflessly magnify, the entering into and keeping of covenants made in the temple, the House of the Lord, that we can strengthen our faith in Jesus Christ and develop our testimony of God the Father, His Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost.
