Robert L. Millet, Steadfast and Immovable: Striving for Spiritual Maturity ( 1992)

Preface

The prophet-editor Mormon writes that Helaman had two sons. "He gave unto the eldest the name of Nephi, and unto the youngest, the name of Lehi. And they began to grow up unto the Lord." (Helaman 3:21.) What interesting words: "They began to grow up unto the Lord." One can only wonder what Mormon intended by that remark. Is he implying that the two sons began to sense, at an early age, what matters most in life? Did he mean that they were eager to please their parents and even more anxious to please the Lord in all they said and did? Could it be that from their youth they sought for and enjoyed the gifts of the Spirit, walked in the light of that Spirit, and centered their minds and hearts on things of righteousness?

The fact is, the Lord calls us to do the same, to grow up in him, to mature spiritually to the point where we see things from an elevated perspective, things as they really are. The Prophet Joseph Smith prayed at the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple: "And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said; and that they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost, and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing." (D&C 109:14-15; italics added.) We are sent to earth to mature, to grow up and to be added upon. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God unto life and salvation, the power by which we grow up in the Lord, the means whereby we become in time steadfast and immovable.

One of the ironies associated with spiritual maturity is that we must start over, start from the beginning, become as little children, before we can grow up and proceed along the gospel path. The angel explained to King Benjamin that every person must put off the natural man and become a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.) In contrast to the world's ways, gospel maturity is accomplished through submission, through surrender. It is evident in the lives of those who have overcome self, who have postponed the gratification of present pleasures and chosen instead to seek for peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come. Those who have "chosen that good part" (Luke 10:42) know, like Paul, that "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:9).

Those who are steadfast and immovable have received the Holy Ghost and taken the Spirit as their guide: they have committed themselves to a course of loyalty to the true Church and devotion to the faith of their fathers. Like Nephi of old, they give no heed to the tauntings and ridicule of persons who whelp and sneer from the large and spacious building. (1 Nephi 8:33.) The mature stand in holy places and remain unmoved (D&C 87:8); theirs is a steady, consistent effort in a world of constantly shifting views and values.

This book deals with spiritual maturity, with growing up in the Lord, with acquiring those attributes and that strength which allow us, in a world without absolutes, to be steadfast and immovable. In its preparation I am indebted to many people—students, friends, faculty colleagues, and teachers—many of whom have exemplified the principles discussed herein. I express special thanks to Lori Soza, a capable and conscientious secretary and assistant, who has read each chapter, made helpful suggestions, and in general prepared the manuscript for publication. I alone am responsible, however, for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited. This book is a private endeavor and not an official publication of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or of Brigham Young University. I write of these things not from a position of personal spiritual maturity but rather as one who has sought understanding on the matter and, more important, one who longs with all his heart to so arrive one day. For me, as with most of mankind, the ideal is yet to become an unblemished reality. But I believe in the ideal and hope that this work will motivate others, with me, to strive toward its realization.
