Robert L. Millet, Steadfast and Immovable: Striving for Spiritual Maturity ( 1992)

Chapter Four

Growing in the Pure Love of Christ

One sign of spiritual maturity is an expansion of our capacity to love—to love God and our fellowmen. People are the Lord's most important product, and as long as we are involved in the work of the Lord, we will and should be involved in the work of blessing people. Those who come out of the world into the true Church—who forsake their sins, who take upon them the name of Christ—covenant to live a life consistent with the doctrines and principles espoused and exemplified by the Master. They covenant to be Christians. They covenant to love.

To those who have gotten onto the strait and narrow path that leads to eternal life, Nephi counsels: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20; italics added.) In this single phrase, "love of God," we see both divine and human initiative.

God's Love for Us

Godlike love begins with and centers in and emanates from God. The apostle John wrote that "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him." (1 John 4:16.) Our Heavenly Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, possess in perfection all of the attributes of godliness, including charity. They love purely, absolutely, and perfectly. Moroni, speaking to the Savior, said: "And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast loved the world, even unto the laying down of thy life for the world, that thou mightest take it again to prepare a place for the children of men. And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity." (Ether 12:33-34; italics added.) Pure love comes from a pure source, from God. It begins with God, is extended by him to man, and sheds "itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men." (1 Nephi 11:22.) As we shall see, we are able to love others purely only as we seek for and partake of the love of God ourselves. As the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 174.)

One of the greatest evidences of the Father's love for us is in the gift of his Beloved Son. The prophet Nephi, having desired to receive the same manifestation that his father Lehi had been given, was shown a vision of a rod of iron, a strait and narrow path, and a large and spacious building. In addition, he beheld a tree whose beauty was "far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow." (1 Nephi 11:8.) Lehi had explained that the fruit "was most sweet, above all that [he] ever before tasted." Further, "it filled [his] soul with exceedingly great joy." (1 Nephi 8:11-12.) Nephi concluded from his visionary experience that the tree represented "the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things." Nephi's guide, an angel, added, "Yea, and the most joyous to the soul." (1 Nephi 11:22-23.)

Earlier in this same chapter, it is written that the Spirit asked Nephi, "Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken?" Nephi answered, "Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of my father." And then the Spirit exulted: "Hosanna to the Lord, the most high God; for he is God over all the earth, yea, even above all. And blessed art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the Son of the most high God. . . . And behold," the Spirit continued, "this thing shall be given unto thee for a sign, that after thou hast beheld the tree which bore the fruit which thy father tasted, thou shalt also behold a man descending out of heaven, and him shall ye witness; and after ye have witnessed him ye shall bear record that it is the Son of God." (1 Nephi 11:4-7; italics added.) This tree was more than an abstract principle, more than a vague sentiment, albeit a divine sentiment. The tree was a doctrinal symbol, a "sign" of an even greater reality—a type of him whose branches provide shade from the scorching rays of sin and ignorance. This was a messianic message, a poignant prophecy of him toward whom all men and women press on that path which leads eventually to life eternal. Truly God the Father "so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16; compare 1 John 4:9; D&C 34:3.)

Our Love for God

John the Beloved observed that we love God because he first loved us. (See 1 John 4:10, 19.) "To love God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength," President Ezra Taft Benson has taught, "is all-consuming and all-encompassing. . . . The breadth, depth, and height of this love of God extend into every facet of one's life. Our desires, be they spiritual or temporal, should be rooted in a love of the Lord." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 349.) As we live in a manner that allows the Spirit to be with us regularly, we begin to see things as they really are. Our love for God grows as we begin to sense his goodness to us, as we become aware of his involvement in our lives, as we begin to acknowledge his hand in all that is noble and good and worthy.

There are times when our love for God is almost consuming. Such feelings may come in prayer as we sense a closeness through the Spirit to the Almighty. Sometimes such feelings of gratitude come as we sing "Because I Have Been Given Much" (Hymns, no. 219) or "I Stand All Amazed" (Hymns, no. 193) or "How Great Thou Art" (Hymns, no. 86), or any number of other hymns that also allow our souls to express praise or thanksgiving. Sometimes a love of the Lord burns within us as we hear and feel the power of the word as it is preached by one who does so under the direction of the Holy Ghost. As we feel charity in the form of a pure love for the Lord, we may, like Alma, feel to "sing the song of redeeming love." (Alma 5:26.) To sing the song of redeeming love is to joy in the matchless majesty of God's goodness, to know the wonder of his love. It is to sense and know that the Lord is intimately involved with his children and that he cares, really cares, about their well-being. Jacob surely sang the song of redeeming love when he exulted in the wisdom of God, the greatness and justice of God, the mercy of God, the goodness of God, and the holiness of God. (See 2 Nephi 9.) Elder George F. Richards sought to explain the ineffable sense of love and gratitude that one can feel for his Lord and Savior: "More than forty years ago I had a dream which I am sure was from the Lord. In this dream I was in the presence of my Savior as he stood in mid-air. He spoke no word to me, but my love for him was such that I have not words to explain. I know that no mortal man can love the Lord as I experienced that love for the Savior unless God reveals it to him. I would have remained in his presence, but there was a power drawing me away from him.

"As a result of that dream, I had this feeling that no matter what might be required of my hands, what the gospel might entail unto me, I would do what I should be asked to do even to the laying down of my life. . . . If only I can be with my Savior and have that same sense of love that I had in that dream, it will be the goal of my existence, the desire of my life." (As cited by Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Apr. 1974, pp. 173-74; italics added.)

In that same spirit, Joseph Smith explained that following his first vision: "My Soul was filled with love and for many days I could rejoice with great joy and the Lord was with me." (From 1832 account, in Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision, p. 157.)

It is not only those who have seen the Lord—have enjoyed a personal appearance, a dream, or a vision—who feel the desire to sing the song of redeeming love. All those who have had the burdens of sin, the weight of guilt, and the agonies of bitterness, hostility, or pain removed by the Great Physician shout praises to the Holy One of Israel. They know that pure love of Christ. Nephi wrote: "My God hath been my support; he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep. He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh." (2 Nephi 4:20-21.) And perhaps nowhere in holy writ do we find a more glorious expression of love and gratitude and praise of the Almighty than in the words of Ammon, son of Mosiah. "Blessed be the name of our God," he exulted to his brothers after the miraculous conversion of thousands of Lamanites. "Let us sing to his praise, yea, let us give thanks to his holy name, for he doth work righteousness forever. . . . Yea, we have reason to praise him forever, for he is the Most High God, and has loosed our brethren from the chains of hell. . . . Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of his great power, and of his mercy, and of his long-suffering towards the children of men? Behold, I say unto you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel." (Alma 26:8, 14, 16.)

Our Love for Others

One dramatic evidence of apostasy in the world today is a growing indifference toward and among the sons and daughters of God. "Because iniquity shall abound," the Savior taught before his death, "the love of men shall wax cold." (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:30; compare D&C 45:27.) "It is one evidence," the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "that men are unacquainted with the principles of godliness to behold the contraction [shrinking] of affectionate feelings and lack of charity in the world." On the other hand, those who come unto Christ become as Christ. They partake of his divine nature, receive his attributes, and come to love as he loves. "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father," the modern seer went on to say, "the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 240-41.)

Ethical deeds, works of faith, acts of kindness toward others—these are so much more effective and pure when grounded in the love of Deity, that is, when the source of the goodness is the Holy One. As we begin to become new creatures in Christ, then we begin to serve out of proper motives. Nephi wrote that the Lord does not do anything "save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him." Nephi then asks: "Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men." Nephi then explains that it must be on the basis of this same motivation—this charity, or pure love of Christ—that the people of the Lord labor in order for Zion to be established. Those who practice priestcraft, he observed, "preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." In this context we learn of charity as the antidote to priestcraft, the preventive medicine and the solution to improper or perverted desires: "The Lord God hath given a commandment that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except they should have charity they were nothing. Wherefore, if they should have charity they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish. But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish." (2 Nephi 26:24-31.)

Both Mormon (Moroni 7:45-48) and Paul (1 Corinthians 13:1-13) wrote of charity as the greatest of all the spiritual gifts, the one which shall endure forever. Both of them described the charitable person as one who:

The greatest acts of charity come through the giving of oneself. Though there are times when money or food or material goods will meet a pressing need, the enduring need for sacrifice of self remains. "Never did the Savior give in expectation," President Spencer W. Kimball explained. "I know of no case in his life in which there was an exchange. He was always the giver, seldom the recipient. Never did he give shoes, hose, or a vehicle; never did he give perfume, a shirt, or a fur wrap. His gifts were of such a nature that the recipient could hardly exchange or return the value. His gifts were rare ones: eyes to the blind, ears to the deaf, and legs to the lame; cleanliness to the unclean, wholeness to the infirm, and breath to the lifeless. His gifts were opportunity to the downtrodden, freedom to the oppressed, light in the darkness, forgiveness to the repentant, hope to the despairing. His friends gave him shelter, food, and love. He gave them of himself, his love, his service, his life. The wise men brought him gold and frankincense. He gave them and all their fellow mortals resurrection, salvation, and eternal life. We should strive to give as he gave. To give of oneself is a holy gift." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, pp. 246-47.)

It should go without saying that disciples of Christ ought to love one another. They have in common those things that matter most in life. Their view of reality, their goals and ambitions, their hopes and dreams for here and hereafter—all these things they share with members of the Church far and wide. They are welded together, clothed in the bond of charity, that mantle "which is the bond of perfectness and peace." (D&C 88:125.) The expression of the love of God is not to be limited, however, to the household of faith. (See D&C 121:45.) We have a duty beyond the fold as well, and the Holy Spirit, which is the source of pure love, expands our vision to see and feel as we ought. Joseph Smith said, "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 174.) On another occasion the Prophet declared: "There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because it is like God, or Godlike." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 147; italics added.) President Ezra Taft Benson thus observed that "we must develop a love for people. Our hearts must go out to them in the pure love of the gospel, in a desire to lift them, to build them up, to point them to a higher, finer life and eventually to exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God." (Come unto Christ, p. 96.)

The Book of Mormon provides a companion witness of the eternal fact that love of man is vitally related to love of God, that when we are in the service of our fellow beings we are only in the service of our God. (See Mosiah 2:17.) President Harold B. Lee related a personal experience that brought this truth home to him in a powerful manner: "Just before the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple," he said, "something new happened in my life when, along about three or four o'clock in the morning, I enjoyed an experience that I think was not a dream, but it must have been a vision. It seemed that I was witnessing a great spiritual gathering, where men and women were standing up, two or three at a time, and speaking in tongues. The spirit was so unusual. I seemed to hear the voice of President David O. McKay say, 'If you want to love God, you have to learn to love and serve the people. That is the way to show your love for God.'" (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 189.)

Indeed, the writers of holy writ affirm that service is essential to salvation. Benjamin taught that caring for the temporal and spiritual needs of the poor, for example, was inextricably tied to receiving the full blessings of the atonement of Christ. Having witnessed the marvelous manner in which the Spirit of the Lord pricked the hearts of those who hearkened to the words of his sermon; having listened as they called upon the name of the Lord for forgiveness of sin; having observed the people as their souls were transformed from guilt and remorse to joy and peace and love, Benjamin then explained how the Saints are enabled through service to remain clean before God. "And now, for the sake of . . . retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants." (Mosiah 4:26; italics added.) Mormon likewise spoke of a time in the days of Alma when the Saints were "abasing themselves, succoring those who stood in need of their succor, such as imparting their substance to the poor and the needy . . . thus retaining a remission of their sins." (Alma 4:13-14.)

Obstacles to Charity

Because charity is so vital to the perfection of human nature and the growth of the kingdom of God, Satan labors incessantly to establish barriers or obstacles to the receipt and practice of this highest of spiritual gifts. Things get in the way to dam the flow of love from God to man, from man to God, and from man to man. Some of these include the following:

On the other hand, those persons, like Helaman's two thousand stripling warriors who are true at all times to themselves, to their values, to their witness, and to others (see Alma 53:20), come to know that true love which emanates from God and feel the need to be true to him. Of the Ammonites the Nephite record states, they were "distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things." Now note what follows: "And they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end." (Alma 27:27; italics added.)

Charity as a Fruit of the Spirit

Charity is a gift of the Spirit. It is bestowed by God. One does not "work on" one's charity any more than one might work on one's prophecy, dreams, visions, or discernment. Charity is that "more excellent way" (1 Corinthians 12:31) that comes by and through the Holy Ghost as one of the gifts of God. It is true that we have a responsibility to give of ourselves in service to others as a part of our covenantal obligation as Christians. (See Mosiah 18:8-10; James 2:8.) It is true that service is essential to salvation. But service and charity are not necessarily the same. Charity is "the highest, noblest, strongest kind of love, not merely affection; the pure love of Christ. It is never used to denote alms or deeds or benevolence, although it may be a prompting motive." (LDS Bible Dictionary, p. 632.) That is, charity is that gift of the Spirit which motivates us to greater goodness, specifically, greater service and compassion for others. In a manner of speaking, we can serve people without loving them; we cannot truly love them, as the Lord does, without serving them. Bruce C. Hafen has written: "Our own internally generated compassion for the needs of others is a crucial indication of our desire to be followers of the Savior. . . . For that reason, we must be reaching out to others even as we reach out to God, rather than waiting to respond to others' needs until our charitable instincts are quickened by the Spirit. But even then, charity in its full-blown sense is 'bestowed upon' Christ's righteous followers. Its source, like all other blessings of the Atonement, is the grace of God." (The Broken Heart, pp. 195-96; italics in original.)

When Benjamin challenged his people, and us, to be spiritually reborn, to put off the natural man and become a saint through the atonement of Christ, he further instructed us to become as little children—"submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict" upon us. (Mosiah 3:19; italics added.) Likewise, Alma warned the people of Ammonihah against procrastination: "But that ye would humble yourselves before the Lord, and call on his holy name, and watch and pray continually, that ye may not be tempted above that which ye can bear, and thus be led by the Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering; having faith on the Lord; having a hope that ye shall receive eternal life; having the love of God always in your hearts, that ye may be lifted up at the last day and enter into his rest." (Alma 13:28; italics added.)

Mormon provides the clearest scriptural statement about how to acquire this gift we call charity. "Wherefore, my beloved brethren," he writes, "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure." (Moroni 7:48; italics added.) We see from this profound pronouncement, then, that the purpose of charity is not just to motivate us to Christian service (as important as such is) but also to sanctify us from sin and prepare us not only to be with God but to be like him. (See Ether 12:34.) In Mormon's words, those who become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ—who have applied the atoning blood of the Savior and have been born again as to the things of righteousness—are the ones upon whom the Lord bestows this gift. Bruce Hafen thus explained:

"The ultimate purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to cause the sons and daughters of God to become as Christ is. Those who see religious purpose only in terms of ethical service in the relationship between man and fellowmen may miss that divinely ordained possibility. It is quite possible to render charitable—even 'Christian'—service without developing deeply ingrained and permanent Christlike character. Paul understood this when he warned against giving all one's goods to feed the poor without true charity. . . . We can give without loving, but we cannot love without giving. If our vertical relationship with God is complete, then, by the fruit of that relationship, the horizontal relationship with our fellow beings will also be complete. We then act charitably toward others, not merely because we think we should, but because that is the way we are.

"Service to others will surely bring us closer to God, especially when motivated by an unselfish sense of personal compassion. But even such desirable service will not of itself complete our relationship with God, because it will not by itself result in the bestowal of the complete attributes of godliness. That bestowal requires the ordinances and doctrines of the restored gospel and all the other elements of sacrifice and obedience spelled out in the scriptures. For that reason, while religious philosophies whose highest aim is social relevance may do much good, they will not ultimately lead people to achieve the highest religious purpose, which is to become as God and Christ are." (The Broken Heart, pp. 196-97.)

President George Q. Cannon spoke of the failure of the Latter-day Saints to seek after the fruits and the gifts of the Spirit: "We find, even among those who have embraced the Gospel, hearts of unbelief. How many of you, my brethren and sisters, are seeking for these gifts that God has promised to bestow? How many of you, when you bow before your Heavenly Father in your family circle or in your secret places, contend for these gifts to be bestowed upon you? How many of you ask the Father, in the name of Jesus, to manifest Himself to you through these powers and these gifts? Or do you go along day by day like a door turning on its hinges, without having any feeling upon the subject, without exercising any faith whatever; content to be baptized and be members of the Church, and to rest there, thinking that your salvation is secure because you have done this? I say to you, in the name of the Lord, as one of His servants, that you have need to repent of this. You have need to repent of your hardness of heart, of your indifference, and of your carelessness. There is not that diligence, there is not that faith, there is not that seeking for the power of God that there should be among a people who have received the precious promises we have. . . . I say to you that it is our duty to avail ourselves of the privileges which God has placed within our reach. . . .

"I feel to bear testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, . . . that God is the same to-day as He was yesterday; that God is willing to bestow these gifts upon His children. . . . If any of us are imperfect, it is our duty to pray for the gift that will make us perfect. Have I imperfections? I am full of them. What is my duty? To pray to God to give me the gifts that will correct these imperfections. If I am an angry man, it is my duty to pray for charity, which suffereth long and is kind. Am I an envious man? It is my duty to seek for charity, which envieth not. So with all the gifts of the Gospel. They are intended for this purpose. No man ought to say, 'Oh, I cannot help this; it is my nature.' He is not justified in it, for the reason that God has promised to give strength to correct these things, and to give gifts that will eradicate them. If a man lack wisdom, it is his duty to ask God for wisdom. The same with everything else. That is the design of God concerning His Church. He wants His Saints to be perfected in the truth. For this purpose He gives these gifts, and bestows them upon those who seek after them, in order that they may be a perfect people upon the face of the earth, notwithstanding their many weaknesses, because God has promised to give the gifts that are necessary for their perfection." (Millennial Star, 23 Apr. 1894, pp. 259-61; italics added.)

The Spirit of God sanctifies—it cleanses and purges the human heart. The Spirit does far more, however, than remove uncleanness. It also fills. It fills one with a holy element, with a sacred presence that motivates to a godly walk and goodly works. Such persons filled with the Holy Ghost (and with charity) do not necessarily plan out how they will perform the works of righteousness; they do not always plot and design which deeds and what actions are to be done in every situation. Rather, they embody righteousness. They are goodness. Good works flow from a regenerate heart and evidence their commitment to their Lord and Master. Yes, these persons do have agency. Indeed, they are free, because they have given themselves up to the Lord and his purposes. They choose to do good, but their choices are motivated by the Spirit of the Lord. They live in a world of turmoil but are at peace. They may exist in a society that is steeped in anxiety and uncertainty, but they are at rest. They may live among persons on all sides who are frightened, but they are secure, for charity, or perfect love, casts out all fear. (Moroni 8:16; 1 John 4:18.)

So where do we go from here? We have discussed the ideal. We have seen that the prophets and the Lord challenge us to see to it that our labors are motivated by the pure love of Christ. But what do we do if for the time being our motives for service are less than the highest? Of course we are to strive to do what is right, even if our hearts have not been fully changed. Of course we are to do our home and visiting teaching, even if our motivation for now is more inspection than divine expectation and spontaneous service. Saints cannot remain stagnant. They cannot sit idly by while others perform the labors of the kingdom. They certainly are not justified in doing wrong because they are as yet unregenerated. At the same time, our task is to seek regularly and consistently for that Spirit which gives life and light and which gives substance and consequence to our deeds. Our assignment is not to run faster than we have strength, to labor harder than we have means, or to be truer than true. Our zeal for righteousness must always be tempered and appropriate and accompanied with wisdom. Zion is established in process of time (see Moses 7:21), and, with but few exceptions, the pure in heart become so in like manner. In short, we do the work of the kingdom, but we pray constantly for a purification of our motives and a sanctification of our desires.

Charity as a Key to Enduring to the End

The apostle Peter taught that charity prevents a multitude of sins. (See JST 1 Peter 4:8.) It is not just that one filled with charity is too busy to sin. Rather, the possession of charity is an evidence of the presence and enduring influence of the Holy Ghost, that moral monitor given by the Father to warn, reprove, correct, prick, sanctify, encourage, and comfort. Mormon taught that charity provides the spiritual strength and fortitude which enable one to endure faithfully to the end. "The first fruits of repentance is baptism," he taught; "and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God." (Moroni 8:25-26; italics added.) Stated simply, remission of sins brings the influence of the Comforter, which in turn brings the gifts of the Spirit, preeminent among which is the gift of charity. And charity enables us to endure faithfully to the end. Perhaps this is what Joseph Smith meant when he said: "Until we have perfect love we are liable to fall and when we have a testimony that our names are sealed in the Lamb's book of life we have perfect love and then it is impossible for false Christs to deceive us." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 9.) Those who possess charity are less prone to have their heads turned by the allurements of a fallen world, less willing to loosen their grasp of the iron rod, on things of enduring worth, to embrace the trappings of Babylon.

There are but few things upon which we may depend with absolute assurance. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland observed: "Life has its share of some fear and some failure. Sometimes things fall short, don't quite measure up. Sometimes in both personal and public life, we are seemingly left without strength to go on. Sometimes people fail us, or economies and circumstance fail us, and life with its hardship and heartache can leave us feeling very alone.

"But when such difficult moments come to us, I testify that there is one thing which will never, ever fail us. One thing alone will stand the test of all time, of all tribulation, all trouble, and all transgression. One thing only never faileth—and that is the pure love of Christ . . . 'If ye have not charity, ye are nothing' (Moroni 7:46). Only the pure love of Christ will see us through. It is Christ's love which suffereth long, and is kind. It is Christ's love which is not puffed up nor easily provoked. Only his pure love enables him—and us—to bear all things, believe all things, hope all things, and endure all things (see Moroni 7:45)." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1989, pp. 32-33.)

Indeed, as Mormon and Paul wrote, charity endures forever. It never fails. (See Moroni 7:46-47; 1 Corinthians 13:8.) Though there may come a day when such gifts of the Spirit as prophecy or tongues or knowledge will have served their useful function, charity—the pure love of Christ—will still be in operation, burning brightly in the hearts and souls of the sons and daughters of Almighty God. "When that which is perfect is come" (1 Corinthians 13:10), the true followers of Jesus Christ will have become like unto him who is the embodiment of love. They will be filled with charity, which is everlasting love. (See Moroni 8:17.)

I have come to believe that the Lord's barometer of righteousness is the heart. No matter the depth of our knowledge, the efficiency of our administration, the charisma with which we influence and lead people—no matter how well we do what we do, of much greater significance in the eternal scheme of things is who we are and what we feel toward God and toward our fellow man. It is so easy to be distracted from what matters most, to focus on things—on goals, on excellence programs, on statistics—when in reality it is people that count. I am convinced that people are more important than goals, more important than private or corporative endeavors. People are more important than the attainment of some form of success. God is in the business of people. And so must we be.

In summary, we do not come to love as the Lord loves merely because we work hard at it. True it is we must serve others, that we must concern ourselves with others' needs more than with our own. And true it is that the disciple is expected to bear the burdens and take up the cross of Christian fellowship. But that service and outreach cannot have lasting effect, nor can it result in quiet peace and rest in the giver, unless and until it is motivated from on high. We come to know the cleansing and regenerating power of our Savior only through acknowledging our fallen nature, calling upon him who is mighty to save, and, in the language of the Book of Mormon prophets, relying wholly upon his merits and mercy and grace. (See 2 Nephi 2:8; 31:19; Moroni 6:4.) That forgiveness which comes from Christ evidences and conveys his perfect love, and, in process of time, empowers us to love in like manner. We must pray for forgiveness, for cleansing, for reconciliation with the Father through the Son. And we must pray for charity. We must plead for it. We must ask with all the energy of heart to be so endowed. As we do so, there will come moments of surpassing import, sublime moments that matter, moments in which our whole souls seem to reach out to others with a kind of fellowship and affection that we would not otherwise know.

I have felt that love. I have tasted of its sweet fruit. It is beyond anything earthly, above and beyond anything that mortal man can explain or produce. One of the greatest regrets of my life is that such moments do not come with the regularity and frequency that I would desire. Such love settles the hearts of individuals. It provides moral courage to those who must face difficult challenges. It unites and seals husbands, wives, and children and grants them a foretaste of eternal life. It welds quorums and classes and wards and stakes into a union that is the foundation for that "highest order of priesthood society" we know as Zion. (Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Oct. 1977, p. 125; compare 4 Nephi 1:15.) And, once again, it comes from that Lord who is the Source of all that is godlike. To the degree that we trust in that Lord and yield our hearts unto him (Helaman 3:35), "I am persuaded," with the apostle Paul, "that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord" (Romans 8:38-39).
