Robert L. Millet, Steadfast and Immovable: Striving for Spiritual Maturity ( 1992)

Chapter Five

Relying upon the Merits, Mercy, and Grace of Christ

What a person trusts in, what he or she relies on—these things are excellent indicators of spiritual maturity. Like the infant that grasps and clings to objects with selfish immaturity, we are so prone to be stingy with our lives, to insist on doing things our way, to chart a course that we want to pursue, to demand complete control. While we labor in this tabernacle of flesh we are subject to a kind of mortal myopia, a tragic shortsightedness in regard to eternal things. In our heart of hearts we know that God's ways are higher than ours and his thoughts and judgment so much grander than our own (Isaiah 55:8-9). Joseph Smith wrote from the Liberty Jail: "The things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out. Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation [in this case, our own], must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—thou must commune with God. How much more dignified and noble are the thoughts of God, than the vain imaginations of the human heart! None but fools will trifle with the souls of men." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 137.)

We know, deep down, that the wise course is to allow the Captain of our soul to have sway, that he can make us into new creatures far beyond anything we might bring about in our own unillumined and unassisted manner. In the words of President Ezra Taft Benson, "Men and women who turn their lives over to God will discover that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 361.) It is through the atoning grace of Christ that we are liberated from skewed perceptions, through the transforming powers of the Holy One of Israel that we become holy and thus able to see things as they really are. As we reach up to grasp the hand of him who has all things in his power, we thereby tighten our grasp on eternal life; we begin the process of spiritual growth.

Fighting Feelings of Failure

At the beginning of a presidency meeting some years ago, the stake president read a letter from a young woman in one of the wards. I knew her very well because I had served for a time as her bishop. She and her husband were the parents of three beautiful little girls. The mother, whom I will here call Brenda, was active and involved and into everything; she worked faithfully in the Young Women's program, was always the life of ward parties, and sought out every opportunity to contribute to parent-teacher functions, civic issues, and community affairs. "Go, go, go" was her motto. The stake president read the letter, which said simply:

"Dear President:

"I want to do everything the Lord has asked me to do. I want to do everything the Church has asked me to do. In order to do so, I decided to make a list of the things that I have been asked to do in the Church during the last six months. A copy of the list is enclosed." Then followed about three pages of items that had been required of her. It was quite an imposing list. She closed as follows: "I have only one question—HOW?" And then she signed the letter: "Dejectedly, Brenda."

The president turned to the other counselor and asked: "Jack, isn't that unfortunate?" Jack nodded soberly. Then the president turned to me: "Bob," he said, "does this letter get to your heart the way it gets to mine?" I answered that it surely did. "Good," he responded, "because I want you to deal with it." "What would you like me to do?" I asked with a gulp. "Just meet with her for a few minutes and see if you can help her." I agreed and made the appointment. What I thought would be a brief pep talk really turned out to be a rather lengthy meeting. I listened as Brenda poured out her concerns for over two hours. It was a very intense occasion filled with much emotion. If I were to summarize what she said in one sentence—a sentence, by the way, with which she concluded her expression—it would go something like this: "I can't do it all. I can't be the perfect mother, the perfect wife, the perfect Church leader, the perfect citizen. I'm tired. In fact, I'm worn out. I tell you, I just can't do it all!"

I startled her a bit when I said, "I know. I can't either." Brenda looked at me with suspicion. "You admit that?" she asked. "I admit that," I came back. She followed up: "Would you admit it in public, perhaps in a stake conference, sometime?" I thought for a second and said, "Yes, I would be pleased to talk about it in a stake conference." (By the way, I did address this matter in my stake conference talk a few months later.) She then asked, "How do you deal with the guilt?" My response surprised her again: "I don't have any, at least not over all the things I just can't do yet." I think she left our meeting with a different view of things; she seemed to be at peace.

Let me relate a second instance, one involving a sixteen-year-old young woman we'll call Sarah. Sarah became aware that she had very uncomfortable and unkind feelings toward a member of her Laurel class. She had been raised in the Church, had been active and involved all her young life, and was well taught. She determined upon a plan to solve her problem. She would get up an hour earlier each morning and stay up an hour later each night reading the Book of Mormon. This she did religiously for three months. At the end of that time Sarah discovered (to her surprise and disappointment) that she still harbored unkind feelings toward the other young woman. "Well," she concluded, "if that doesn't work, then I'll multiply my efforts. I'll get up two hours earlier in the morning and stay up two hours later at night reading the Book of Mormon; I'll fast at least two times a week; and I'll volunteer my services at the temple once per week." At the end of six months Sarah realized that she had read the Book of Mormon through twice; had lost a good deal of weight; and, sadly, still had unkind feelings toward the other young woman. She cried out, "Why? Why? If this is the true Church, why doesn't my hard work count? Why can't I solve my problems?"

Why, indeed? Why wouldn't Sarah's problems be solved through her superhuman effort? Why would Brenda, and a thousand others like Brenda, labor in guilt over all the things she couldn't get around to? Though each of us is different and has unique challenges and strengths, there is one problem to which most of us are susceptible, one which keeps us from enjoying the kind of peace and comfort that the Saints of the Most High ought to—and have a right to—enjoy. I fear that one reason we have feelings such as Brenda and Sarah—had feelings that we just don't measure up, feelings that no matter how much we do it isn't enough—is our failure to trust in the Lord and rely on him. We live in a culture in which excellence and success and victory are drilled into us from the time we are old enough to take part in society. Words such as submission and surrender are almost foreign to our way of life. But in fact submission is absolutely necessary if we are to be happy; surrender is vital if we are to be at peace. Christ invites his disciples to submit to him, to have an eye single to his glory, to yield their hearts unto him. Christ invites his disciples to surrender, to lay down their mortal weapons and acknowledge his lordship. As we are able to trust in the Master—to trust in his time frame, his way of life, his vision of what is best for us—we begin to mature in our faith.

Without such trust in the Lord, without relinquishing our own stranglehold on life, we will probably either work ourselves into a frenzy of spiritual and physical exhaustion, or else find ourselves doing all the right things but feeling little pleasure in doing so. In short, we may find ourselves "going through the motions." One writer used the following story to illustrate this matter of going through the motions: "Imagine yourself in a large house, in which are living both deaf and hearing people. They are all mixed together, and you can't tell by looking who is deaf and who has hearing. Sitting in a room by himself is a man. As you watch, you notice that he is tapping his toes rhythmically and snapping his fingers in time. You know what is happening. He's listening to music, and obviously enjoying himself. His whole body wants to respond to what his ears are receiving. There's nothing strange or mysterious about it.

"But now, let's add a new person to the scene. One of the deaf persons opens the door and enters the room. He immediately sees the first man and walks over to him and smiles a greeting. The deaf man watches the music-lover for a few moments. 'He sure seems to be enjoying himself,' he thinks. 'I think I'll try it, too.' So the deaf man sits next to the first man and begins to imitate him. Awkwardly and haltingly at first, he tries to snap his fingers, tap his toes, and move like the person next to him. Everybody has some sense of rhythm, whether they can hear or not. After a little practice, the deaf man is snapping and tapping in time with the first man. He even smiles a little and shrugs: 'It's not that much fun,' he thinks, 'but it's okay.'

"Let's now add our final factor to the story. A third man walks into the room. What does he see? Two men, apparently doing the same thing. But is there a difference? Absolutely! All the difference in the world! The first man's actions are natural responses to the music he hears. The deaf man is only imitating those outward actions—even though he can't hear a note." (Bob George, Classic Christianity, pp. 152-53; italics in original.)

So often we end up going through the motions—performing the appropriate labors but not enjoying it, doing the right things but having to grit our teeth and force ourselves to do them—because we are trying to do good works against a fallen and unregenerate nature. Don't get me wrong—it's always better to do the right thing, even for the wrong reason, than to do the wrong thing. I hear people say: "It would be better to stay home from church than to go to church, given the way I feel!" Not really. It's better to go to church. There is a better and higher motivation, however, one that is above and beyond self-discipline, well beyond sheer willpower and dogged determination. It is a motivation borne of the Spirit, one that comes to us as a result of a change of heart.

For years, it seems to me, many Latter-day Saints have refused to speak or teach or believe much about the principle or doctrine of salvation by grace because we did not want to be confused with others in the Christian world who believe in salvation by grace alone. That is illustrated quite well in an experience I had. Before leaving on a mission, I approached one of my priesthood leaders with the question, "What does it mean to be saved by grace?" Having been raised in the southern states and the Bible Belt, I had heard the phrase many times from numerous friends. My priesthood leader—a powerful preacher of the gospel and one who knew the doctrines well—responded quickly: "We don't believe in that." I asked further, "We don't believe in salvation by grace? Why not?" His comeback: "Because the Baptists do!"

His answer speaks volumes. If the Protestants are on the far right in regard to this matter of grace, then we just have to be on the far left. The problem with this reasoning, of course, is that by such prejudice we may miss something, miss and thus fail to grasp and experience the essential verity so vital to a dynamic faith in Jesus Christ.

Because ours is a day of intense involvement, perpetual motion, and constant change and complexity, many of us, like Brenda, who wanted to be a perfect wife and mother, a perfect homemaker, a perfect Mia Maid adviser, and a perfect citizen in the community, are stretched to the limit. Further, many have recognized their limits, become aware of what is left to do, acknowledged the gap between the two (between the ideal and the reality), and thrown in the towel: they've surrendered to the spirit of discouragement. For another thing, repeated claims of Christian groups around the world that Latter-day Saints are not Christian, that we are not entitled to the name and designation of the Savior, have caused us to search and delve into the core doctrines of scripture. Many Mormons have found themselves reading the scriptures (ancient and modern) with an intensity and a fervor that they have not known before, not only to sustain and defend the faith against carpers and critics but also to come to know their religion for themselves. In that regard, I am convinced that one of the reasons we find ourselves reflecting on the matter of grace more today than we did twenty years ago is that we have rediscovered the Book of Mormon. The Book of Mormon teaches the doctrine of Christ—including the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, and the need for absolute reliance on the Savior—more clearly than any other scriptural record we have. Relying upon the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah is the burden of that sacred volume. President Ezra Taft Benson's call to the Church to search, study, and apply the teachings of the Book of Mormon will surely prove to be a message that will have everlasting influence on the members of the Restored Church.

The New Life in Christ

As we begin to mature spiritually, as we begin the process of becoming steadfast and immovable, we come to realize that some things simply matter more than others. Some topics of discussion, even those that are intellectually stimulating, must take a backseat to more basic and fundamental truths. That is the case with regard to what the scriptures call the gospel or the doctrine of Christ, those foundational verities associated with the person and powers of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer. Who he is, what he has done for us, and how we may appropriate those transforming powers in our own lives are paramount and central issues; all else, however supplementary, is secondary. Joseph Smith the Prophet thus observed that "the fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 121.)

We speak much about our appreciation for the gospel of Jesus Christ. We bear testimony of the gospel. And what is it that we testify of? Joseph Smith wrote: "And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, . . . that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." (D&C 76:40-42; italics added; compare 3 Nephi 27:13-14.) When we bear witness that we know the gospel is true, we are testifying that Jesus is the Christ, that death and hell and endless torment have been overcome through his atoning sacrifice, and that the transformation from fallen creature to spiritual being comes to pass through the redeeming power of his blood. Power unto life and salvation is in a Person, the person of Jesus Christ. We may know much about the Church and kingdom of God, all of which is very important, but if we are not anchored to the truth of the gospel, we will not enjoy the blessings that might otherwise be ours. Elder Boyd K. Packer thus observed: "Truth, glorious truth, proclaims there is . . . a Mediator. . . . Through Him mercy can be fully extended to each of us without offending the eternal law of justice. This truth is the very root of Christian doctrine. You may know much about the gospel as it branches out from there, but if you only know the branches and those branches do not touch that root, if they have been cut free from that truth, there will be no life nor substance nor redemption in them." (In Conference Report, Apr. 1977, p. 80; italics added.)

As inspired as programs or policies or procedures are, as successful as organizations and auxiliaries may prove to be, it is Christ that saves, Christ that changes the human heart, Christ that binds up the broken heart. Abinadi, in censuring the priests of the wicked King Noah, said: "And now ye have said that salvation cometh by the law of Moses. I say unto you that it is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses. And moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses." (Mosiah 13:27-28.) In applying these ancient words to our own day, Elder Bruce R. McConkie pointed out: "Suppose we have the scriptures, the gospel, the priesthood, the Church, the ordinances, the organization, even the keys of the kingdom—everything that now is down to the last jot and tittle—and yet there is no atonement of Christ. What then? Can we be saved? Will all our good works save us? Will we be rewarded for all our righteousness?

"Most assuredly we will not. We are not saved by works alone, no matter how good; we are saved because God sent his Son to shed his blood in Gethsemane and on Calvary that all through him might ransomed be. We are saved by the blood of Christ.

"To paraphrase Abinadi: 'Salvation doth not come by the Church alone: and were it not for the atonement, given by the grace of God as a free gift, all men must unavoidably perish, and this notwithstanding the Church and all that appertains to it."' ("What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?" Brigham Young University Fireside and Devotional Speeches, 1983-84, p. 48.)

With all of this in mind, with a clear picture of the fact that it is Christ that can and does make the difference in human souls, we need to focus on a dimension of his atoning mission that often receives too little treatment. As important as it is to know that Jesus died for us, it is equally important to stress that we have not begun to fully enjoy the blessings of the Atonement until he comes to live in us. To say this another way, we need to focus upon Christ's life-sharing as much as we focus upon his life-giving. Paul explained in his epistle to the Galatians: "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." (Galatians 2:20; italics added.) But how can such be? How can a resurrected, exalted, immortal being live in us? It is by the power of his Spirit, the Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost is the Revelator. He is the Comforter. And he is the Sanctifier. As Sanctifier, it is his task to work upon the hearts of those who repent and offer themselves a living sacrifice unto Christ; it is by the Holy Ghost that people are cleansed and purified, the means by which they have dross and filth burned out of their souls as though by fire. But the Holy Ghost does more than cleanse. He fills. He fills us with a holy element that motivates to a godly walk and goodly works. "The process of canning," one Christian thinker has observed, "is an excellent illustration of the two parts of the gospel. Let's say that you are going to preserve some peaches. What is the first thing you have to do? Sterilize the jars. Why the process of sterilization? So that the contents of the jars—the peaches—will be preserved from spoiling.

"Imagine a husband coming home and finding his wife boiling jars in the kitchen. 'What are you doing, honey?'

" 'Sterilizing jars.'

" 'Why are you doing that?' the husband asks.

" 'I just like clean jars,' she answers.

"The husband is clearly at a loss. 'What are you going to do next?' he asks.

" 'Keep them clean!'

"This story doesn't make much sense, does it? You have never seen anyone decorate his kitchen with a sterile jar collection. No, the only reason to sterilize jars is because you intend to put something in them. We would never expect to find a person involved in only half the process of canning, just cleansing jars. But we have done this exact thing with the gospel!" In fact, one more step is essential, one with which Latter-day Saints can identify quite well. "As a matter of fact, there is one final part of the canning process. After sterilizing the jars and filling them with fruit, the jars are sealed. Sealing keeps the good things inside and the bad things that would spoil the contents outside." (George, Classic Christianity, pp. 62, 63; italics in original.)

The apostle Paul asked the Roman Saints: "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life." (Romans 6:3-4.) This scripture has reference to the newness of life that can be ours in mortality through the redeeming powers of Christ. As the Spirit begins to work in us we, in process of time, begin to be born again or be born from above. The life of Christ begins to be manifest in us. We have his image in our countenances. (Alma 5:14.) Ours is a godly walk and conversation. (D&C 20:69.) Our behavior begins to reflect our belief wherever we may be on the highways, at the ballparks, in the gymnasiums, or in the supermarkets. Our tongue and our actions betray us as Christians.

Jesus came to earth on his search and rescue mission not only to change us but also to exchange with us. In short, as we agree to accept him as our Mediator and spiritual Benefactor, as we take his name upon us and strive by covenant to live a life befitting a disciple of Christ, he agrees to justify us, meaning to exonerate us or pronounce us innocent. As we fully come unto Christ—with no desire to hold back or to hold on to the things of the world—he takes our sins and then imputes to us his righteousness. What a marvelous exchange! Paul taught: "I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith." (Philippians 3:8-9; italics added.) Likewise, to the Corinthians he delivered a witness of the Master's exchange: "Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new. And all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation. . . . Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. For he [the Father] hath made him [the Son] to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." (2 Corinthians 5:17-18, 20-21; italics added.)

Some people complain that it is hard to live the gospel, to abide by all the standards of the Church. From one perspective, it is not hard to live the gospel unless we are trying to hold on to Babylon and the ways of the world. (See Robert L. Millet, An Eye Single to the Glory of God, chap. 1.) From another perspective, it isn't hard: it's impossible! At least it's impossible if we try to keep all the rules and obey all the statutes on our own, without divine assistance. Just as Brenda explained, we can't do it all. And here we come face to face with the matter of works. How do I do all the works expected of me? How do I perform the tasks assigned to me? Simply stated, I cannot do it all on my own. Paul explained: "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." (Ephesians 2:8-10; italics added.) In a scripture that Latter-day Saints are prone to quote when confronted by certain Christians who cite the above passage from Ephesians, Paul taught: "Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling." (Philippians 2:12; italics added.) And there it is—the commission to work out our salvation by ourselves. But not so fast. The next verse is quite instructive: "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." (Philippians 2:13; italics added.)

Are works unimportant, then? Doesn't it matter what we do? Of course works matter. Of course it matters what we do. But the scriptures attest again and again that it is not our works that save us. Our works—our reception of the ordinances of salvation, our acts of goodness and benevolence, our contribution to the work of the kingdom—are necessary, but insufficient. As Elder McConkie pointed out, our works, no matter how many or how good, are not enough. We are not saved by our works. Some people say that we are saved by the grace of Christ but exalted by our works. That also is false. Our works evidence our faith in Christ and our desire to follow him and rely upon his atoning grace. But there are simply not enough loaves of bread to bake or home teaching visits to make or meetings to attend to save me from the woes of sin; such requires the mediation of a God. The strangest matter of all is that it is his works—the works of Christ—that save us. Thus Lehi declared to Jacob: "Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer." Indeed, as Lehi went on to say, "There is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah." (2 Nephi 2:3, 8; italics added; compare Alma 22:14.)

The issue is not whether we are saved by grace or works. That is the wrong question, one that has alienated people for too long. It is, as C. S. Lewis observed, "like asking which blade in a pair of scissors is most necessary." (Mere Christianity, p. 129.) The real questions to be asked are, In whom do I trust? On whom do I rely? Do I trust in my works? Do I rely on my goodness? "And now, my beloved brethren," Nephi proclaimed in a discussion of the doctrine of Christ," after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save. " (2 Nephi 31:19; italics added.) Wholly means absolutely, completely, perfectly. Is this not the same message that Moroni delivered when he spoke of the Nephite Church? In speaking of those who had come into the true church and begun the process of spiritual growth, Moroni wrote: "And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith." (Moroni 6:4; italics added.)

Imagine that you had been asked to serve as the defense attorney for a man who had been arrested for robbing a local food store. How would you proceed? Well, you think back to all the Perry Mason episodes you have viewed and plot out a defense. First, you need to establish that your client has no motive, that he is financially in good shape, and that to steal a hundred dollars from a food store makes no sense. Then you might work on his access to the crime, that he was nowhere near the scene at the time the crime was committed, that he has an alibi. Finally, you might work on the matter of his reputation. You stress to the jury that this man is the beloved father of nine children, that he is civic-minded, is a little league baseball coach, and an active scouter. In short, such a crime is absolutely foreign to his reputation. Such an approach just might do the trick. Think for a moment, however, of how those in the courtroom might respond to a defense that went something like the following: You stand and speak with much confidence, "Judge, jury, I demand that you set this man free!" The judge answers: "On what grounds?" You reply: "Because of my excellent reputation as an attorney, because of my marvelous record of service to the innocent who are unjustly accused." One can imagine how the judge and jury would respond. You would no doubt be laughed out of the courtroom. And yet, note in a modern revelation how the Savior pleads our case, how he mediates between us and the Eternal Father: "Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified." What a strange defense! What an unusual manner of defending us! The Lord here pleads our cause on the basis of his merits; we are saved through his works, his mercy and grace. And what does he require? "Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:3-5.)

On this matter of trusting the Lord, C. S. Lewis has written: "In one sense, the road back to God is a road of moral effort, of trying harder and harder. But in another sense it is not trying that is ever going to bring us home. All this trying leads up to the vital moment at which you turn to God and say, 'You must do this, I can't.' . . . The thing I am talking of now may not happen to every one in a sudden flash—as it did to St. Paul or Bunyan: it may be so gradual that no one could ever point to a particular hour or even a particular year. And what matters is the nature of the change in itself, not how we feel while it is happening. It is the change from being confident about our own efforts to the state in which we despair of doing anything for ourselves and leave it to God.

"I know the words 'leave it to God' can be misunderstood, but they must stay for the moment. The sense in which a Christian leaves it to God is that he puts all his trust in Christ: trusts that Christ will somehow share with him the perfect human obedience which He carried out from His birth to His crucifixion: that Christ will make the man more like Himself and, in a sense, make good his deficiencies. . . . And, in yet another sense, handing everything over to Christ does not, of course, mean that you stop trying. To trust Him means, of course, trying to do all that He says. There would be no sense in saying you trusted a person if you would not take his advice. Thus if you have really handed yourself over to Him, it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way." (Mere Christianity, pp. 128-29; italics added.)

The new life in Christ is thus far more than a change in behavior, more than a slight correction of a faulty action or two. It is a renovation of human nature. As one writer has observed, "We may be quite sure that Christ-centredness and Christ-likeness will never be attained by our own unaided efforts. How can self drive out self? As well expect Satan to drive out Satan!" (John Stott, Life in Christ, p. 109.) And there is perhaps no better statement on the nature of our change from death to life than that by President Ezra Taft Benson: "The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1985, p. 5.) As we begin to mature spiritually, we may find ourselves praying more earnestly about our nature, about what we are, as much as we pray about what we do. Indeed, what we do becomes a reflection and an extension of what we are, what we really are.

The Master calls us to perfection. It is a lofty goal, one that too often strikes fear or, more often, discouragement into the hearts of all of us who fall so very short of the ideal. The fact is, no mortal man or woman will achieve moral perfection in this life or will traverse the path of life without some sort of spiritual detour. Jesus alone accomplished that superhuman task. But we can become perfect in eternity, and we are able to do so in this life to the degree that we yield our hearts unto Christ and rely upon his merits, mercy, and grace. The Lord offers hope. He offers peace. He offers rest, all in and through him. Moroni pleaded with us to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him." (Moroni 10:32.) We are perfected in Christ, in the same way that we are reborn, justified, and sanctified in Christ. We become perfect—that is, whole, complete, fully formed, and finished—as we join with him by covenant. Jesus thus becomes the author and finisher of our faith. (See Moroni 6:4; Hebrews 12:2.) Those who go to the celestial kingdom are those who are just men and women who have been made perfect "through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:69.)

Stephen Robinson, my friend and colleague, has given the following excellent analogy:

"Perfection comes through the Atonement of Christ. We become one with him, with a perfect being. And as we become one, there is a merger. Some of my students are studying business, and they understand it better if I talk in business terms. You take a small bankrupt firm that's about ready to go under and merge it with a corporate giant. What happens? Their assets and liabilities flow together, and the new entity that is created is solvent.

"It's like when Janet and I got married. I was overdrawn; Janet had money in the bank. By virtue of making that commitment, of entering into that covenant relationship of marriage with my wife, we became a joint account. No longer was there an I, and no longer a she—now it was we. My liabilities and her assets flowed into each other, and for the first time in months I was in the black.

"Spiritually, this is what happens when we enter into the covenant relationship with our Savior. We have liabilities, he has assets. He proposes to us a covenant relationship. I use the word 'propose' on purpose because it is a marriage of a spiritual sort that is being proposed. That is why he is called the Bridegroom. This covenant relationship is so intimate that it can be described as a marriage. I become one with Christ, and as partners we work together for my salvation and my exaltation. My liabilities and his assets flow together into each other. I do all that I can do, and he does what I cannot yet do. The two of us together are perfect." ("Believing Christ," Brigham Young University Fireside and Devotional Speeches, 1989-90, pp. 120-21.)

A Risky Doctrine?

As I have addressed this subject in lectures or firesides, there have been occasions when people have responded: "Wait a minute! Aren't you just a little nervous about teaching these things? Don't you worry that some people will take what you say as license to goof off?" I suppose there is some risk in that regard. The apostle Paul certainly wrestled in his day with Saints who took his words on the liberating power of the gospel as license to sin. People who want an excuse to do little or who seek to rationalize their worst efforts will always latch on to such twisted views. But I think there is a greater risk here. I'm thinking of those people on the other side of this issue, those members of the Church who are doing all they know how to do, good people who push themselves, noble souls who double and triple their efforts after an initial failure, fine and upstanding Latter-day Saints who wrestle constantly with feelings of inadequacy. I worry about them far more. I worry sometimes that if we understate the Atonement, if we see Jesus only as he who forgives gross sin, instead of as the One sent to "bind up the brokenhearted" (Isaiah 61:1), we may not grasp the essential truth that our Lord can and will bring peace of soul to those who are filled with bitterness, hostility, anger, jealousy, fear, loneliness, and feelings of inadequacy.

Several years ago I spoke to a group of Latter-day Saints on the topic of "relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." (2 Nephi 31:19.) About three weeks later I received a letter from a woman who had attended the lecture. She wrote to express appreciation for what had been said and to ask for clarification on a few matters. Without disclosing too many personal details, she related to me that hers had been a full and rich life, that she had a wonderful husband and adorable children. She then wrote of her struggles to do all that had been assigned her, to keep up with what she described as a maddening pace, to "perform" against what she believed to be an impossible standard. She said, in essence, that she really did want to do it all. She stated that there was no doubt in her mind that the Church was true and that this was our Father's plan. But then she said: "I'm worn out. I just don't have the strength to go on. What do I do?" I sat on the letter for over a month. I prayed for direction as to how to help her see things in proper perspective. I finally wrote back the following:

"Dear Sister:

"The subject of salvation by grace has been on my mind for a number of years now. I sense deeply that this is one of the major burdens of scripture and one that we as Latter-day Saints would do well to better understand and apply, especially in light of so many who struggle with feelings of frustration, hopelessness, and exhaustion. The following represent just a few thoughts, random reflections on this subject of how to rely more on the Lord, how to get beyond the frame of mind where we feel a constant need to double and redouble our efforts when all does not go as anticipated. They are given as I think of them, in no particular order. They are also my own conclusions, and they really have no higher authority than that. But I feel that they are true.

"1. I believe that the Lord wants us to succeed and that he has every intention of bringing back as many of his children as is possible. Discouragement and despondency are not of the Lord. They are of Lucifer. The arch-deceiver would have us lose our balance, lose track of what matters most in life, and focus too much on the less significant. He would have us labor to exhaustion in secondary causes.

"2. We cannot do everything we are asked to do, at least not in a few weeks or months. It takes some time to be able to figure this out. One of the hardest things to do is to recognize when we are stretching to the limit, and then to stop and slow down.

"3. There are some things about us—personality quirks, deep feelings (jealousies, fears, loneliness, bitterness, etc.)—that we cannot completely change on our own. We can devise and implement all the behavior modification programs possible, can chart and record and recite our flaws till doomsday, and still not overcome them. These require divine assistance, an assistance that may bring about change quickly and dramatically, or, more than likely, a change that will come in process of time. As the Savior explained through Moroni, his grace—his enabling power—is sufficient to change our nature, if we acknowledge his power so to do and then rely on him as the Change Agent. (Ether 12:27.) As C. S. Lewis wrote: 'If . . . what we are matters even more than what we do—if, indeed, what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what we are—then it follows that the change which I most need to undergo is a change that my own direct, voluntary efforts cannot bring about. . . . I cannot, by direct moral effort, give myself new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realise that everything which really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God.' (Mere Christianity, p. 165.)

"4. One way I have come to rely on the Lord more is to pray constantly for a purification of my motives. When I am more concerned with pleasing the Lord than with pleasing others, I am less 'uptight' when my meager efforts do not quite measure up to others' expectations. There is something to be said for doing what you feel and hope is right and then letting the consequence follow.

"5. There is also great virtue in praying that the Lord will let us know our limits, let us know when further labors on our part will in reality be spiritually counterproductive. More and more our prayers become: 'O God, help me know when my offering is acceptable.' When we feel we have reached our limits, our prayers become: 'Heavenly Father, I've done all I know how to do. Please, help me.'

"6. Because we are human—because we are weak and mortal and tired and frail—we will probably never reach the point in this life when we have done 'all we can do.' Too many of us misread 2 Nephi 25:23 and conclude that the Lord can assist us only after we have done 'all we can do.' That is incorrect; he can and does help us all along the way. Further, I think Nephi is trying to stress that no matter how much we do, it simply will not be enough to guarantee salvation, without Christ's glorious intervention. Restating Nephi, 'Above and beyond all we can do, it is by the grace of Christ that we are saved.' To push ourselves beyond what is appropriate in our effort to 'work out our salvation' is, in a strange sort of way, a statement that we fear that we must do the job ourselves if we expect it to get done. Don't get me wrong: I know, as do you, that we must do our duty in the Church and that the 'works of righteousness' are necessary. What is so very unnecessary is the type of pharisaical extremism and the subsequent negative feelings that too often characterize the efforts of some members of the Church.

"I have a conviction that God is unquestionably aware of us. He loves you and he loves me. This I know. He certainly wants us to improve, but he definitely does not want us to spend our days languishing in guilt. Rather, the gospel of Jesus Christ is intended to liberate us, to lift and lighten our burdens. If it is not doing that in our personal lives, then I contend that our approach and understanding—not necessarily the quantity of work to be done—may need some adjustment. May the Lord bless you with the assurance of his love and his willingness to bring you peace and rest."

A most entertaining and instructive story on the matter of risk was given by a Protestant minister. In it we see many of the elements that we have spoken of, elements that become a part of our lives as we begin to mature spiritually. "I remember when I first earned my license to drive," Charles Swindoll has written. "I was about sixteen, as I recall. I'd been driving off and on for three years (scary thought, isn't it?). My father had been with me most of the time during my learning experiences, calmly sitting alongside me in the front seat, giving me tips, helping me know what to do. My mother usually wasn't in on those excursions because she spent more of her time biting her nails (and screaming) than she did advising. My father was a little more easygoing. Loud noises and screeching brakes didn't bother him nearly as much. My grandfather was the best of all. When I would drive his car, I would hit things . . . Boom! He'd say stuff like, 'Just keep on going, Bud. I can buy more fenders, but I can't buy more grandsons. You're learning.' What a great old gentleman. After three years of all that nonsense, I finally earned my license.

"I'll never forget the day I came in, flashed my newly acquired permit, and said, 'Dad, look!' He goes, 'Whoa! Look at this. You got your license. Good for you!' Holding the keys to his car, he tossed them in my direction and smiled, 'Tell you what, son . . . you can have the car for two hours, all on your own.' Only four words, but how wonderful: 'All on your own.'

"I thanked him, danced out to the garage, opened the car door, and shoved the key into the ignition. My pulse rate must have shot up to 180 as I backed out of the driveway and roared off. While cruising along 'all on my own,' I began to think wild stuff—like, This car can probably do 100 miles an hour. I could go to Galveston and back twice in two hours if I averaged 100 miles an hour. I can fly down the Gulf Freeway and even run a few lights. After all, nobody's here to say 'Don't!' We're talking dangerous, crazy thoughts! But you know what? I didn't do any of them. I don't believe I drove above the speed limit. In fact, I distinctly remember turning into the driveway early . . . didn't even stay away the full two hours. Amazing, huh? I had my dad's car all to myself with a full gas tank in a context of total privacy and freedom, but I didn't go crazy. Why? My relationship with my dad and my granddad was so strong that I couldn't, even though I had a license and nobody was in the car to restrain me. Over a period of time there had developed a sense of trust, a deep love relationship that held me in restraint." (The Grace Awakening, pp. 47-48; italics in original.)

Trust and reliance on the Lord lead to obedience. The more we trust in him, the more he endows us with his power, his might, and his goodness. He extends to us his grace, meaning a power that enables us to do things we could not do on our own. Our righteousness is then borne of the Spirit, our works are his works, and the deeds we do have a lasting impact on our brothers and sisters and a sanctifying influence on ourselves. On his mighty arm we rely. Because of who he is and what he has done for us, there is no obstacle to eternal life too great to overcome. Because of him, our minds can be at peace. Our souls may rest.
