Robert L. Millet, Steadfast and Immovable: Striving for Spiritual Maturity ( 1992)

Chapter Six

Building on the Rock of Our Redeemer

Life is too short to spend our days laboring in secondary causes. Nothing could be more frustrating than to devote oneself to a cause that is found in time to be fruitless, to climb a ladder that one eventually discovers to be leaning against the wrong wall. Surely one aspect of maturity is being able to tell the difference, being able to discern the crucial from the convenient, the fundamental from the fleeting. Some things simply matter more than others. Our challenge is to sift through not only the sordid but also the subsidiary and secondary, to focus our lives—our time, our talents, and our means—on those matters that will make for the greatest good.

The Lord Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah of the sin of ancient Israel: "My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water." (Jeremiah 2:13.) It is a most serious matter to forsake the Lord, to ignore or reject his counsel, to turn a deaf ear to his divine direction. The Lord is the Way, and those who refuse his message thereby enter the broad road that leads to destruction. The Lord is the Truth, and those who spurn his teachings and authority wander in ignorance. The Lord is the Life, and those who feel no need to align themselves with his will enter into league with him who seeks our spiritual death. The Lord is the Light, and those who forsake him choose in that action to walk in darkness. To forsake the Fountain of Living Waters is to deny oneself access to that living liquid that is the only sure antidote to the world's desperate thirst. And, unfortunately, there is no relief to be found in digging our own cisterns, or even in adopting those of others, especially those cisterns that are at best deficient and at worst perverse, those, in the language of Jehovah, that can hold no water, those that provide no deliverance from this world's woes.

Troublesome Trends

C. S. Lewis, in his masterwork, The Screwtape Letters, has one of the archdevils, Screwtape, giving instruction to his nephew, Wormwood, about how to deceive those who call themselves Christians: "The real trouble about the set your patient is living in is that it is merely Christian. They all have individual interests, of course, but the bond remains mere Christianity. What we want, if men become Christians at all, is to keep them in the state of mind I call 'Christianity And.' You know—Christianity and the Crisis, Christianity and the New Psychology, Christianity and the New Order, Christianity and Faith Healing, Christianity and Psychical Research, Christianity and Vegetarianism, Christianity and Spelling Reform. If they must be Christians, let them at least be Christians with a difference. Substitute for the faith itself some Fashion with a Christian colouring. Work on their horror of the Same Old Thing." (The Screwtape Letters, pp. 115-16; italics in original.)

The devil doesn't need to get us to steal or lie or commit adultery, just undersell, understate, and underestimate the powers, appropriateness, and relevance of the gospel. One challenge we face in a world that is expanding dramatically in regard to information, discovery, and technology is to hold fast to that which is fundamental, to rivet ourselves to the simple. In many cases new discoveries have and will yet pave the way to the amelioration of human suffering and the removal of so many of life's struggles. But there are some things that never change, some things whose resolution is brought to pass only through divine intervention. Paul taught us that in Christ "dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power." (Colossians 2:9-10; italics added.)

One Christian writer explained:

"A pastor I know of was conducting a series of meetings in several churches in North and South Carolina. He was staying in the home of some close friends in Asheville and traveling each night to wherever he was speaking that evening.

"One night he was scheduled to speak at a church in Greenville, South Carolina, which is several hours from Asheville. Because he didn't have a car, some friends from Greenville offered to transport him to and from the meeting. When they arrived to pick him up, he bid farewell to his hosts and told them he hoped to be back by midnight or soon afterward.

"After ministering at the Greenville church, he stayed awhile to enjoy some fellowship and then rode back to Asheville. Approaching the house, he saw the porch light on and assumed his hosts would be prepared for his arrival because he had discussed the time of his return with them. As he got out of the car, he sent his driver on his way, saying, 'You must hurry. You have a long drive back. I'm sure they're prepared for me; I'll have no problem.'

"He felt the bitter cold of the winter night as he walked the long distance to the house. By the time he reached the porch, his nose and ears were already numb. He tapped gently on the door but no one answered. He tapped a little harder, and then even harder—but still no reply. Finally, concerned about the intense cold, he beat on the kitchen door and on a side window. But there was still no response.

"Frustrated and becoming colder by the moment, he decided to walk to a neighboring house so he could call and awaken his hosts. On the way he realized that knocking on someone's door after midnight wasn't a safe thing to do, so he decided to find a public telephone. It was as dark as it was cold, and the pastor wasn't familiar with the area. Consequently he walked for several miles. At one point he slipped in the wet grass growing beside the road and slid down a bank into two feet of water. Soaked and nearly frozen, he crawled back up to the road and walked farther until he finally saw a blinking motel light. He awakened the manager, who was gracious enough to let him use the telephone.

"The bedraggled pastor made the call and said to his sleepy host, 'I hate to disturb you, but I couldn't get anyone in the house to wake up. I'm several miles down the road at the motel. Could you come get me?'

"To which his host replied, 'My dear friend, you have a key in your overcoat pocket. Don't you remember? I gave it to you before you left.'

"The pastor reached into his pocket. Sure enough, there was the key.

"That true story illustrates the predicament of Christians who try to gain access to God's blessings through human means, all the while possessing Christ, who is the key to every spiritual blessing. He alone fulfills the deepest longings of our hearts and supplies every spiritual resource we need." (John MacArthur, Jr., Our Sufficiency in Christ, pp. 25-27.)

In our complex world we find people on every corner eager to provide solutions to modern man's troubles. Radio and television programs, newspaper columns, magazine articles, and individual and group seminars or workshops abound. They're everywhere! Some focus on the importance of self-discovery, of coming to know who we are and what marvelous possibilities exist for us. Others seem to have an obsession with self-esteem, an inordinate concern with being on a type of perpetual emotional high. There are those who insist that the answer to all personal problems lies deep within ourselves, that the key to understanding and correcting our attitudes and actions lies somewhere in our past. Especially popular in the last decade is the idea that dysfunctional relationships with parents or siblings or childhood friends or marriage partners have resulted in stilted and perverted views of the world, that our problems now are largely a product of how people have in the past mistreated us, and that we need to "work through" such relationships to wholeness. Underlying much of what we are witnessing today is a very telling philosophy, one that is less than obvious to most people—that deep-seated problems can be solved only by professional counselors in well-orchestrated therapeutic settings; that scripture study, prayer, forgiveness, repentance, and the ordinances of the priesthood are overly simplistic and thus inadequate to deal with today's difficult challenges.

I do not write these things in total ignorance. I was trained as a psychologist and have great regard for the discipline and field. I know that hundreds and thousands of people are helped each year by caring, prepared, and thoughtful counselors and psychotherapists. Having worked for a time as a counselor, I am also very much aware that certain kinds of mental or social-emotional problems result from a chemical imbalance or may require intensive therapy. My concern is that far too often we understate the importance of the love and power of Jesus Christ to remake and renovate the human personality. The Spirit of the Lord is remarkably therapeutic. The love of God, as expressed by and through the Holy Ghost, is above and beyond anything earthly; in dealing with deepseated problems of anger or bitterness or pain, it transcends in importance anything we could create or generate of ourselves. The principle of forgiveness—both to be forgiven and to give freely of the same to others—is a transcendent power, one that can bring hope and peace to a soul long habituated in the course of sin or anger. My gravest concern is that, like the minister above, we have within our reach a key, a supernal key, which to some degree is unappreciated and thus almost unused by too many of us. I have a feeling that when it comes to solving our problems the Lord expects us to take the scriptures, the words of modern prophets, the guidance of the Holy Ghost, and the powers of the priesthood as seriously as we do the guides and canons and procedures of learned men and women.

Also prevalent in today's world is a preoccupation with success and excellence. Books and tapes and seminars abound. Counsel and advice and direction and charts and schemes and planners fill the land. To the degree that such things help us focus upon the tasks ahead or to be more effective in what needs to be done, they are commendable. To the degree, however, that our quest for success, our yearning for excellence, leads us to become fiercely competitive, or our desire for improvement results in a fixation upon externals, we are walking in slippery paths. Bruce C. Hafen has written in this regard:

"I am addressing primarily a need for perspective. I do not mean to diminish the value of serious commitments to personal achievement and responsibility. The willingness to strive and keep striving is at the heart of [the scriptural] message to us. But the striving must be to find out God and to accept fully the experiences he knows will enlarge our souls. The trouble with modern pursuits of excellence is that they can become a striving to please other people, or at least to impress them or to seek their approval. A desire for such approval is not all bad, especially among Church members, who generally reserve their approval for accomplishments having positive value. But other people are not finally our judge, and making too much of either the affirmative or the adverse judgments of others can actually undermine our relationship with God and our development of sound values. " (The Broken Heart, pp. 98-99; italics added.)

It is just so with regard to an inordinate stress upon goal setting and achievement. We should and must have goals in life, and certainly we should do what is appropriate and right to bring them to pass. But our personal goals need to be in harmony with the Lord's grand design for us and for all his children. Further, a too great or unhealthy emphasis in this area can become an obsession, resulting in insensitivity to people (who may need our assistance but who do not immediately contribute to goal fulfillment) or to those sudden, unexpected promptings of the Spirit (which just might be designed to lead us in unanticipated directions).

The power unto life and salvation is in Christ the Person; his grace is sufficient to heal us if we yield and submit and rely. The Savior came to change human nature. Too often we attempt to solve our spiritual problems in our own way. One example is an effort to remake or redo our personality through some kind of personal behavior modification plan. We decide to work on a vice (or virtue) for a period of time, move to the next one for a specified period, and so on. That is essentially the plan that Benjamin Franklin used for self-improvement. It certainly has merit, especially inasmuch as it encourages us to do our best to alleviate the flaws in our character through facing our weaknesses and applying self-control. And yet, such an approach is terrestrial at best. I have tried to think of an analogy that would illustrate this approach. It would be like my stepping into a baptismal font with water up to my chest, and then having a person in authority suddenly drop one hundred Ping-Pong balls into the font and say: "Brother Millet, if you desire to be saved in the celestial kingdom, you will need to get all those Ping-Pong balls under the water at the same time!" Being a confident type, I respond: "Hey, no problem. I can handle it!" I work at it for hours, using my arms and legs and head. Success is near as I manage to immerse seventy-five, eighty, eighty-five, and even ninety balls at once. Then, in unexpected fashion, fifteen or twenty pop up out of the water. I groan and go back to work.

I believe our sins are something like that. It's not just impractical to try to change our lives this way: it's impossible! The Lord's way is so much more effective, so much less frustrating, and so much more satisfying. He calls upon us to be born again, to have our natures changed so that we will come in time to have no desire to engage in our old ways. He bids us to acknowledge our weakness and human limitations, acknowledge his power to renew and refine us, and acknowledge that such a transformation can come in and through him and in no other way. As we do our best to overcome the bad habits, pray with real intent, and lean on that arm that is mighty to save, we begin in time to notice changes in our nature. I once sat in an interview with a fine young man who really desired to be pure in heart. He said to me: "Bishop, I want to get my life in order. I want the Spirit to be with me, and so each night I take the time to list all my sins and all my problems to the Lord. I pray for his forgiveness and ask him for specific help to overcome each one." I commended the young man for his diligence and his desires. I then suggested lovingly that he might consider an alternative approach—to pray about his nature and his desires, to ask the Lord to make of him a new creature in Christ, to give him in time a clean heart and an educated conscience.

The Lord has a way of assisting us in our problems that may be quite different from the solutions offered in today's world. Elder Dallin H. Oaks has cautioned us as follows: "We can liken the various ways of the world to implements that can draw water from a worldly well. We need such implements. We can and do use them to make our way in the world.

"But while we are doing this, in our occupations, in our civic responsibilities, and in our work in other organizations, we must never forget the Savior's words, 'Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again.' Only from Jesus Christ, the Lord and Savior of this world, can we obtain the living water whose partaker shall never thirst again, in whom it will be 'a well of water springing up into everlasting life.' And we do not obtain that water with worldly implements." (The Lord's Way, p. 14.)

The Only Sure Foundation

A quiet but real peace accompanies the decision to yield ourselves as instruments of the Lord. Furthermore, safety and security—spiritual maturity—come from being rooted and grounded in the religion of Jesus Christ. When we are settled in the faith, securely fastened to principles of truth and righteousness, we will not be wafted about by false educational ideas or the philosophies or vagaries of men and women who know not God or his ways. Indeed, as the apostle Paul wrote, the true church is built upon the foundation of apostles and prophets with Jesus Christ himself as the chief cornerstone. (See Ephesians 2:19-20.)

Every person builds a house, a house of faith. We do so knowingly or unknowingly. And every builder soon learns that a good building with bad foundations is worse than useless; it is dangerous. As one Christian writer has observed, "If the stability of buildings depends largely on their foundations, so does the stability of human lives. The search for personal security is a primal instinct, but many fail to find it today. Old familiar landmarks are being obliterated. Moral absolutes which were once thought to be eternal are being abandoned." (John Stott, Life in Christ, p. 22.) Thus our house of faith can be no more secure than the foundation upon which it is built. The foolish build upon the shifting sands of ethics and the marshlands of manmade philosophies and doctrines. The wise build upon the rock of revelation, heeding carefully the living oracles, lest they be "brought under condemnation . . . and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house." (D&C 90:5.) All that we do as members of the Lord's church must be built upon a foundation of faith and testimony and conversion. When external supports fail us, then our hearts must be riveted on the things of the Spirit, those internal realities that provide the meaning, the perspective, and the sustenance for all else that matters in life.

A very old tradition among the Jews holds that during the early stages of construction of the second temple, the builders, by mistake, discarded the cornerstone. Centuries later, in the midst of a long day of debate, Jesus, seemingly drawing upon this tradition, spoke of the irony associated with ignoring or dismissing him and his message. "Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?" (Matthew 21:42; compare Psalm 118:22-23; Acts 4:11.) Among the Nephites, Jacob prophesied: "I perceive by the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that by the stumbling of the Jews they will reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation." (Jacob 4:15.)

The climax of Helaman's commission to his sons Nephi and Lehi contains the following admonition: "And now, my sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

Surely the supreme challenge of this life for those who aspire to Christian discipleship is to build our lives on Christ, to erect a house of faith, a divine domicile in which he and his Spirit would be pleased to dwell. There is safety from Satan and his minions only in Christ. There is security only in his word and through his infinite and eternal power.

How, then, do we build on Christ? In a day when the winds are blowing and the waves beating upon our ship, how do we navigate our course safely into the peaceful harbor? What must we do to have our Savior pilot us through life's tempestuous seas? Amidst the babble of voices—enticing voices that threaten to lead us into forbidden paths or that beckon us to labor in secondary causes—how do the Saints of the Most High know the Way, live the Truth, and gain that Life which is abundant? The revelations and the prophets offer us some simple yet far-reaching suggestions:

Mormon explained that "whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked." (Helaman 3:29.) The word of God, especially that found in the canon of scripture, allows us to discern and expose those teachings or schools of thought that lead us on intellectual or spiritual detours, to cut through false educational ideas, and to discard spurious notions that may be pleasing to the carnal mind but are in fact destructive to the eternal soul. Further, those who search and study the institutional revelations open themselves more fully to that individual revelation which is promised. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained to Church leaders that "however talented men may be in administrative matters; however eloquent they may be in expressing their views; however learned they may be in worldly things—they will be denied the sweet whisperings of the Spirit that might have been theirs unless they pay the price of studying, pondering, and praying about the scriptures." (Regional Representatives Seminar, 2 Apr. 1982; as cited in Doctrines of the Restoration, p. 238.) Those who are grounded and settled in truth, anchored to the Lord's word, are built upon the rock of Christ. Or, in Mormon's words, those men and women of Christ who manage to lay hold upon the word of God and follow the strait and narrow path, eventually "land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out." (Helaman 3:30.)

There are those who feel they can enjoy a relationship with the Lord independent of his Church, separate and apart from the organization established by revelation. There are even those who feel they can stay close to the Lord while they criticize or find fault with the Church and its leaders. These are wrong. They are deceived. They are painfully mistaken and are walking in slippery paths. No person comes to the Master who does not acknowledge the mantle worn by his anointed. There is no power to be found in Christ independent of his constituted priesthood authorities. In the words of Elder Marvin J. Ashton, "Any Church member not obedient to the leaders of this Church will not have the opportunity to be obedient to the promptings of the Lord." (In Germany Area Conference Report, Aug. 1973, p. 23.)

Few gifts of the Spirit are of greater worth in a day of doubt and a time of confusion than the gift of discernment. We have the challenge not only of discerning good from evil, light from darkness, but also of discerning that which matters from that which has but little value. In a time like our own when a babble of voices is heard, when discordant voices vie for our attention and seek for our time and interest, it is incumbent upon us to be discerning, to be discriminating. Some things simply matter more than others. But, in the words of Alma, "there is one thing which is of more importance than they all." (Alma 7:7.) That something is the knowledge and testimony of Jesus, the calm certitude that comes by the spirit of revelation. We may know many things, but if we do not know this, our testimony is deficient and our foundation less solid than it might otherwise be. "Upon this rock," the rock of revelation, the Master said at Caesarea Philippi, "I will build my church." (Matthew 16:18; see also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 274.) "And how could it be otherwise?" Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked. "There is no other foundation upon which the Lord could build his Church and kingdom. The things of God are known only by the power of his Spirit. God stands revealed or he remains forever unknown. No man can know that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

"Revelation: Pure, perfect, personal revelation—this is the rock!

"Revelation that Jesus is the Christ: the plain, wondrous word that comes from God in heaven to man on earth, the word that affirms the divine Sonship of our Lord—this is the rock!

"The divine sonship of our Lord: the sure, heaven-sent word that God is his Father and that he has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel—this is the rock!

"The testimony of our Lord: the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy—this is the rock!

"All this is the rock, and yet there is more. Christ is the Rock: the Rock of Ages, the Stone of Israel, the Sure Foundation—the Lord is our Rock!" (In Conference Report, Apr. 1981, pp. 102-3; italics in original.)

Truly, as the apostle Paul testified: "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ." (1 Corinthians 3:11.) This message is certainly sounded clearly in scripture, but it is also echoed in hymns of faith and praise. Consider the following words by Edward Mote (as cited in John Stott, Life in Christ, p. 29):

My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus' blood and righteousness; no merit of my own I claim, but wholly trust in Jesus' name. On Christ, the solid rock, I stand— all other ground is sinking sand. When weary in this earthly race, I rest on his unchanging grace; in every wild and stormy gale my anchor holds and will not fail. His vow, his covenant and blood are my defence against the flood; when earthly hopes are swept away he will uphold me on that day. When the last trumpet's voice shall sound, O may I then in him be found! clothed in his righteousness alone, faultless to stand before his throne. On Christ, the solid rock, I stand— all other ground is sinking sand.

Ponder the significance of the words of a hymn we frequently sing:

How firm a foundation, ye Saints of the Lord, Is laid for your faith in his excellent word! What more can he say than to you he hath said, Who unto the Savior for refuge have fled? . . . . When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine. E'en down to old age, all my people shall prove My sov'reign, eternal, unchangeable love; And then, when gray hair shall their temples adorn, Like lambs shall they still in my bosom be borne. The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose I will not, I cannot, desert to his foes; That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake, I'll never, no never, no never forsake! (Hymns, 1985, no. 85.)

Elder Marion D. Hanks has explained: "A perusal of the Christian's passageway seems almost too much. How can ordinary mortals walk it? If we are to regard our religion as a 'packet of beliefs and practices' to be borne, it will indeed be too much. But this cannot be for the Christian. Our religion is 'not weight; it is wings.' It can carry us through the dark times, the bitter cup. It will be with us in the fiery furnace and deep pit. It will accompany us to the hospital room and to the graveside. It can assure us of the presence of a captain on the rough voyage. It is, in short, not the path to easy disposition of problems but the comforting assurance of the eternal light by which we may see and the eternal warmth that we may feel. All of this comes to us through the love of Christ." (Bread upon the Waters, p. 34.)

President Spencer W. Kimball spoke to the Saints of the need for holding tenaciously to the truth, of grounding ourselves in gospel verities. "The forces of good are clearly and continually under attack," he said. "There are times when it seems the world is almost drowning in a flood of filth and degradation. And I want to cry out, 'Hold on! Hold on to what is right and true. Therein is safety. Don't let yourself be swept away.'

"In 1946 I visited Hawaii shortly after a huge tidal wave, where walls of water some forty feet high struck Hilo and the Hamakua coast, and I saw the devastation that resulted. Homes had been overturned and shredded, crushed into splinters like toothpicks; fences and gardens were obliterated; bridges and roads were washed away. Bathtubs, refrigerators, mangled autos lay strewn all about the streets. Where one of our little chapels had stood, nothing remained but the foundation. More than a hundred people lost their lives; as many more were injured; thousands were left homeless. I heard many stories while there of suffering, of heroism, of salvation.

"One woman told how she received a telephone message from friends to get out and to leave—that a tidal wave was coming. She looked out to sea and saw the monstrous wave approaching, like a mountain. She and her husband picked up the baby and ran for their lives up the hill. However, two of their little girls were away from home playing near a clump of lauhala trees. They saw the wave coming, ran into the trees, and held tightly with their arms around the tree trunks. The first gigantic wave washed entirely over them, but they held their breath and clung with all their might until the water receded and their heads were again above the water. When the wave receded, they quickly ran up the hill before the succeeding waves came. Together, the family watched from the safety of the hill as their home below disappeared under the pounding of the waves.

"We, too, are faced with powerful, destructive forces unleashed by the adversary. Waves of sin, wickedness, immorality, degradation, tyranny, deceitfulness, conspiracy, and dishonesty threaten all of us. They come with great power and speed and will destroy us if we are not watchful.

"But a warning is sounded for us. It behooves us to be alert and to listen and flee from the evil for our eternal lives. Without help we cannot stand against it. We must flee to high ground or cling fast to that which can keep us from being swept away. That to which we must cling for safety is the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is our protection from whatever force the evil one can muster." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1978, pp. 5-6.)

As we continue in his word, as we move forward in steadfast but unsensational fashion, as we come to live by everyword of God, we come to know him who is the Truth: we come to know our Lord. We come to know about the Lord by study. We come to know the Lord only by study in combination with faith. Jesus said: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) It is not just that the Son of God brought light into a darkened and fallen world; he is the light. (3 Nephi 11:11.) It is not just that our Savior showed us the way; he is the way. (John 14:6.) It is not just that Christ made the resurrection available; he is the resurrection. (John 11:25.) And it is not just that Jesus of Nazareth restored the truth and taught the truth; he is the truth. (John 14:6.) Knowing these things, knowing that our hope for peace here and our longing for eternal glory hereafter are inextricably tied to Jesus Christ, we gladly acknowledge him as our Lord and God, our King Emmanuel, truly the Hope of Israel.
