Robert L. Millet, Steadfast and Immovable: Striving for Spiritual Maturity ( 1992)

Epilogue

When I first was given the assignment to direct the institute of religion connected with Florida State University, I became acquainted with a young college student who had just joined the Church. David was a ball of fire, an enthusiastic, missionary-minded convert who was also like a sponge as far as knowledge and understanding were concerned. He just couldn't get enough! He attended every institute class. He would sit back, read the scriptures with us, and, at the moment of discovery of some new principle or insight, get a glow in his eyes, and let out a "Wow!" or "Oooh!" or "I can't believe it!" Such outbursts were at first humorous to the other students but over time came to be a regular part of the class experience. It was fun to watch David grow and, more important, to sense his deep appreciation for the marvelous light and truth which flow from the restored gospel. A year after his baptism David left on a mission, and things quieted down in my classes substantially.

His homecoming address was most inspirational. Before us stood a young man who had come to know the Lord, who had gained a closeness to the Lord's Spirit, and who would be a staunch defender of the Lord's church and kingdom. We all noticed in institute class that David made few comments and seldom if ever responded in his typical enthusiastic manner to points of interest. No grunts, no shouts, no gesticulations. Just an occasional smile and a nod of the head. After a few months David asked to speak with me privately. In our interview he expressed a personal fear that he had lost something. "I just don't seem to be as excited as I once was about the gospel." I asked: "Is that because you seem to be having fewer 'Ah hah' experiences?" He nodded. I explained the very fundamental principle that the depth of our spiritual maturity is not necessarily to be measured by what shows, by decibels of delight or brand new doctrinal discoveries or how high our spiritual high may be today. Rather, as we move along that path which the scriptures describe as strait and narrow, we actually become more stable and secure, less prone perhaps to unnatural spiritual highs or abyssmal lows. As the Holy Ghost transforms our soul, as we begin to forsake the world and find delight in the noble and uplifting, we begin to enjoy the quiet assurance that God is in his heaven, that the work in which we are engaged is true and will triumph, and finally (but more important) that the Holy One is pleased with our offerings. Our testimony of the truth becomes stronger and stronger, but our desire to share it and our feelings of appreciation for what matters are more often couched in the simple expressions of testimony and gratitude. Though we know more surely than we have ever known, though the scriptures and the words of the living oracles have become manna to our taste, though our desire to proclaim the truths of the gospel knows no bounds, yet our zeal has been tempered by wisdom and our enthusiasm has gained a dignity and a stability that characterize those who are steadfast and immovable.

The present thrust of the Church toward simplification and reduction is an inspired one. It causes us to reexamine our lives, evaluate our motives and priorities, and direct our efforts toward those things of greatest worth. One antidote to complexity and confusion is a renewed focus on fundamentals. As we spend our time and our resources on the things that lead us to God and cause us to love and reach out to his children, we are on the road to gospel greatness. "After all," President Joseph F. Smith observed, "to do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all man-kind, is the truest greatness. . . .

"We should never be discouraged in those daily tasks which God has ordained to the common lot of man. Each day's labor should be undertaken in a joyous spirit and with the thought and conviction that our happiness and eternal welfare depend upon doing well that which we ought to do, that which God has made it our duty to do. . . .

"Let us not be trying to substitute an artificial life for the true one. He is truly happy who can see and appreciate the beauty with which God has adorned the commonplace things of life." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 285-86; italics added.)

In many ways, the gospel of Jesus Christ is one of the best-kept secrets in the Church. I refer not necessarily to the knowledge and understanding associated with the gospel but rather to the gospel as an experience, as "the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16.) We are too often prone to be content with traveling about in twilight when we could walk and talk in the glorious light of the noonday sun. (See D&C 95:5-6.) In short, we have within easy reach the powers of God, but because of preoccupation or distraction we fail to appropriate such endowments into our lives. In so doing, we fall short of that spiritual maturity that might otherwise be ours. At a time when the early Latter-day Saints were struggling under financial pressures, the Lord provided what we might call the "vertical dimension of problem solving." He said: "And again, verily I say unto you, concerning your debts—behold it is my will that you shall pay all your debts. And it is my will that you shall humble yourselves before me, and obtain this blessing by your diligence and humility and the prayer of faith. And inasmuch as you are diligent and humble, and exercise the prayer of faith, behold, I will soften the hearts of those to whom you are in debt, until I shall send means unto you for your deliverance." (D&C 104:78-80.) The Lord stands ready to assist us; the depth of our sincerity and our maturity may be discerned by the degree to which we are willing to trust him.

The story is told of a poor man who had always wanted to go on a cruise. "As a youngster he had seen an advertisement for a luxury cruise, and ever since, he had dreamed of spending a week on a large ocean liner enjoying fresh sea air and relaxing in a luxurious environment. He saved money for years, carefully counting his pennies, often sacrificing personal needs so he could stretch his resources a little further.

"Finally he had enough to purchase a cruise ticket. He went to a travel agent, looked over the cruise brochures, picked out one that was especially attractive, and bought a ticket with the money he had saved so long. He was hardly able to believe he was about to realize his childhood dream.

"Knowing he could not afford the kind of elegant food pictured in the brochure, the man planned to bring his own provisions for the week. Accustomed to moderation after years of frugal living, and with his entire savings going to pay for the cruise ticket, the man decided to bring along a week's supply of bread and peanut butter. That was all he could afford.

"The first few days of the cruise were thrilling. The man ate peanut-butter sandwiches alone in his room each morning and spent the rest of his time relaxing in the sunlight and fresh air, delighted to be aboard ship.

"By midweek, however, the man was beginning to notice that he was the only person on board who was not eating luxurious meals. It seemed that every time he sat on the deck or rested in the lounge or stepped outside his cabin, a porter would walk by with a huge meal for someone who had ordered room service.

"By the fifth day of the cruise the man could take it no longer. The peanut-butter sandwiches seemed stale and tasteless. He was desperately hungry, and even the fresh air and sunshine had lost their appeal. Finally, he stopped a porter and exclaimed, 'Tell me how I might get one of those meals! I'm dying for some decent food, and I'll do anything you say to earn it!'

" 'Why, sir, don't you have a ticket for this cruise?' the porter asked.

"'Certainly,' said the man. 'But I spent everything I had for that ticket. I have nothing left with which to buy food.'

" 'But sir,' said the porter, 'didn't you realize? Meals are included with your passage. You may eat as much as you like!"' (John MacArthur, Jr., Our Sufficiency in Christ, pp. 241-42.)

Too often we are like the man on the cruise: we have unlimited possibilities for growth and development, infinite avenues for joy and contentment, all available through the omniloving offering and gift of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. But we settle for less. Much, much less. Surely one sign of spiritual maturity is the ability to recognize a good deal when it presents itself to us and then to clinch it!

We have discussed several aspects of gospel living that contribute to our spiritual maturity. As we learn to respond appropriately to the questions that arise in our lives; as we pursue a sane and balanced course in life, stay in the mainstream of the Church and move toward our eternal goals with dignity and patient maturity; as we seek gospel growth through consistent and steady personal study; as we acquire and bear that pure testimony which is reflected so often in the utterances of the Lord's anointed; as we plead with all the energy of our souls for that love of God which transforms the human personality and all human interactions; as we come to trust in and rely on the merits, mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, thus looking unto God that we might live (Alma 37:47)—as we do these things, we begin to build our houses of faith upon the rock of our Redeemer. We lay the foundation for a life in which we will be, even in the midst of adversity and turmoil, steadfast and immovable. Through this means we gain in time the transcendent assurance that the Lord is pleased with us, that eternal life is at the end of our course. "Therefore, my beloved brethren," Paul wrote, "be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 15:58.) Indeed, King Benjamin's challenge and invitation are ever before us: "Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all. Amen." (Mosiah 5:15.)
