Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

FOREWORD

Christ in Ancient America by Dr. Milton R. Hunter of the First Council of the Seventy is a book of tremendous interest and value for those who would know firsthand the traditions and folkways of the early inhabitants of North, Central, and South America as well as know the truth contained in the Book of Mormon concerning these peoples.

This book follows the procedure that Dr. Hunter has pursued in all of his writings: He has built testimony in a most unusual way. From little-known books—largely inaccessible to the average layman—he has assembled material that reads so fascinatingly that those who once begin the book will be unable to lay it aside.

Dr. Hunter piles evidence on evidence from incontestible sources that the Book of Mormon record is indeed true wherein it states that Christ visited the Western Hemisphere. The persistent, although somewhat distorted, stories of the "White and Bearded God" among the inhabitants of Mexico, Yucatan, Central and South America cannot help indicating that the legends were based on truth. In fact, some of the archaeologists have proved that Christ or at least some of his apostles must have come since there is so much similarity between the Christian and the Indian knowledge.

Dr. Hunter feels, and those who have followed his career agree, that part of his mission at least is to find these materials which bear directly on the promise of the Book of Mormon, which is a witness for Christ ". . . to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel, and also to the Jew and Gentile. . . ."

Through Dr. Hunter's painstaking research, he bears his own testimony to the truthfulness of the gospel and encourages the building of such testimony in the hearts and minds of all who read his works.

Dr. Milton R. Hunter, according to Dr. G. Homer Durham, has "two fundamental qualities that have motivated his life: first, his unswerving faith in and devotion to the Church and its people; second, that gifts enhanced by a thirst for knowledge and higher education do not depend for their expression on an easy ideal environment."

Dr. Hunter, in all of his work, first as a seminary and institute teacher and director; second, as a member of the priesthood quorums; and, third, as a member of the First Council of the Seventy, has always placed his Church first; and in order better to serve the Church, he has continued his study and research. He has been blessed in having a wife, Ferne Gardner Hunter, and a family who co-operate completely in his endeavors.

To most people the idea of giving up the comforts of home to trudge through the trackless jungle trails, enduring the hardships of primitive accommodations, the dangers of sickness and of attack from wild animals, the ferociousness of hostile natives would be unthinkable. Dr. Hunter has not only endured them, he has sought them out—if there were a remote chance that by so doing he could advance the knowledge of Latter-day Saints concerning the truthfulness of the gospel.

In all of his writings this has been Dr. Hunter's goal: To build faith in others. Innumerable articles and books have flowed from his facile pen in his earnest endeavor to depict the growth of Mormonism and to illustrate through archaeology, history, and biography as well as by reinforcing the standard works of the Church, the forcefulness of Latter-day Saint religion.

Christ in Ancient America adds its strength to the building of faith and testimony among Latter-day Saints.

March 21, 1959

Salt Lake City, Utah

MARBA C. JOSEPHSON

Associate Managing Editor

The Improvement Era
