Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It is the purpose of the writer to present in this book a correlation of archaeological and anthropological findings, as well as Indian traditions, with the claims made by the Book of Mormon in regard to Christ's resurrection, his appearance to the ancient Americans, and the marvelous work he did among them. All of the evidences presented contribute to sustaining the fact that Jesus did arise from the grave, breaking the bands of death for mankind, and that, as the God and Savior of the entire human family, he performed a phenominal work in ancient America.

This volume expresses my personal views and findings. While I assume the complete responsibility for its contents, I am deeply indebted to many people for their helpful suggestions and assistance.

I express my deepest gratitude to the First Presidency of the Church and to President Joseph Fielding Smith for affording me opportunities to visit Mexico and Central America on mission tours and on other occasions—opportunities which enabled me to study and photograph the ruins and relics at numerous archaeological sites and museums.

C. N. Shelton, President of the TAN Air Lines, and his brother, Ralph V. Shelton, Vice-President, provided me the opportunity of visiting Peru and Bolivia; and of studying the archaeological ruins and artifacts there. For this unusual courtesy I offer sincere thanks. I am also grateful for the collection of archaeological photographs of South America that Ralph V. Shelton gave me.

Special recognition is extended to Paul R. Cheesman of Miami, Florida, for his wholehearted co-operation and for supplying me with a number of photographs of the Andean region.

For their hospitality and for taking me to many archaeological sites, I express sincere appreciation to President and Sister Frederick S. Williams of Lima, Peru. Also, I extend gratitude to Robert and Alwina Hulme of LaPaz, Bolivia, for their hospitality and kindness.

President and Sister Edgar L. Wagner of the Central American Mission extended numerous kindnesses to me on two mission tours. I express to them wholehearted appreciation. On several visits to Mexico I enjoyed the most genuine hospitality, consideration, and kindness from the late President Claudious Bowman and his good wife, Sister Bowman. Also, Major and Sister Joseph E. Vincent have been most kind in taking me to archaeological ruins and entertaining me in Oaxaca.

Deep appreciation is expressed to Stanford J. Robison for graciously permitting me to publish a number of the outstanding drawings of Maya stelae made by his late wife, Huberta Berg Robison. These drawings are exceptional in beauty and accuracy.

I extend appreciation to Elder Harold B. Lee and Elder Richard L. Evans, both of the Council of the Twelve, for reading the portion of this book which previously appeared in the Improvement Era and offering numerous and helpful suggestions. To Elder Bruce R. McConkie, my close associate on the First Council of the Seventy, I express gratitude for the encouragement, suggestions, and help that he has generously extended to me. Others of the General Authorities have encouraged me to continue this project.

I am grateful for the co-opeation and the suggestions received from the members of the Improvement Era staff, especially Doyle Green, Marba C. Josephson, Elizabeth J. Moffitt, and Verl F. Scott, and appreciate their graciousness in allowing me to reprint Hofmann's "Jesus the Christ" as the frontispiece of this book. Sister Josephson not only read the entire manuscript and offered many valuable suggestions but she also read the proofs and wrote the foreword. I extend sincere thanks for all that she did.

I also express special appreciation to J. Fred Evans of Council Bluffs, Iowa, for providing me with several important books on archaeology and an abundance of information which he has collected in this field.

I sincerely acknowledge my deep obligation for the helpful suggestions of Alva H. Parry, manager of the Deseret Book Company, Thomas S. Monson and S. Ross Fox of the Deseret News Press, for giving unstintingly of their time and counsel in arranging for the printing and publishing the book. All of the men at the Deseret News Press co-operated wholeheartedly in the production of this volume.

I am grateful for the work done by Evelyn Brough and Diane Reid, my secretaries, who typed the manuscript, and to Velma Harvey, who extended much help and co-operation in this project.

I owe a special debt of gratitude to my wife, Ferne G. Hunter, who co-operated wholeheartedly in helping to bring this volume into existence. To her I express sincere gratitude and appreciation. The fullest credit for the completion of this book rightfully goes to her. Without her help the book would not have been completed and published.

March 23, 1959

Salt Lake City, Utah

MILTON R. HUNTER
