Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 1

QUETZALCOATL—THE "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD"

INDIANS' UNIVERSAL TRADITION OF A "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD"

When the Spanish conquistadores and Catholic fathers first arrived on the shores of Mexico, Central America, and the various countries of South America, and when the English and French colonizers and missionaries first penetrated the vast wildernesses of Canada and the United States, they received from the Indian tribes scattered over the Western Hemisphere various versions of a tradition of a "White and Bearded God" who had in the distant past visited their ancestors, taught them their culture, and mysteriously disappeared, but who would eventually return to them. This "Fair God" we shall discuss under the title of Quetzalcoatl (Ket-sal-ko-at'l) by which he was known to the Aztec Indians of Mexico and their Toltec predecessors; however, he was known by various other names in the traditions of a number of other Indian tribes of North and South America.

Although the traditions from the various Indian groups regarding the "White Bearded God" do not agree in details, there being a variety of versions, yet in the principal points these Indian traditions from Canada in the north to Chile in the south have a close resemblance to one another. Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, an American scholar who made an extensive study of this subject during the latter part of the past century, devoted the greater portion of one of his book, American Hero-Myths, to this subject. The following is one of his summary statements:

The native tribes of this Continent had many myths, and among them there was one which was so prominent, and recurred with such strangely similar features in localities widely asunder, that it has for years attracted my attention, and I have been led to present it as it occurs among several nations far apart, both geographically and in point of culture. This myth is that of the national hero, their mythical civilizer and teacher of the tribe, who, at the same time, was often identified with the supreme deity and the creator of the world. It is the fundamental myth of a very large number of American tribes, and on its recognition and interpretation depends the correct understanding of most of their mythology and religious life.

The outlines of this legend are to the effect that in some exceedingly remote time this divinity took an active part in creating the world and in fitting it to be the abode of man, and may himself have formed or called forth the race. At any rate, his interest in its advancement was such that he personally appeared among the ancestors of the nation, and taught them the useful arts, gave them the maize or other food plants, initiated them into the mysteries of their religious rites, framed the laws which governed their social relations, and having thus started them on the road to self-development, he left them, not suffering death, but disappearing in some way from their view. Hence it was nigh universally expected that at some time he would return. . . .

Whenever the personal appearance of this hero-god is described, it is, strangely enough, represented to be that of one of the white race, a man of fair complexion, with long, flowing beard, with abundant hair, and clothed in ample and loose robes. [^1]

During the past century the famous historian Hubert Howe Bancroft accomplished a gigantic task by collecting numerous Indian traditions and producing a history of the American Indians according to their traditions. His momentous historical contribution resulted in the publishing of thirty-six massive volumes, entitled The Native Races. After carefully collecting and studying the numerous Indian traditions regarding a "White Bearded God," Bancroft wrote the following conclusion:

Although bearing various names and appearing in different countries, the American culture-heroes all present the same general characteristics. They are all described as white, bearded men, generally clad in long robes, appearing suddenly and mysteriously upon the scene of their labors. They at once set about improving the people by instructing them in useful and ornamental arts, giving them laws, exhorting them to practise brotherly love and other Christian virtues, and introducing a milder and better form of religion; having accomplished their mission, they disappeared as mysteriously and unexpectedly as they came; and finally they are apotheosized and held in great reverence by a grateful posterity. In such guise or on such mission did [the "White Bearded God" under such names as] Quetzalcoatl appear in Cholula, Votan in Chiapas, Wixepechocha in Oajaca, Zamna and Cukulcan with his nineteen disciples in Yucatan, Gucumatz in Guatemala, Viracocha in Peru, Sume and Pay-Tome in Brazil, the mysterious apostle mentioned by Rosales in Chile, and Bochica in Colombia. [^2]

William Hickling Prescott, in his famous two volumes on The Conquest of Mexico, described Quetzalcoatl and the marvelous work that he performed anciently in Meso-America. Prescott wrote:

A far more interesting personage in their [Aztec] mythology was Quetzalcoatl, God of the air, a divinity who, during his residence on earth, instructed the natives in the use of metals, in agriculture, and in the arts of government. He was one of those benefactors of their species, doubtless, who have been deified by the gratitude of posterity. Under him, the earth teemed with fruits and flowers, without the pains of culture. An ear of Indian corn was as much as a single man could carry. The cotton, as it grew, took, of its own accord, the rich dyes of human art. The air was filled with intoxicating perfumes and the sweet melody of birds. In short, these were the halcyon days, which find a place in the mythic systems of so many nations in the Old World. It was the golden age of Anahuac. [^3]

Prescott described the "Fair God" as follows: "He was said to have been tall of stature, with a white skin, dark hair, and a flowing beard." [^4] The famous historian gave an account of the departure of Quetzalcoatl from the ancient Americans, stating that he promised them that "he . . . would revisit them hereafter." Later in his book, Prescott wrote:

In a preceding chapter I have noted the popular traditions respecting Quetzalcoatl, that deity with a fair complexion and flowing beard, so unlike the Indian physiognomy, who, after fulfilling his mission of benevolence among them [ancient Americans], embarked on the Atlantic Sea for the mysterious shores of Tlapallan. He promised, on his departure, to return at some future day . . . and resume the possession of his empire. That day was looked forward to with hope or with apprehension, according to the interest of the believer, but with general confidence throughout the wide borders of Anahuac. Even after the Conquest, it still lingered among the Indian races, by whom it was as fondly cherished, as the advent of . . . the Messiah by the Jews. [^5]

SOURCES OF INFORMATION REGARDING THE "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD"

The most important record regarding the "White and Bearded God" in ancient America is the Book of Mormon. This volume is an historical and religious record of the peoples who lived on this land from the time of the building of the Tower of Babel until A.D. 421. The account tells the story of three separate peoples—Jaredites, Nephites-Lamanites, and Mulekites—who migrated from western Asia and developed into great nations on the Western Hemisphere. The prophet-historians of these peoples recorded the religious teachings and history of their races as the events occurred, thereby making their accounts historically accurate.

The second source of evidence regarding the "Fair God" is found in the writings of Indian historians who wrote shortly following the Spanish conquest of the New World. These accounts were written primarily in Mexico—including Yucatan—and in Guatemala. These documents should give us reliable information, since the authors accounted the traditions of their forefathers which had come to them either in oral or written form.

A third source—an important and voluminous one—is the writings of the early Spanish chroniclers who recorded the history and religious beliefs and customs of the native Americans shortly after the discovery of the New World. These writers were usually Catholic priests who spent many years doing missionary work among the Indians. What they wrote they received directly from the aborigines, and became well informed regarding the religious customs, rites, practices, and traditions of the Indians. The fact that they received their information firsthand adds to the reliability of their accounts.

Archaeological discoveries and excavations have added an abundance of information to the recorded accounts previously mentioned; and so from these four sources we will tell our story of "Christ in Ancient America."

IXTLILXOCHITL'S ACCOUNT OF QUETZALCOATL

In the great central mesa of Mexico, the name by which the "White and Bearded God" was usually known was "Quetzalcoatl." This is an Aztec name, and the name by which the "Fair God" will be designated in much of the discussion in this book. Indian writers and Catholic padres who did extensive missionary work among the Indians of Mexico and Central America shortly following the Spanish conquest have left us numerous accounts of the traditions of Quetzalcoatl.

One of the most authentic of the Indian writers was Ixlilxochitl (Eesh-tleel-sho-cheetl'), a native American prince or chief who lived near the City of Mexico and wrote in approximately 1600 A.D. He wrote a history of his ancestors—who the writer believes were the Nephites and Lamanites—and of their descendants, the American Indians. His story began with the colonization of ancient America with three separate groups of people from Babel and western Asia, a story identical with that in the Book of Mormon. Ixtlilxochitl continued his story down to the Spanish conquest.

This Indian prince claimed that he produced his history from written documents which had come to him from his ancestors by right of his position as prince or chief in the royal family and also from the traditions he received from the old people.

Ixtlilxochitl's story of the people of ancient America is perhaps the most detailed and accurate of any of the ancient documents with the exception of the Book of Mormon. Of interest to us in discussing this subject is his very pertinent information regarding the appearance of Quetzalcoatl to his ancestors and the marvelous work accomplished by that "White Bearded God." To quote from the Works of Ixtlilxochitl:

And when the second group of colonizers, [the Toltecs] were in the height of their power, there arrived in this land a man whom they called Quetzalcoatl and others Huemac on account of his great virtues, considering him as just, saintly [holy], and good; teaching them by deeds and words the path of virtue and forbidding them their vices and sins, giving laws and good doctrine. And in order to refrain them from their pleasures and dishonesties, he instituted (established) fasting for them and [he was] the first who worshiped and placed the cross which they called Quiahuiteotl-chicahualizteotl and others Tonacaquahuitl, which means: God of rains and of health and tree of sustenance or of life. [^6]

CATHOLIC PADRES' ACCOUNTS OF QUETZALCOATL

On the heels of the Spanish conquistadores came numerous Catholic padres, devoted advocates of European Christianity, carrying their messages to the American Indians. To them we are deeply indebted for much that is known today regarding the "White and Bearded God" who left such an astounding impression on the life and culture of ancient America.

Such Catholic padres as Bernardino de Sahagun (Sa-ha-goon'), Bartolome de Las Casas), (Las Cass-us), Juan de Torquemada (Torkay-mah'da), and Diego de Landa (Lan'da), in Meso-America and numerous others in the Andean region, all recorded much that they received from the Indians relative to the "White and Bearded God." They stated that he had suddenly appeared in ancient America, had taught the people many wonderful things and then had left just as suddenly as he had previously appeared. They all maintained that the Indians worshiped him as their Creator, God, Messiah, Savior, and Teacher. He is said to have given the ancient Americans their religion, their government, and their culture. He had promised those whom he taught, and their posterity, a blessed immortality on condition of their obedience to his teachings.

The accounts of these padres state that after this "Fair God" had done his benevolent work among the ancient Americans, he ascended to heaven to dwell with his Father, the head God. However, before leaving he promised the people that someday he would return to their posterity.

SAHAGUN'S COMMENTS ON QUETZALCOATL

Bernardino de Sahagun was born in Spain in 1499. He came to Mexico in 1529 and lived there until his death in 1590. He became a Catholic missionary of great renown among the Indians, and also a historian of marked importance. He wrote his scholarly work—Historia de Las Cosas de Nueva Espana—during the latter years of his life. His writings are among the most reliable and comprehensive reports concerning the ancient inhabitants of Middle America. Father Sahagun's history was lost and unknown for nearly three hundred years after it was written. Fortunately, it was discovered in a convent in Spain, and the first publication of it appeared in Mexico in 1829.

Lord Kingsborough published Sahagun's writings as volume eight of his Mexican Antiquities in 1848; and since then there have been numerous other Spanish-language editions. A part of his works has been published in English. From the time of the publishing of the first edition of his writings to the present day, scholars have regarded his writings with the deepest respect.

From the stories which had come to the Indians from their ancestors, Father Sahagun gathered the traditions of the sojourn and numerous accomplishments of Quetzalcoatl in America in ancient times. To quote his statements:

They [the Toltecs or descendants of the Nephites] worshipped only one Lord that they held as God, who was called Quetzalcoatl. . . He did not want them to offer and give him in sacrifice anything except snakes and butterflies, and since the said Toltecas believed and obeyed him in everything, they were no less fond of divine things than their priest, and [they were] very fearful of their God. [^7]

And these said Toltecs were apt in the Mexican language for they were not barbaric, although they did not speak it as perfectly as it is now used. They were rich, and because they were intelligent and capable they soon had riches, and they said their God and Lord Quetzalcoatl gave them said riches. And thus it was said among them that he who in a brief time becomes rich was a son of Quetzalcoatl. [^8]

Quetzalcoatl was esteemed and loved as God and he was adored in the old times in Tula, and he had a very high Cu [temple tower] with many steps, which steps were very narrow—too narrow for an entire foot . . . and the vassals which he had were all skilled in mechanical arts and dextrous in the working of green stones called chalchihuites, and also for the working of silver and for the making of other things; and all these arts had their start and origin from this said Quetzalcoatl . . . and the said vassals of Quetzalcoatl were very rich and they lacked hardly a thing, there was no hunger, there was no lack of corn, and they did not have to eat mazorcas when small, and they heated their baths. . . . [^9]

Thus the scholarly Sahagun characterizes Quetzalcoatl as the one God of the people of Tula, Tlapallan, or Bountiful. [^10] He it was who blessed them with their culture and riches. The people built great cities and temple-towers in his honor.

Father Sahagun was regarded at first by the natives of Mexico as a representative of Quetzalcoatl. Hubert Howe Bancroft states that "Father Sahagun was also asked by everybody on his journey to Mexico City if he and his suite came from Tlapallan [Bountiful-land]." That region was the ancient Toltec-Nephite land where the "Fair God" had made his original New World appearance. Apparently the natives thought that the second coming of Quetzalcoatl would occur there.

TORQUEMADA'S COMMENTS ON QUETZALCOATL

Juan de Torquemada, a Catholic padre, arrived in Mexico from Spain about the middle of the sixteenth century. He spent the remainder of his life working with the Indians, and so he was able to gather many valuable traditions which had come down from their ancestors.

Torquemada gives considerable information about Quetzalcoatl, some of which he obtained from Sahagun and some which he took from Bartolome de Las Casas, [^11] both Catholic missionaries and sixteenth century writers. However, much of his material he obtained directly from the Indians.

At times Torquemada confuses Quetzalcoatl with the tenth century Toltec ruler, Topiltzin-Quetzalcoatl, who claimed a priesthood authority from the "Fair God." Many later writers have fallen into the same error. The following is quoted from Torquemada:

Concerning the God Quetzalcoatl, whom these Indian people had as God of the air, and the many things that they attributed to him.

Quetzalcoatl means plumage of serpent or serpent which has plumage, and these serpents, whose name these Indians gave to this their God, are in the Province of Xicalanco [in Campeche, a part of ancient Bountiful-land], which is at the entrance of the kingdom of Yucatan, as one goes from that (Province) of Tabasco [toward Yucatan.] . . . This Quetzalcoatl, according to true histories, was the Great Priest of the City of Tula [Bountiful]. . . . They say of him that he was a white man, large of body, wide forehead, large eyes, long and black hair, large and round beard. . . . they held him in great esteem, and reverenced him as a King in that City [Tula or Tollan or Tlapallan] . . . in spiritual and ecclesiastical matters this Quetzalcoatl was supreme, and as a Great Priest.

They say that in those times when he ruled over them that corn was very plentiful, and large pumpkins a fathom long, and very thick, and that the ears of corn climbed over them [the pumpkins] as over trees, so large and thick were they that one alone was enough of a load for a person, and all the other seeds were plentiful and tall. They sewed and harvested cotton of all colors—white, red, incarnadine, yellow, and many other and various colors, and in the same City of Tula many and diverse species of birds were raised, such as the Ziuhtototl, Quetzaltototl, Zaquan, Tlauhquechol, and many other fowl that sang sweetly and softly; there were cacao trees of all kinds; and his subjects were very rich, and they lacked nothing; they did not suffer hunger nor any decline; Quetzalcoatl did penance, piercing his legs, and drawing blood with which he stained the points of the maguey plant. . . .

. . . He never wanted nor permitted sacrifices of blood of dead men, nor of animals, but only of bread and roses and flowers and perfumes and other smells. He very efficiently prohibited and forbade wars, robberies, and deaths and other harm they inflicted on each other. They say that whenever they mentioned deaths or wars or other evils in front of him, he would turn his head and stop his ears in order not to see or hear them. Also, in him is praised the fact that he was very chaste and very honest, and very moderate in many other things.

This God was held in such reverence and devotion, and so reverenced with vows and pilgrimages in all these Kingdoms, on account of his prerogatives, that even the very enemies of the City of Cholula would promise to come in pilgrimage to fulfill their covenants and devotions, and they came secure [in safety], and the lords of the other provinces or cities had their chapels, oratories, and their idols and images, and only this one, among all the gods, was called in that city "Lord par excellence"; so that when they took an oath or said, "By our Lord," it was understood they referred to Quetzalcoatl, and not to any other god, although there were many others who were very esteemed gods. All of this was because of the great love they had for him and continued to have for him for the reasons mentioned. Also, it is true that the Lordship of this Quetzalcoatl was gentle, and he asked of them in service but light things as distinguished from painful things, and he taught them those things which were virtuous, prohibiting them those which were evil, noxious and harmful, teaching them also to hate evil things.

For this [i.e., for these reasons] it seems (and it will seem clear below) that the Indians who made and make human sacrifices were not following the will [of Quetzalcoatl]. . . .

. . . and among other doctrines he gave them, was to tell them that the inhabitants of the City of Cholula were to hold as certain that in future times there were to come by sea, from whence the sun rises, some white men, with beards like his, and that they would be lords of these lands and that they were his brothers. Thus, these Indians always expected that prophecy to be fulfilled, and when they saw the Christians, they immediately called them "son Gods" and "brothers of Quetzalcoatl," although after knowing them [the Spaniards] and experiencing their deeds, they did not hold them as heavenly, because the slaughter the Spaniards perpetrated in that City [Cholula] [^12] was outstanding (no other like it up to that time in the Indies nor, perhaps, in the other parts of the world).

This [Quetzalcoatl] was the God of the Wind, and his temple was round and very sumptuous. . . . the Indians applied the name to Quetzalcoatl, on account of his gentleness and tenderness toward everybody, not wanting the harsh and disagreeable things that others esteemed and prized. So that the God of Wind, who was among these Indians was Quetzalcoatl, . . .

. . . and it was held as true that he made the calendar. He had priests who were called Quetzalcohua, which means "the religious ones and Priests of the Order of Quetzalcoatl." He left a great memory of himself among these peoples, and they say that women who were sterile and barren, by making offerings and sacrifices to this God, would presently become pregnant. He was (as they say) God of the Winds, for they attributed to him the power to command the winds to blow or to stop blowing. They also said that this Quetzalcoatl swept the roads so that the Tlaloc gods would come to reign. . . .

They say about this God Quetzalcoatl that while living in this mortal life [he] dressed in long clothes down to his feet, through modesty, with a cloak on top scattered with red crosses. . . . In the city of Tula he had a very sumptuous and large temple, with many gradins (steps), and so narrow that a foot could not fit on them. His image had a very ugly face, a long head, and very bearded. They had it lying down and not standing, and covered with cloth; and they say they did it in memory of the fact that he was to return again to reign; and in reverence to his great majesty they must have his figure covered; and having it lying down must have meant his absence, like him who sleeps and lies down to sleep, and that on waking up from that sleep of absence, he will arise to reign. [^13]

QUETZALCOATL TRADITIONS BASED ON HISTORICAL FACTS

Certain skeptical writers have maintained that the whole Quetzalcoatl myth was a Spanish invention which they concocted to facilitate the conquest of Mexico and Peru and the victory of Christianity over the American natives. A German scholar, Paul Herrmann, ridicules such a concept. He states:

. . . how clumsy it all was, how small the propaganda value of this story to the cause of Spain! For if a militarily and culturally superior victor is to impose his gods on a subjugated people, he will naturally depict these gods as the quintessence of himself. But this is exactly what the Spaniards did not do—if they invented the story. On the contrary, Quetzalcoatl's appearance was so portrayed that the Aztecs could not fail to notice how little like the blond god the dark Spaniards were. The Aztecs were bound to conclude sooner or later that they could not be the sons of the Light God at all.

If the Spanish conquistadores did not portray the White Savior of the Indians after their own image, however, then he cannot be a Spanish invention and the myth must be Indian in origin. . . .

Carefully considered this leaves no other conclusion open than that the Light God Quetzalcoatl was a real person, that he was neither an invention of Spanish propaganda nor a legendary figment of Indian imagination. . . . [^14]

Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, one of America's greatest students of Indian traditions and history, completely agrees with Dr. Herrmann's conclusion. Let us recall Herrmann's statement to the effect that the traditions of Quetzalcoatl are authoritative Indian traditions and history and not stories concocted after the arrival of the Spaniards. Referring to the entire Quetzalcoatl traditions in general and in particular to the fact that this ancient hero-god, according to Indian tradition, was "one of the white race, a man of fair complexion, with long, flowing beard, with abundant hair, and clothed in ample and loose robes," Dr. Brinton wrote:

. . . This extraordinary fact naturally suggests the gravest suspicion that these stories were made up after the whites had reached the American shores, and nearly all historians have summarily rejected their authenticity, on this account. But a most careful scrutiny of their source positively refutes this opinion. There is irrefrangible evidence that these myths, and this ideal of the hero-god, were intimately and widely current in America long before any one of its millions of inhabitants had ever seen a white man. [^15]

Recently Laurette Sejourne wrote an outstanding book entitled Burning Water—Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico. Throughout her entire book she describes the various features of the Mexican religion which were in existence at the time of the conquest of Mexico by Cortes. She maintains that the Mexican religion had its origin with what she terms the Toltec or Nahuatl culture. The Book of Mormon describes this culture and calls it Nephite. Laurette Sejourne strongly maintains that Quetzalcoatl was an actual historical character and that he was the founder of the Toltec or Nahuatl culture. To quote:

A figure exists who, since he is inextricably linked with Toltec life, may give us a clue. This is Quetzalcoatl. His historical reality seems to be established without doubt, since his qualities as leader are many times mentioned. [^16]

Recently the outstanding archaeologists of the world, whose interest is that of the American Indians, met at Paris in an International Congress of the Americas to exchange ideas on the most recent materials available relative to the history and culture of the Indians. Dr. Herbert Joseph Spinden, who for many years has been rated as one of America's foremost scholars on the Indians, gave one of the papers at this congress. In it he declared that Quetzalcoatl was ". . . the greatest figure in the ancient history of the New World, with a code of ethics and love for the sciences and the arts." [^17]

The day is past when reputable students who deal with the subject of Quetzalcoatl attempt to throw suspicion on his historicity; but, on the other hand, they maintain that he not only existed in ancient America, but beyond a shadow of a doubt he was its greatest figure. In fact, Quetzalcoatl is now accepted as a deity—a god and not man.

Footnotes

Note: the foregoing names are pronounced as follows: Cholula—(Cho-loo'-la); Chiapas (Chee-op'-us); Oajaca (Oaxaca)—(Wah-hah'-ka); Zamna—(Zahm'-na); Cukulcan (Kukulcan)—(Koo-kul-con'); Guatemala—(Gwa-ta-ma'la); Viracocha—(Ve-ra-ko'-cha); Sume—(Soo-may'); Bochica—(Bo-chee'-ka).

Bercerra shows that many of the place names of Chiapas include this important name, Tula or Tulan or Tlan, meaning "bountiful" or "abounding." He uses the Spanish word abundancia to define it. Abundancia is defined "abundance, opulence, fertility, plenty. . . ."

[We may also mention] the ancient Maya term, Tutul-xiu, meaning "abounding in plants," the equivalent in Hebrew of Zara-hemullah or Zarahemla.

The famous Spanish-born Bernardino de Sahagun . . . says of ancient Tulan: "This city they called Tullan, which means place of fertility and abundance. . . ."

The French savant, H. de Charencey, points out that the root Tul means "abundance, excess," and that the Maya term Tutul (as used in Tutul-xiu) is a doubled "Tul": Tul-tul. The double use of the term makes it plural—this plural form being used for emphasis in the same fashion that Hue-hue, "old-old," means "very old" or "ancient." Tutul means "very bountiful."

The term Tlapallan sometimes appears in the old accounts as Tulapan, meaning "Bountiful-land capital." Pan is Maya for center or capital, as pointed out by Charencey.

Thus, the name of the "seat of the kingdom," Huehue Tlapallan, means "Ancient Bountiful-land Capital." It was the capital or "seat of the kingdom" of the Tulteca-Olmeca [Nephite-Mulekite] settlers at the time of the council meeting of 132 B.C. Tultecas (Toltecs) means "Bountiful-people" or People of Bountiful-land."—Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, California, 1950), pp. 149-153.

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel H. Brinton, The Myths of the New World (Philadelphia, 1905), pp. 333-334.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 336-337.
[^3] Paul Herrmann, Conquest by Man (New York, 1954), p. 175.
[^4] Ibid., p. 178.
[^5] Daniel H. Brinton, cited in T. A. Willard, Kukulcan the Bearded Conqueror (Hollywood, California, 1941), p. 127.
[^6] T. A. Willard, ibid., pp. 131-133.
[^7] Bernardo de Lizana, History of Yucatan and Spiritual Conquest, cited in Willard, ibid., pp. 151-152.
[^8] Miles Poindexter, The Ayar-Incas (New York, 1930), vol. 1, p. 175.
[^9] P. De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), vol. 1, pp. 423-424.
[^10] William H. Prescott, History of the Conquest of Mexico (Modern Library Ed., New York—First Ed., 1856), p. 41.
[^11] De Mier, cited in P. De Roo, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 229.
[^12] Idem., p. 424.
[^13] Hubert Howe Bancroft, The Native Races (San Francisco, 1883), vol. 5, p. 201.
[^14] Ibid., p. 200.
[^15] De Roo, op. cit., p. 424.
[^16] Ibid., pp. 111-112, 196-197, 449, 558.
[^17] Daniel G. Brinton, American Hero-Myths (Philadelphia, 1882), p. 27; Bancroft, op. cit., vol. 5, pp. 23-24; William H. Prescott, Mexico and the Life of the Conqueror Fernando Cortes (New York, 1898), vol. 1, p. 64, vol. 2, pp. 388-389.
