Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 2

QUETZALCOATL IDENTIFIED

TREMENDOUS INFLUENCE OF THE "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD"

The Catholic padres who faithfully dedicated their lives to missionary work with the American aborigines shortly following the discovery of the New World soon found that the "White and Bearded God"—regardless of what name he may have been called—had left a tremendous influence on the lives of the people of the entire Western Hemisphere. These Christian missionaries from the Old World were surprised, and at times even astounded, to find the American Indians teaching and practicing numerous high moral tenets and at the same time indulging in numerous crude and even barbaric pagan rituals. The more refined and higher moral practices were accredited by the native Americans as having been given to their ancestors by the "Fair God." Dr. Daniel H. Brinton reached the following conclusion regarding these more noble aspirations, religious beliefs, and practices of the aborigines:

. . . whence comes the manifest and undeniable improvement occasionally witnessed—as, for example, among the Aztecs, the Peruvians, and the Mayas?

The reply is, by the influence of great men, who cultivated within themselves a pure faith, lived it in their lives, preached it successfully to their fellows, and, at their death, still survived in the memory of their nation unforgotten models of noble qualities.

Where, in America, is any record of such men? We are pointed, in answer, to Quetzalcoatl, Viracocha, Itzamna, and their congeners. . . . [^1]

Later in his book Dr. Brinton described many of the chief characteristics and teachings of the "savior-gods" of the American Indians. Numerous different Indian tribes had their own traditions regarding the "White and Bearded God," each designating him by its own particular tribal traditional name; however, all of these ancient "Fair Gods" seemed to have taught similar doctrine to their respective peoples, and they themselves had similar moral qualities and standards. Evidence indicates that they were all perhaps the same individual, coming down, however, through Indian traditions under various names. The following pertinent quotation from Dr. Brinton gives a concise description of the importance of the teachings given anciently by the "White and Bearded God" and the pronounced effect they had upon the lives of the American Indians:

But in his highest divinity, he recognized a Father and a Preserver, a benign Intelligence, who provided for him the comforts of life—man, like himself, yet a god—God of All. "Go and do good," was the parting injunction of his father to Michabo in Algonkin legend; and in their ancient and uncorrupted stories such is ever his object. "The worship of Tamu," the culture hero of the Guaranis, says the traveller D'Orbigny, "is one of reverence, not of fear." They were ideals, summing up in themselves the best traits, the most approved virtues of whole nations, and were adored in a very different spirit from other divinities.

None of them has more humane and elevated traits than Quetzalcoatl. He was represented of majestic stature and dignified demeanor. In his train came skilled artificers and men of learning. He was chaste and temperate in life, wise in council, generous of gifts, conquering rather by arts of peace than of war; delighting in music, flowers, and brilliant colors, and so averse to human sacrifices that he shut his ears with both hands when they were even mentioned.

Such was the ideal man and Supreme God of the people who even a Spanish monk of the sixteenth century felt constrained to confess were "a good people, attached to virtue, urbane and simple in social intercourse, shunning lies, skilful in arts, pious toward their gods." Is it likely, is it possible, that with such a model as this before their minds, they received no benefit from it? Was not this a lever, and a mighty one, lifting the race toward civilization and a purer faith?

Transfer the field of observation to Yucatan, and we find in Itzamna, to New Granada and in Namqueteba, to Peru and in Viracocha, or his reflex Tonapa, the lineaments of Quetzalcoatl—modified, indeed, by difference of blood and temperament, but each combining in himself all the qualities most esteemed by their several nations.

They are credited with an ethical elevation in their teachings which needs not blush before the loftiest precepts of Old World moralists. According to the earliest and most trustworthy accounts, the doctrines of Tonapa were filled with the loving kindness and the deep sense of duty which characterized the purest Christianity. "Nothing was wanting in them," says a historian, "save the name of God and that of his Son, Jesus Christ." [^2]

MANDAN INDIANS AND THE "FAIR GOD"

During the colonial period the Mandan Indians inhabited the whole area of the states of North and South Dakota, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. White farmers settled this part of the United States about the middle of the last century, "shortly after the Mandan had been wiped out by a smallpox epidemic." [^3] When white trappers and explorers first discovered the Mandans, according to Dr. Paul Herrmann, a German scholar, these Indians held the following tradition regarding the "Fair God":

Long before the first missionaries reached the Mandan, they are alleged to have known of a gentle, kindly god who was born of a virgin and died a death of expiation; they told of a miracle having close affinities with the feeding of the five thousand; they related the story of the first mother of mankind and her fall, of the ark, and of the dove with the green twig in its beak; they believed in a personal devil who sought to win over and subjugate to himself the world of men. [^4]

MONTEZUMA THE "SAVIOR-GOD" OF THE PUEBLO INDIANS

The Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico worshiped a god named Montezuma who was similar to Quetzalcoatl. He is not to be confused, however, with the Aztec emperor of Mexico, named Montezuma or Moctezuma, but is to be regarded as the Pueblo Indians' version of the white Messiah or "savior-god." It was claimed that Montezuma was born of a virgin mother of exquisite beauty and most charitable disposition. P. DeRoo, in Volume I, page 106, of the History of America before Columbus, wrote:

The many-sided culture-hero of the Pueblos, Montezuma, is the center of a group of the most poetic myths found in any ancient American mythology. The Pueblos believed in a Supreme Being, a Good Spirit so exalted and worthy of reverence that his name was considered too sacred to utter, as, with the ancient Hebrews, Jehovah was the unmentionable name. Nevertheless, Montezuma was the equal of this Great Spirit, and was often considered with the sun. Mr. Bancroft says, "Under restrictions, we may fairly regard him as the Melchizedek, the Moses, and the Messiah of the Pueblo desert-wanderers. . . ."

ITZAMNA THE "FAIR GOD" OF THE ITZAS

When the Spanish Catholic priests first arrived in Yucatan, they found that the Itza-Mayas worshiped a "Fair God" who, in many respects, was quite similar to Quetzalcoatl of the Valley of Mexico. He was known by the name of Itzamna, being a deity held in the highest veneration.

According to the Itzas' traditions, Itzamna was once a man who had lived among their ancestors and had performed numerous benevolent deeds. The Maya codices, or sacred books, spoke of him as a universal deity. Dr. Daniel H. Brinton described him as follows:

Chief of the beneficent gods was Itzamna. He was the personification of the east, the rising sun with all of its manifold mythical associations. His name means dew or moisture of the morning. He was said to have come in his boat across the eastern waters. One of his titles was Lakin-Chan, the serpent of the East. . . .

As light is synonymous with life and knowledge, he was said to have been the founder of the culture of the Itzas and Mayas. He was the first priest of their religion; invented writing and books. He named all of the localities in Yucatan and divided the land among the people.

As a physician he was famous, not only knowing the magic herbs but possessed of the power of healing by the laying on of hands whence came his name Kabul, the Skillful Hand, under which he was worshipped in Chichen Itza. For his wisdom he was spoken of as the royal or noble master of knowledge. In the Maya language, this is Yax-coc-ah-mut, which means that he was the first man of great fame. [^5]

T. A. Willard informs us that Itzamna was regarded as the light and life of the world, and so his universal symbol represented light and life. Let us quote some important extracts from Willard's discussion of Itzamna:

Father Bernardo de Lizana, one of the most devout priests of his time, stated in his history of Yucatan, written in 1633, that Itzamna was called Kabul, the Skillful Hand, with which he performed miracles, curing the sick by placing his hands on them. "He was a king, a priest, a legislator, a ruler of benevolent character, like Christ," wrote the historian. "He came from the east and founded the Itza civilization." It was said Itzamna could revive the dead. . . .

Through various writings we are shown that Itzamna was one vital influence in implanting the ancient civilization of Yucatan so firmly that it spread out for hundreds of miles. Herrera, the celebrated Mexican historian, states in his work that "The one who first discovered the letters of the Maya language and who made the computations of the years, months and katuns . . . was Kinich-Ahau who was also called Zamna or Itzamna. . . ."

In Documentos Ineditos Relaciones de Yucatan, the reader will find many confirmations of the similarity between this [Itza-Maya's] religion and that of the Christian doctrine. Itzamna was considered the Son and disciple of the one and only God, Hunab-Ku, upon whose altars were placed only fruit and flowers. Human sacrifice and other pagan practices were unknown to these people.

When the Mexican captain, Kukulcan [or Topiltzin] as the old writers called him, entered the country, he supplanted this Christ-like religion with an idolatrous one, and introduced human sacrifices and other abominations. [^6]

The Catholic padre Bernardo de Lizana, referred to by Willard, wrote a book called History of Yucatan and Spiritual Conquest which was published in A.D. 1633. In it he gives us much information obtained from the Itza Indians of Yucatan regarding the great god Itzamna. Among other things, he wrote:

In the city of Itzamal (now called Izamal) there are five very high pyramids, all ruined, on dry stone with their forces and supports which serve to raise the stones high. Today no complete edifices are seen, but the signs and vestiges are apparent. On one of them in the southern part, the ancients had a most celebrated idol which they called Itzamatul (Itzamna), which means he who receives and possesses the grace or dew or substance from the sky. And this idol had no other name because they say that he was a King and great Lord of this land, who was obeyed as the Son of God, and when they asked him what he was called or who he was, he would say nothing but these words. "I am the dew or substance of the sky and clouds."

This great King died and they raised altars to him and he was an oracle and afterwards it will be seen that they built another temple and for what. When this King, who was afterwards deified, lived, the people consulted him about the things that happened in some remote parts and he told them of present and future things. At the same time they carried their dead to him and he brought them back to life, and the sick got well, and for this he was greatly venerated and with reason, for if it were true that he was a Son of God, who only can give life to the dead and health to the sick, since it is impossible for an ordinary man, nor the demons, but only the same God, who is the lord of life and death.

The people believed this, and did not know another god, and for this they said he resurrected and cured them. [^7]

Bernardo de Lizana received from the Indians of Yucatan a tradition that Itzamna died and was buried in the City of Itzamal. His body was buried in three separate tombs. The following pertinent information regarding Itzamna, the "Fair God" of the Itza- Mayas,and his father, Hunab-Ku, the supreme God, is quoted from pages 148-149 of Willard's Kukulcan the Bearded Conqueror:

. . . When his [Itzamna's] human form was divided into three parts, his "Skillful Hand" was buried in one pyramid; his head in another, and his body in the third. The sacred spots became the oracles or shrines to which people came from the directions of the four winds (a Maya expression) to worship the great and only god of the country of whom there was no image. [This God was the Heavenly Father.] His name, as we have said before, was Hunab-Ku, the father of Itzamna.

Thus passed Itzamna, this reputed Son of God—perhaps our Christian God under another name, and the Itzas believed that his soul went to dwell with his heavenly father.

We can readily see by the foregoing Itza-Maya traditions of Itzamna that he can be identified as being the same god as Quetzalcoatl, the Messiah of the Indians of the Valley of Mexico, and also the same god as Kukulcan, the benevolent deity of the Toltec-Mayas of Yucatan following the Toltec invasion of that land during the tenth century A.D. He was merely known among the Itzas by another name; however, he was the "White and Bearded God," known universally by various names by the many different tribes of aborigines.

THE GOD WAKO

William Montgomery McGovern, an English explorer, recorded the beliefs of a primitive tribe of Indians on the upper Amazon River of South America regarding their god Wako. In his book, Jungle Paths and Inca Ruins, pages 276-280, he wrote:

Wako . . . was a combination of the ideas of tribal hero and high good god. . . . He . . . came to be regarded much as Christians regard the Supreme Deity.

Wako created the earth, the sun, the moon, and lightning and thunder, . . . [and later he] created a woman. . . .

Wako, I discovered, was reverenced above all as the giver of culture. It was Wako who taught human beings how to prepare the feather ornaments, and who told them how and when they were to dance. . . .

According to my informants, Wako suddenly appeared as a full-grown man among human beings, first of all at Ipanore, but subsequently at many other places. Wherever he appeared a cataract sprang up. Altogether Wako stayed on the earth a whole year. During this time he particularly instructed the members of each tribe how they were to prepare kashiri and kaapi. . . .

. . . He therefore gave long instructions to all the assembled men and beasts as to what they were to do and how they were to behave. He then ascended into the sky. As he disappeared, he sent down a pounder, or drumstick, which has ever since been used by the Indians in honor of their lawgiver. . . .

Since Wako disappeared from the world, he has continued to exist somewhere in the high heavens, . . .

SIMILARITIES BETWEEN INDIAN TRADITIONS AND CHRISTIANITY

The Spanish Catholic missionaries who gathered traditions of Quetzalcoatl from the Indians, as well as practically every student who has made a study of the traditions, have commented on the numerous similarities between the Indian traditions and the teachings of Christianity. Miles Poindexter compares the Spanish priests' interpretation of Jehovah with the belief held by the Indians of Peru at the time of the Spanish conquest. To quote:

The Incas' idea of God as the Creator was almost identical with that of the Spanish invaders,—except that Viracocha of the Incas, as their ancestor and the beneficent Creator and preserver of all things, was a nobler conception, in some respects than the Jehovah of the Spanish priests; and the Amautas' conception, both of the age and of the method of creation of the world, was more enlightened than that of the Europeans. Both conceptions were evidently from the same source. . . . [^8]

Dr. P. De Roo gives considerable evidence to sustain his hypothesis that Christianity was taught in ancient America and thoroughly instilled into the hearts of the American Indians. The Christian missionaries were surprised to find that the natives were familiar with numerous Christian doctrines when they were first contacted by the whites from the Old World. He states that ". . . most ancient and modern authors agree in saying that the Christian religion had been taught to the Indians in pre-Columbian days." To continue the quotation:

Bastian establishes this opinion by the numerous analogies he points out between the religious belief and practices of the Christians and those of American aborigines. Von Humboldt admits the parity to be so striking as to have given the Spanish missionaries a fine opportunity to deceive the natives by making them believe that their own was none other than the Christian religion. . . . Quite a number of ancient writers, such as Garcilasso de la Vega, Solorzano, Acosta, and others are equally explicit in asserting that several Christian tenets and practices were found among our aborigines. . . . [^9]

William H. Prescott discussed a number of Christian doctrines and rituals of the Aztec Indians at the time of the Spanish conquest, such as repentance, confession, and baptism, and then he wrote:

. . . We are reminded of Christian morals, in more than one of their prayers, in which they use regular forms. "Wilt thou blot us out, O Lord, forever? Is this punishment intended, not for our reformation, but for our destruction?" Again, "Impart to us, out of thy great mercy, thy gifts, which we are not worthy to receive through our own merits." "Keep peace with all," says another petition; "bear injuries with humility; God, who sees, will avenge you." But the most striking parallel with Scripture is in the remarkable declaration that "he, who looks too curiously on a woman, commits adultery with his eyes."

These pure and elevated maxims, it is true, are mixed up with others of a puerile, and even brutal character, arguing that confusion of the moral perceptions, which is natural in the twilight of civilization. One would not expect, however, to meet, in such a state of society, with doctrines as sublime as any inculcated by the enlightened codes of ancient philosophy. [^10]

The facts of which Prescott and practically all other writers on ancient American cultures are not aware are that the true Christian religion was taught on the Western Hemisphere approximately 2,000 years ago, that the people regulated their lives by its doctrines and ordinances, and that such "pure and elevated maxims" as those mentioned by Prescott survived from that day. Completely in harmony with these facts, Dr. De Mier, in his discussion of the writings of Father Bernardino de Sahagun, the eminent and scholarly missionary who labored among the Indians of Mexico from 1529 to 1590, concluded:

Not a single American missionary who has, until this day, left any writing has forgotten to notice the evident vestiges of Christianity, which had in former times penetrated even among the most savage tribes. [^11]

As a result of coming in contact with numerous teachings so similar to those of Christianity, some of the early Catholic missionaries maintained that some of Jesus' apostles, perhaps Bartholomew or Thomas, had brought Christianity to the Indians; however, although the majority of the early Catholic fathers, such as Garcilasso de la Vega, Solorzano, Acosta, Las Casas, and others, definitely recognized the similarity between the Christian tenets and practices and those found among the American aborigines, "they deny their introduction by Christian teachers, giving, strange to say, to the devil the honor of spreading the light of Christianity, in spite of his hatred for it." [^12]

Bancroft described Quetzalcoatl and his work as follows:

. . . Quetzalcoatl was a white, bearded man, venerable, just, and holy, who taught by precept and example the paths of virtue in all the Nahua cities, particularly in Cholula. His teachings, according to the traditions, had much in common with those of Christ in the Old World, and most of the Spanish writers firmly believed him to be identical with one of the Christian apostles, probably St. Thomas. [^13]

According to Bancroft, it was "during the Olmec period, that is, the earliest period of Nahua power, [that] the great Quetzalcoatl appeared." [^14] Authorities place the height of the Olmec period approximately at the time that Jesus Christ lived in Palestine, was crucified, and resurrected. In the light of the Book of Mormon account of the appearance of the resurrected Lord to the ancient Americans, Bancroft's dating of Quetzalcoatl's appearance constitutes a significant fact which will be discussed later. Dr. P. De Roo, a historian who during the past century made an extensive study of Indian traditions, came to the following pertinent conclusion regarding Bancroft's statement:

. . . If the vestiges of Christianity found in Central America date, as is generally admitted, from Quetzalcoatl, it is evident that this missionary was a person distinct from the apostle St. Thomas. [^15]

Before concluding this brief discussion of "similarities between Indian traditions and Christianity," let us refer once again to some of the marvelous material collected by Dr. P. De Roo and the conclusions he reached as a result of his extensive research. In speaking of the more enlightened nations of American Indians, he wrote:

. . . but above all their earnestness and their accuracy evinced by their conformity with the general traditions of enlightened mankind and the conclusions of modern science, are proof sufficient that the remote ancestors of these tribes had attained a much higher degree of civilization than that of their fallen posterity, and that they had lived at no great distance from the biblical patriarch, who had preserved incorrupt the memory of man's primordial history and the truths of primeval divine revelation.

That these Indians, and probably several more congenial tribes, were Christians, in the broad sense of the word, at the time of their [the Europeans'] landing on American soil can scarcely be doubted. They knew and worshipped the one eternal spiritual, and unbiquitous God, who "caused" or created the heavens and the earth and all they contain; they knew of the happiness of our first parents eating the "fat fruit" of Eden, and of the "bad spirit" who brought them to sin, misfortune, and death; and, as they were acquainted with the circumstances of the dire tragedy, we may readily infer that they were not altogether ignorant of its most important particular: the promise of a Redeemer, which constitutes the deepest foundation of Christianity. . . .

[And later De Roo stated that] . . . it is almost certain that the Christian religion was preached at various times in America before Columbus' discovery; and while Christianity accepts all the fundamental tenets of Jewish dogmas and morals, and highly respects the typical liturgy of the Old Testament, there is no reason to disbelieve that the apparently Judaic vestiges may be explained by the fact of early Christian missions. The alleged similarities actually bear the imprint of Christian teaching to such an extent as to make the judicious Waldeck assert that, "If the Toltecs were Jews, they must have visited the Old World to obtain the Christian dogma apparent in their cult."

The vestiges of former Christianity in America, . . . have led the enthusiastic Lord Kingsborough, Brasseur de Bourbourg, and several more to believe that the American redskins are descendants of Israel, . . . Giordan, Meyer, Crawford, Juarros, Em. de Moraez, Ethan, Smith, Beatty, besides the Mormons, are of that same opinion. . . .

. . . Von Humboldt [maintained] . . . that Christian teachers had brought to the American races the light of civilization long before the Spanish and other conquistadores spread over them the gloomy shadows of servitude and extinction, and that whatever we find of social order and material progress among our most advanced Indian nations was probably the scanty remainder of a once flourishing Christian society. . . .

The history of Quetzalcoatl's missionary career offers many analogies with that of our Lord, who went about doing good, whom at one time the Jews wanted to make king, whom they denied and persecuted, and whom they worshipped after his death. [^16]

QUETZALCOATL IDENTICAL WITH JESUS CHRIST

The identity of this "Fair God," described as a radiant, white, beautiful being, dressed in a long, white robe, has been a puzzle to the Catholic padres, to historians, archaeologists, anthropologists, and others who have studied these Indian traditions. [^17] Numerous efforts have been made to identify him with certain historical characters, such as one of Jesus' apostles—perhaps Thomas or Bartholomew—or with the Savior himself. [^18] Others have thought that Quetzalcoatl may have been a European Christian who had visited America perhaps a few hundred years before the arrival of Columbus. [^19]

Dr. De Roo made this significant statement: ". . . Quetzalcoatl is often confounded with his Divine Master, whose doctrine and precepts he published and observed." [^20]

A very vital question is, Who was Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God" of Mexico, and the "Fair God" as he appears under a variety of names in Indian traditions?

Laurette Sejourne comes so near giving the correct solution to the foregoing question that one may feel that she had almost discovered the long-sought answer for which scholars of American antiquity have so earnestly searched. In spite of their honest efforts to obtain that information, most of them do not know the true identity of Quetzalcoatl.

In 1830, which is much more than a hundred years ago, Jesus Christ gave to the inhabitants of the earth the answer to the question regarding the identity of the "White and Bearded God" of ancient America. However, a vast majority of the people of the world are still uninformed in regards to this problem, and so the purpose of this book is to present an abundance of evidence, and give sufficient explanations, so that those who desire may know who the "Fair God" of ancient America was.

Perhaps we can increase our understanding of this problem by quoting a marvelous statement from Laurette Sejourne:

His [Quetzalcoatl's] essential role as founder of Nahuatl culture was never questioned by any of the historians of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, who always state that, just as our era began with Christ, so that of the Aztecs and their predecessors began—approximately at the same time—with Quetzalcoatl. His image, the plumed serpent, had for pre-Columbian peoples the same evocative force as has the Crucifix for Christianity. Later, in Tenochtitlan, he continued to be the object of the deepest veneration. Besides being invoked as the creator of man and his work, he was patron of two institutions which were the foundations of all Aztec social and religious life: the priesthood and the college of princes. Until the fall of the Empire the great pontiffs of the metropolis continued to call themselves "successors to Quetzalcoatl."

Who, then, was this primordial figure, and why was his memory so ardently worshipped? As we know that during his reign . . . the social and religious views that dominated Meso-America for over fifteen hundred years were crystallized, we must think of him first as an organizer without equal.

But whence did this statesman derive the power which enabled him to amalgamate and transfigure the cultural elements he had inherited from archaic times into so dynamically homogeneous a system? He must evidently have been possessed of some quite exceptional interior strength, and all that is known about him corroborates this view. [^21]

It is marvelous how the Mexican archaeologist, Laurette Sejourne, definitely designates Quetzalcoatl "as the founder of Nahuatl culture" and places that event at about the time Christ began the Christian era in the Old World; and then she asked questions in the last two paragraphs which certainly hint the correct answer, getting so near to it but even then not comprehending who Quetzalcoatl was.

Certainly the only person who has ever lived in this world who could have "crystallized the social and religious views which dominated Meso-America for over fifteen hundred years," that primordial figure who lived and did his unique work in the New World about the time that Christ began the Christian era in the Old World, that great statesman who possessed such power "to amalgamate and transfigure the cultural elements into so dynamically homogeneous a system" in ancient America, that religious genius who is supreme over all other religious teachers known, even so powerful that he could influence the cultures of all the native peoples of the Western Hemisphere so profoundly that "his memory was so ardently worshipped . . . for over fifteen hundred years," could have been none other than Jesus the Christ, the Lord and God of this earth, and the Savior of the human family. Thus Jesus Christ and Quetzalcoatl are identical.

PRESIDENT TAYLOR IDENTIFIED QUETZALCOATL WITH CHRIST

The foregoing conclusion sustains the clear-cut and forceful statement given in 1882 by President John Taylor, the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church of Jesus Christ. In that statement he answered the question regarding Quetzalcoatl's identity, giving the viewpoint of the Latter-day Saints which they have held throughout the history of the Church. In the words of President Taylor:

Modern revelation has restored another most important key to unlock the mystery of the almost universal knowledge of the Redeemer and of the plan of the atonement. It is found in the statement that Jesus, after his resurrection, visited at least the inhabitants of two distinct portions of the earth, which could not have been reached through the ministry of his Jewish Apostles. These two peoples were the Nephites on this land, and the Ten Tribes in their distant northern home. The knowledge that the Mexicans, and other aboriginal races of America had, at the time of their discovery by the Spaniards, of the life of the Savior, was so exact, that the Catholics suggested two theories (both incorrect, however) to solve the mystery. One was that the devil had invented an imitation gospel to delude the Indians; the other, that the Apostle Thomas had visited America and taught its people the plan of salvation.

The story of the life of the Mexican divinity, Quetzalcoatl, closely resembles that of the Savior; so closely, indeed, that we can come to no other conclusion than that Quetzalcoatl and Christ are the same being. But the history of the former has been handed down to us through an impure Lamanitish source, which has sadly disfigured and perverted the original incidents and teachings of the Savior's life and ministry. . . .

. . . in the traditions with regard to this especial God, we have an almost complete life of the Savior, from the announcement of his birth to his virgin mother, by an angel, to his resurrection from the grave. . . . The Book of Mormon alone explains the mystery. The account there given of Christ's ministrations amongst the forefathers of these peoples makes the whole thing plain. We understand, through that record, how and by what means they obtained this great knowledge, and can also readily perceive how the unworthy descendants of those whom the Savior visited, gradually add much childish rubbish to the original facts; making their story, like almost all other mythology, an unseemly compound of heavenly truth and puerile fable. But, in view of these facts, when all things are considered, it is almost a wonder that so much of the truth was retained to the days when America became known to Europeans. [^22]

CONCLUSION

The abundance of historical evidence available thoroughly demonstrates the fact that the "Fair God" was a real historical person who visited the inhabitants of ancient America. This evidence is so completely in harmony with the beautiful story told in the Book of Mormon of Christ's appearance to the inhabitants of this land following his resurrection that, it seems to the writer, it leaves no room for doubt in the minds of those who thoroughly and without bias study this subject as to the identity of the "White Bearded God." [^23] Quetzalcoatl, under a variety of names as presented in the traditions of the Indians of North, Central, and South America, is none other than Jesus Christ, the resurrected Lord, as was maintained by President John Taylor.

The story of the life and works of the Messiah and his revelations to the inhabitants of ancient America are beautifully presented in the records of those people, records which were revealed by an angel to the Prophet Joseph Smith; on the other hand, the accounts of Quetzalcoatl come to us in a distorted and corrupted form in Indian traditions; and yet sufficient truth was retained by the inhabitants of the New World to make it possible to identify the two persons as the same individual—Jesus the Christ, the Savior of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Laurette Sejourne, Burning Water—Thought and Religion in Ancient America (London, 1956), p. 1.
[^2] Ibid., p. 21.
[^3] Ibid., p. 22. Sejourne quotes Fr. Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia General de las Cosas de Nueva Espana (Editorial Nueva Espana, S. A. Mexico, 1946), vol. 2, p. 275. (Italics were supplied by the writer.)
[^4] Sejourne, op. cit., pp. 21-22. Note: The Toltecs were also known as Nahuas, a name perhaps derived from Nephites.
[^5] Sahagun, op. cit., vol. 2, pp. 276, 268, 269, 280, 281.
[^6] Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson had the Works of Ixtlilxochitl translated from Spanish into English, and from this document wrote a book in which they compared its contents with the contents of The Book of Mormon. The book is entitled Ancient America and the Book of Mormon. It was published in 1950.
[^7] Hubert Howe Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America (San Francisco, 1876), vol. 5, p. 147.
[^8] Idem.
[^9] George C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Baltimore, Maryland, 1944), p. 85.
[^10] Alfredo Chavero, preface to Obras Historias de Don Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl (1891 edition), vol. 1, p. 6.
[^11] Works of Ixtlilxochitl, cited in Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, Calif., 1950), pp. 18, 22; Book of Mormon, "Preface"; Ether 1:1-4.
[^12] Ixtlilxochitl cited in Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 24-25. (See also Ether 1:33-37; 6:12-16, 30; 1:40-43; 2:1-7, for the Book of Mormon account of these events.)
[^13] Ixtlilxochitl cited in ibid., p. 49. (See also Ether 13:13-26; 14:1-2, 21-25; 15:2, 13-33 for the Book of Mormon account.)
[^14] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 57. (See also Jacob 1:14; Alma 3:11.)
[^15] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 89. (See also 1 Nephi 5:10-12; Alma 10:22; 3 Nephi 22:9-10.)
[^16] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 147; Words of Mormon 16-18; Mosiah 1:1, 10, 18; 2:1-2, 5, 8; 25:1-19.
[^17] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., pp. 257, 291; 1 Nephi 18:25; 2 Nephi 5:14-17; Jarom 1:8; Helaman 6:9-11; 3 Nephi 6:4, 8, 11; Mosiah 11:8-11.
[^18] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 315; Mosiah 10:5; Alma 1:29; 4:6; 46:11-12; Helaman 6:13; 1 Nephi 4:19; 10:8; 2 Nephi 4:33.
[^19] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 323; 3 Nephi 12:33-37.
[^20] Ixtlilxochitl, cited in ibid., p. 240; 2 Nephi 5:20-21; Jacob 3:5, 8; 3 Nephi 2:14-16; 1 Nephi 13:15.
[^21] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 23.
[^22] 4 Nephi 2-17.
[^23] Alfonso Caso, cited in Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1947), p. 42.
