Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 3

RELIGION OF THE TOLTECS AND QUETZALCOATL

TOLTEC CULTURE INHERITED BY AZTECS

When Hernan Cortes and his Spanish conquistadores in February 1519 reached the fabulous Aztec city of Tenochtitlan where Mexico City now stands, they found a people who—according to Laurette Sejourne—had placed their roots in ". . . a civilization which by that time had existed in Mexico for over fifteen hundred years"; [^1] i.e., from about the time of the rise of Christianity in the Old World. Although the Aztecs were late comers to the Valley of Mexico—founding Tenochtitlan in 1325 A.D., they readily adopted much of the culture and religion of the people—known as Toltecs or Nahuas—whom they found there. Thereupon they carried forward in a corrupted form this much older and much higher civilization with its religious beliefs and practices. In the words of Laurette Sejourne:

In tracing Aztec origins, the chroniclers speak of the ancient Nahuas and attribute to them the foundation, at about the beginning of the Christian era, of the religious system that nourished Pre-Columbian Mexico up to the conquest, that is, for fifteen hundred years. . . . Archaeological excavations have fully confirmed the accuracy of these texts, having unearthed in the ruins of the Nahuatl capital evidence of the same gods, the same rituals, the same symbolic language as in the last—ill-fated Tenochtitlan. [^2]

TOLTECS, NAHUAS, OR NEPHITES

For an introduction to the ancient Toltec, Nahuatl, or Nephite culture perhaps we could do no better than to quote again from Laurette Sejourne's brilliant work on the Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico.

The veneration shown by the proud Aztecs toward these ancestral Nahuas is certainly surprising. We might have supposed that, once lords of the universe, as it seemed to them, they would have taken full possession of the cultural heritage they had adopted, attributing it perhaps to some national hero. Nothing of the kind happened, because they recognized that their entire system of knowledge came from those who were "the first inhabitants of this land, and the first that came to these parts called the land of Mexico . . . those who first sowed the human seed in this country." [^3]

Here we come face to face with this ancient people, whom all documents without exception present as creators of the most important of the ancient cultures. It is said that because of their supreme artistic talents they were called Toltecs, a word which in Nahuatl means master craftsmen. [^4]

According to the Book of Mormon, the only authoritative history of the ancient Americans down to A.D. 421, the first people to arrive on the Western Hemisphere following the flood were called Jaredites. They came from the Tower of Babel under the direction of a prophet named Mahonri Moriancumer. This people established a mighty civilization in America, which lasted for more than 2,000 years. They finally destroyed themselves in a terrible war between the dates of B.C. 600 and the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To replace the Jaredites and to raise up a holy people unto himself, the Lord directed a prophet named Lehi to bring another colony of chosen people to the New World. These immigrants left Jerusalem about B.C. 600. Throughout their history they were known as Nephites in honor of Lehi's very righteous son, Nephi, one of the greatest prophets who has ever lived. This name, Nephites, in the form Nahuas, was carried on by the Indians to the time of the coming of the Spaniards. Native historians such as Ixtlilxochitl also called the ancient American Toltecs, because of their numerous skills and industry. During the fourth century A.D., this intelligent, and—for many years—godly people, had dropped into extreme wickedness and apostasy from the true religion given them by Jesus Christ. As a result of their wickedness and in fulfilment of predictions made by the Master and his holy prophets, by A.D. 400 the Nephites as a nation were exterminated by the Lamanites. The latter group had been cursed by the Lord with a dark skin; this accounts for the color of the skin of the American Indians who are their descendants.

Fourteen years after the Nephites left Jerusalem, the Lord brought to the New World another group of people which are known in the Book of Mormon as Mulekites. About B.C. 200 the Mulekites merged with the Nephites and thereby lost their identity as a separate people.

It was the Nephite-Mulekite people, spoken of by the Catholic Padre Bernardino de Sahagun and Laurette Sejourne, who, about the beginning of the Christian era, developed "the religious system that nourished Pre-Columbian Mexico up to the conquest, that is, for fifteen hundred years." This culture, established by Christ, was handed down in a polluted, paganized, and badly adulterated form even to the coming of the Spaniards. The Nephites (Toltecs or Nahuas) were "the creators of the most important of the ancient cultures." It was their religion and their culture which held the controlling influence over the various Indian groups—both high and low cultures—of North, Central, and South America for hundreds of years. So strong and lasting was this influence that even the bloodthirsty Aztecs submitted to that culture as they inherited it and acknowledged the ancient Toltecs as its source. The Book of Mormon should be conscientiously, thoroughly, and honestly studied by every person who is honestly attempting to learn all he can regarding the culture and history of the American Indians and their origin, since it is the only historical account of the ancient Americans written by eyewitnesses. It is pure source historical material.

CULTURE OF THE TOLTECS AS KNOWN BY SAHAGUN

The very reliable Catholic padre and famous missionary among the Indians, Bernardino de Sahagun (1499-1590), described the Toltec culture as he received information from the Indians of the Valley of Mexico during the first century of the Spanish conquest. Thus his reports would be firsthand and very reliable. To quote from this great Catholic historian:

. . . Whatever they [the Toltecs] turned their hands to was delicate and elegant, all was very good, remarkable and gracious, such as the houses they made very beautiful, highly decorated within, of a certain kind of precious stone very green with lime, and those so adorned had a lime highly polished which was a sight to be seen, and the stones also, fashioned and stuck together, that seemed like a kind of mosaic; with justice were they later called exquisite and noteworthy, because they possessed such beauty of workmanship and labour. . . .

. . . They were the inventors of the art of featherwork . . . and all that was done in ancient times was made with wonderful invention and great skill.

. . . the Toltecs had much experience and knowledge in the qualities and virtues of herbs, and they left docketed and named those now used for treating because they were also physicians and the best in the art . . . they were the first inventors of medicine.

. . . What they achieved in knowledge of precious stones was so great that, though these were buried in a larger one and below ground, by their natural genius and philosophy they would discover where to find them.

. . . So remarkable were these Toltecs that they knew all mechanical skills, and in all of these were unique and exquisite craftsmen, for they were painters, stone workers, carpenters, bricklayers, masons, workers in feather and ceramics, spinners and weavers. . . .

. . . They were so skilled in astronomy . . . that they were the first to take count of and order the days of the year. . . .

They also invented the art of interpreting dreams, and they were so informed and so wise that they knew the stars in the heavens and had given them names and knew their influences and qualities. So also they knew the movements of the heavens by the stars.

. . . These Toltecs were good men and drawn to virtue . . . they were tall, larger in body than those who live now. . . . They also sang well, and while they sang or danced they used drums and timbrels of wood . . . they played, composed and arranged curious songs out of their heads; they were very devout, and great orators. . . . [^5]

IXTLILXOCHITL'S APPRAISAL OF THE TOLTECS

Next to the Book of Mormon, the Works of Ixtlilxochitl [^6] give the most reliable and complete account of the history and culture of the early Toltecs (Nephites) and the Lamanites, the ancestors of the American Indians. Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl wrote the history of the inhabitants of ancient America—the Jaredites who came from the Tower of Babel, the Nephites, Lamanites, and Mulekites, who came from Jerusalem—from written documents received from his ancestors and from oral traditions received from Indians who knew the traditions of their people. His first work was written about A.D. 1600 and his second about 1608.

The reliable historian, Hubert Howe Bancroft, states that "Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl was a grandson of the last king of Texcoco, from whom he inherited all that were saved of the records in the public archives. His works are more extensive than those of any other native writer. . . ." [^7] Bancroft also indicates that Ixtlilxochitl ". . . wrote honestly, compiling from authentic documents in his possession." [^8] In 1944 Dr. George C. Vaillant, a distinguished archaeologist and authority on early cultures of Mexico, stated that Ixtlilxochitl ". . . was a descendant of the old Texcocan lineage, the ruling house, and had access to many of the ancient records of his people and left a full history." [^9]

Ixtlilxochitl, an Indian native of Mexico, where he spent his entire life, ". . . was born about 1568; he was a student at the College of Santa Cruz in Tlateloco [Mexico]; . . . he was an interpreter in the court of justice of the Indians; and he died in 1648 at the age of eighty." [^10] The quotations given from this native historian may be regarded as reliable and very valuable.

Ixtlilxochitl refers to the ancient inhabitants of America as "Toltecs." The first group, who came from the Tower of Babel and who would correspond with the Jaredites of the Book of Mormon, he calls early Toltecs, Ancient Ones, or Giants; and the peoples who would be comparable to the Nephites and Mulekites, he merely calls Toltecs. They are also referred to in many early documents as Nahuas.

A number of quotations will be given from Ixtlilxochitl which will describe the appearance, beliefs, modes of living, culture, religious beliefs, and customs of these ancient Americans whom he calls Ancient Ones; Giants, and Toltecs. The footnotes not only tell where Ixtlilxochitl's quotations may be found, but they will also guide the readers into very closely related materials contained in the Book of Mormon—the most authoritative history in existence dealing with the great races which inhabited ancient America from the time of the building of the Tower of Babel to A.D. 421.

According to Ixtlilxochitl, the early Toltecs or Ancient Ones knew "many things from the creation of the world to its destruction. . . . And they say that the world . . . was destroyed by the deluge; . . . and how men began to multiply from a few that escaped this destruction within a Toptlipetlacalli, which almost means closed ark." [^11]

And [the Toltec history tells] how afterwards men, multiplying, made a very tall and strong Zacualli, which means the very high tower, in order to shelter themselves in it when the second world should be destroyed.

When things were at their best, their languages were changed and, not understanding each other, they went to different parts of the world; and the Toltecs, who were as many as seven companions and their wives, who understood their language among themselves, came to these parts, having first crossed large lands and seas, living in caves and undergoing great hardships, until they came to this land which they found good and fertile for their habitation. . . .

. . . according as it appears in their histories, that the first king they had was called Chichimecatl, who was the one who brought them to this New World where they settled, who, as can be inferred, came from the great Tartary, and they were of those of the division of Babylon, as it is declared more at length in the history that is written. [^12]

After living in America for many centuries, these early Toltecs, sometimes referred to as Ancient Ones or Giants, ". . . had many wars and dissensions . . . especially in all the land that is now called New Spain. They were destroyed and exterminated by great calamities and punishments from heaven, for some grave sins that they had committed." [^13]

Then Ixtlilxochitl discussed the second group of settlers, known in the Book of Mormon as Nephites, whom he definitely designates as Toltecs. To quote:

The Toltecs were the second settlers of this land after the decline of the giants. . . .

Tolteca means artisan and wise man, because the people of this nation were great artisans, as is seen . . . in the ruins of their buildings, in the towns of Teotihuacan, Tula and Cholula. [^14]

. . . and they [the Toltecs] had knowledge of the creation of the world, and how it was destroyed by the deluge, and many other things they had in picture and in history. . . . [^15]

[In B.C. 132] . . . all the land of this New World being in peace, all the Tolteca Wisemen, astrologers, as well as men of other arts, got together in Huehuetlapallan, seat of their kingdom, where they discussed many things, happenings and calamities that they had, and movements of the heavens since the creation of the world, as well as many other things . . . Among other things, they added the leap year in order to make the solar year agree with the equinox, and many other curiosities, as will be seen in their tables and rules for their years, months, weeks, and days, signs and planets, according as they understood them, and many other curiosities. [^16]

The Toltecs were great architects and carpenters and were skilled in the mechanical arts, like silversmiths. They took out [mined] gold and silver and smelted it, and carved precious stones; they did the best thing of what there is in the world. . . .

[The Toltecs were] poets, philosophers, and orators, so that they used all the arts, the good as well as the bad. . . . [^17]

And they were painters, the best in the land (world); and the women great spinners and weavers, weaving very gallant mantles of a thousand colors and figures—those which they (the men) wanted, and as fine as those of Castile; and they wove the cloth in many different ways, some that looked like velvet, and others like damask and satin; others like thin linen and others like thick linen, just as they (the men) wanted and needed. . . . [^18]

These said Toltecs were good men and friends of virtue. They did not tell lies, and their way of speaking and greeting each other was "Sir" and "Sir, brother . . ." and "Sir, older brother" and "Sir, younger brother." Their speech, instead of swearing, was "It is true," "thus it is," "it is ascertained," and "yes" for yea, and "no" for no. . . . [^19]

These [Toltec] kings were high of stature, and white, and bearded like the Spaniards, . . . [^20]

The foregoing quotations constitute only a small part of the numerous things that the Indian prince, Ixtlilxochitl, said about the Toltecs; however, the author feels that this is sufficient to permit the reader to gain a partial understanding of the high Nephite (Toltec) civilization that existed in ancient America during the early Christian centuries and the Jaredite civilization which existed earlier. For a more thorough understanding of that wonderful period in American history, one needs to turn to the Book of Mormon and read the marvelous story contained therein.

The most important section of the Works of Ixtlilxochitl deals with the life and works of Quetzalcoatl. This part of his writings will be reserved for use at a later place in the book.

NEPHITE CIVILIZATION SUPERB

The descriptions of the Toltec (Nephite) culture given by Sahagun and Ixtlilxochitl enumerate some of the chief characteristics of the more highly developed Meso-American civilizations as far as the information had come down to them. But even these descriptions only partially tell of the sublimity, grandeur, and godliness of the remarkable Nephite (Toltec) culture and people that existed in ancient America during the early Christian centuries. The Mexican archaeologist Laurette Sejourne agrees with the foregoing statement, although it is very likely that she has never read the Book of Mormon which describes that marvelous ancient civilization. Truly the Nephites during that period established a "golden age" in world's history. Let us quote Laurette Sejourne:

Yet, extensive as it may seem, the list does not tell of all the skills used in the creation of the great Tollan of legendary splendour. Though what Sahagun tells us is confirmed by archaeological findings, the illustrious historian, who was not privileged to look upon the ruins, is very far from giving us an idea of the prodigious creative power of their builders, which we shall see later for ourselves. [^21]

Laurette Sejourne made the foregoing statement as a result of conclusions drawn from archaeological discoveries. Perhaps even she would be astounded if she had a full comprehension of the high culture attained by the ancient Nephites (Toltecs), especially during the first and second centuries following the resurrection of Christ and his appearance to the inhabitants of ancient America. Jesus the Christ, the Lord and God of the entire world, ushered in a period of peace and righteousness under which the people developed a culture—especially in religious activities—which perhaps no people has ever equaled in the history of the world, with the possible exception of the people who lived such godly lives during the days of Enoch that the City of Enoch and its inhabitants were taken to heaven. For nearly 200 years the Nephites maintained their superb culture, which was centered around religion, with Jesus Christ revealing to them divine truths and serving as their Lord and God. Finally wickedness crept in, and the Nephite culture declined, following the same road that all cultures eventually follow when the people refuse to accept Jesus as their Savior and Redeemer and openly defy his holy laws and commandments.

Let us have a brief glance at the Nephite culture as it is described in the Book of Mormon when it was at its height:

And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another.

And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift.

And there were great and marvelous works wrought by the disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of miracles did they work among the children of men; and in nothing did they work miracles save it were in the name of Jesus. . . .

And the Lord did prosper them exceedingly in the land; yea, insomuch that they did build cities again where there had been cities burned. . . .

And now, behold, it came to pass that the people of Nephi did wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast, and became an exceedingly fair and delightsome people. And they were married, and given in marriage, and were blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord had made unto them.

. . . they did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord. . . .

And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of God. [^22]

MOTHER CULTURE—NEPHITE

We could conclude, therefore, with many of the outstanding archaeologists of the world—especially Mexican archaeologists—that the descriptions of the culture of the Toltecs given by Sahagun and Ixtlilxochitl deal primarily with the chief characteristics of the more highly developed Meso-American Indian civilizations that arose following the close of Book of Mormon history. These explanations, however, as has been pointed out, only partially describe the exceedingly high culture and superb religious pattern that existed among the Nephites following the resurrection of the Savior until approximately A.D. 200, and then disintegration began its ugly work.

It is a fact of marked significance of which every student of this subject should take cognizance, that many outstanding archaeologists and anthropologists, especially those of Mexico, maintain that the unusually great Toltec culture—meaning that which followed A.D. 400—as well as all the other marvelous Indian cultures of Meso-America and the Andean region, were the outgrowth of an even greater civilization, by some writers termed the "Mother Culture." After spending many years of research, Dr. Alfonso Caso, one of Mexico's most prominent archaeologists, made the claim that the accumulated evidence indicates that the high Indian cultures found their origins in a much greater civilization—" . . . a most ancient culture, which is found at the bottom of the specialized cultures of central Mexico and northern Central America. . . ." [^23] As time passes more and more of the archaeologists are discovering the foregoing to be a fact. These discoveries and conclusions marvelously sustain the claims made by the Book of Mormon, a record written anciently by holy prophets and given to an American Prophet, Joseph Smith, by an angel sent directly from the presence of God.

There are many archaeologists, however, who still hold to the old erroneous theory that the high American Indian cultures gradually developed from primitive savagery. On this subject, Thor Heyerdahl points out that ". . . until very recent decades it has been the opinion of most followers of the contemporary school of anthropology that man, in all his local varieties, came to America as a savage barbarian, . . . Many have even inclined to the belief that, from an archaic culture based on primitive hunting and collecting, high-culture with all its diversified aspects developed out of savage mentality and activities, each tribe and nation beginning from the bottom, independent of other American cultures, and developing analogous features merely through the parallel inclinations of human nature." [^24] He continues by pointing out that this theory is rapidly losing supporters, since it fails ". . . to find verification or support in archaeological material and excavations." [^25]

As early as 1900, after discussing many of the more civilized tribes of the American Indians, Dr. P. De Roo stated:

. . . the general traditions of enlightened mankind and the conclusions of modern science, are proof sufficient that the remote ancestors of these tribes had attained a much higher degree of civilization than that of their fallen posterity, and that they had lived at no great distance from the biblical patriarchs, who had preserved incorrupt the memory of man's primordial history and the truths of primeval divine revelation. . . . [^26]

Dr. De Roo made the foregoing statement without knowing that Jehovah had given numerous revelations to both the Jaredites and the Nephites, revealing to the ancient Americans the entire gospel plan of salvation. In fact, it was under the direction of the Lord and divine revelation that the Jaredites came from the Tower of Babel to colonize the New World. Numerous very important revelations were received by the Jaredites' prophet-leader, Mahonri Moriancumer; for example, he stood in the presence of the Lord, even Jesus Christ, and saw him with his own eyes as one man sees another. The description of this glorious vision is found in the Book of Mormon:

. . . behold, the Lord showed himself unto him, and said: Because thou knowest these things ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you.

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters. . . .

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. [^27]

The Book of Mormon tells many instances wherein the ancient American prophets were as close to the Lord as were the biblical patriarchs and received as many—or more—divine manifestations and revelations as did the holy men of God on the Eastern Hemisphere. Certainly it could be said of them that they also ". . . preserved incorrupt the memory of man's primordial history and the truths of primeval divine revelation."

The following quotation from S. Linne, whose statement was made in 1939, is in perfect agreement with the opinions of many archaeologists today, especially those of Mexico:

In the Valley of Mexico, the archaeologists have penetrated as far down as to the times of the primitive agriculturists, the so-called archaic culture. Here, already, we are confronted with the peculiar phenomenon characteristic of America, that the cultures appear suddenly, quite readily formed and without strong relations between each other. Subsequently they develop further, within the limits of a narrow margin, then disappear to be succeeded by others. A new stock with other artistic intentions but in many ways with corresponding modes of living, weapons, and tools, have taken possession of the land. [^28]

Naturally the correct answer is that America was colonized at various times with highly civilized peoples from other parts of the world. It is not known exactly how many migrations with high cultures migrated to the New World in ancient times; however, the Book of Mormon gives a detailed history of three definite and distinct migrations—the Jaredites who came from the Tower of Babel, the Nephites who came from Jerusalem A.D. 600, and the Mulekites who also came from Jerusalem A.D. 586. Each group of people brought the culture of its country to the Western Hemisphere; and so the beginnings of human life in the New World were represented by cultures fully developed and not by savage, primitive, nomadic hunters.

Dr. A. L. Kroeber, one of the world's outstanding anthropologists and for many years head of the department of anthropology at the University of California, points out that the cultures of Meso- America and Peru were basically very similar; and then he positively declared that "in each case the culture meets us full blown." [^29] Dr. Kroeber then called attention to the Indians' traditions of a white and bearded race of culture institutors and concluded that those people may have been responsible for the fact that the "other Culture" appeared originally in "full bloom" in the various countries of the New World preceding the rise of the numerous inferior Indian cultures.

Thor Heyerdahl of Kon-Tiki fame agrees with Dr. Kroeber in giving credit to a white race for establishing the high American culture anciently which served as the "Mother Culture" of all later Indian achievements. To quote Thor Heyerdahl:

The specified traditions of light-skinned and bearded founders of culture were most prominent and complete among the Aztec, Maya, Chiocha, and Inca nations, that is, among the natives with the highest cultural standing in the New World, and we have also ample evidence to verify that these historic nations really did owe their cultural standing to other people with even more impressive high-cultures who had been active in just these same localities in earlier times. These original culture-bearers are known to us only through their archaeological remains, chiefly consisting of deserted ecclesiastical sites. It is noteworthy that all the known culture peoples concerned disclaim the honour of having constructed these monuments, or of having originated their own cultural standards, and give all the credit to foreign intruders remembered as having lighter skins than themselves, long beards, marked ecclesiastic interests and benevolent characters. [^30]

If Thor Heyerdahl had just completed reading the Book of Mormon, he could not have given a more accurate statement of the ancient Nephites—with their high culture, holy prophets who received revelations from God and some occasional personal visitations from the Master, with their true gospel of Jesus Christ, and strong ecclesiastical interests.

Miguel Covarrubias, a Mexican writer and archaeologist, pin-points the ancient "Mother Culture" as to the time of its sudden appearance more definitely than do most authors. To quote Covarrubias:

. . . The tantalizing presence of a great and remote past in what is now uninhabited, impenetrable jungle is all the more puzzling because most archaeologists now agree that many of these artistic masterpieces date back to the beginning of the Christian era. Appearing suddenly out of nowhere in a state of full development, they constitute a culture that seems to have been the root, the mother culture, from which the later and better-known (Maya, Totonac, Zapotec, etc.) cultures sprang. [^31]

Let us recall the fact that another outstanding Mexican archaeologist, Laurette Sejourne, in her recent book—Burning Water—Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico—is as definite as Covarrubias in placing a time for the establishment of the "Mother Culture" in ancient America. She states that ". . . the chroniclers speak of the ancient Nahuas [Nephites] and attribute to them the foundation, at about the beginning of the Christian era, of the religious system that nourished Pre-Columbian Mexico up to the conquest, that is, for fifteen hundred years. [^32]

Helen Augur, in her book Zapotec, discusses somewhat in detail this ancient "Mother Culture" of Meso-America. After having introduced the subject, she stated: "Meanwhile, simply for convenience, we shall call the unknown mother culture of middle America 'Complex X.' This term covers a whole set of important elements such as ceremonial cities with their stepped pyramids, a mastery of astronomy, and a written language; . . ." [^33] This author made a number of other pertinent statements with which we should become acquainted. To quote:

Middle America, in the centuries before the Christian era, is a complex of small puzzles and great mysteries. The men of early Monte Alban already had wide horizons. They were in touch with other cities in Oaxaca, with the pre-Maya in Guatemala, with nations living along the Gulf of Mexico, and with the peoples of the central plateau. We see great ceremonial cities rise over an expanding area, cities wondrous in their stepped pyramids, their carved jade and stelaes, their colossal stone heads, and even more amazing in the mental powers they reveal. There are three remarkable things about these cities: they all belong to the same unique, highly evolved culture; this culture is quite unlike that of other regions in the Americas; and it appears fully formed, without prelude. No transitional epics lie under the stones of Uaxactun or Monte Alban or La Venta; these magic cities might as well have dropped from the sky. As Dr. Caso remarked when we were discussing this enigma, "The Middle American culture is incredible, inexplicable—but there it is. We must accept it without being able, at the moment, to understand it." [^34]

It is of marked significance that Helen Augur places the date for the high culture having been established at Monte Alban at approximately B.C. 600. In giving the date 600 B.C., or earlier, she is in complete agreement with Dr. Herbert J. Spinden, one of America's greatest Maya archaeologists and scholars. Dr. Spinden, in discussing the Maya calendar, stated:

Now Mayan history does not reach back to the zero date which must be regarded as a theoretical beginning of Mundane Era. The earliest object with contemporary date is Tuxtla Statuette with May 16, 98 B.C. It appears, however, that the real historic beginning of the day count was 7.0.0.0.0., 10 Ahua 18 Zac, August 6, 613 B.C. The Calendar of months was probably inaugurated in 580 B.C. when 0 Pop New Year's day coincided with the winter solstice. [^35]

Helen Augur continues by stating:

Six centuries before Christ, before the Persian Wars and the Golden Age of Athens, centuries before the first dated Maya stone, the Indians of Oaxaca had already worked out the calendar which was eventually adopted all over Middle America. They built the earliest observatory so far found in the New World, and the only one of its kind. They were superb engineers, stone carvers, and potters, and they had a written language. [^36]

She then pointed out that American students of archaeology and anthropology are still in doubt as to what people were responsible for this high "Mother Culture" which preceded all later marvelous Indian cultures. These quotations from Helen Augur and Dr. Spinden are of much interest and importance to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, because they know who established this remarkable "Mother Culture." The date 600 B.C. corresponds almost exactly with the date that Lehi, accompanied by his family, with Ishmael and his family, left Jerusalem to begin their historic journey toward America, the "Promised Land." [^37] The date of 613 B.C., given by Dr. Spinden as the date of the beginning of the Mayan calendar, could represent the time of departing of the progenitors of the Mayas to ancient America from the Holy Land. Nephi could have brought the ideal of the calendar with him and instituted a calendar from that date. Since Dr. Spinden maintains that the calendar of months was probably inaugurated in 580 B.C., that date could be the exact time that Nephi inaugurated the calendar for his people after the arrival of Lehi's colony on the Western Hemisphere. Since scholars have observed the close similarities between the Egyptian calendar and that of the Mayas and other peoples of Meso-America, that fact lends even more credence to the belief that Nephi was responsible for the American calendars. It is a well-known fact by those who are acquainted with the Book of Mormon that the Nephites brought much Egyptian culture with them to America, even writing some of their records in the Egyptian language. [^38] Thus Nephi or one of his descendants could have used the Egyptian calendar as the basis for creating a calendar for the people in the New World by making such alterations as eighteen months of twenty days each and five extra days instead of twelve months of approximately thirty days each as used in the Gregorian calendar. It is also important to note that both the Gregorian calendar, the one we have inherited, and the one used by the peoples of Meso-America made adjustments for the extra fraction of a day each year.

CONCLUSIONS

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and others interested in authoritative history of ancient America know through studying the Book of Mormon that following the flood to A.D. 421, three successive native cultures—Jaredite, Nephite, and Mulekite—flourished in the New World. The culture bearers of these three groups migrated from Asia—the first immigrated from the Tower of Babel and the other two from Jerusalem—each group bringing to America highly developed cultures as inheritances from their native lands; and so it is not surprising to learn that such outstanding scholars as Dr. A. L. Kroeber, Dr. Alfonso Caso, and others, have found a "Mother Culture" underlying all Indian cultures, and have met in their archaeological and anthropological researches in each case the culture "full blown." If the Book of Mormon is as it claims to be, archaeologists should find a "high culture"—a "Mother Culture"—antedating any of the known Indian civilizations—and such is the case.

Furthermore, anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians, having marveled at the high status and superior qualities of the ancient "Mother Culture," are puzzled as to who its founder may have been. As we have already learned, some of the students of America's ancient civilizations maintain that a real historical character, known as Quetzalcoatl, was the founder of the "Mother Culture."

The Book of Mormon informs us that the "Fair God" was none other than Jesus Christ of New Testament fame and the God known to the Old Testament peoples as Jehovah. He it was who directed the migration of the Jaredites to America and who directed emigration of the Nephites and Mulekites from Jerusalem to the Western Hemisphere. It was he who revealed to all of those ancient peoples through personal visitations and through holy prophets his gospel or religion around which cultures developed. Furthermore, as a climax to the marvelous events of ancient times and as has already been pointed out, this same God following his crucifixion and resurrection in the Holy City, visited the inhabitants of ancient America and ushered in a reign of peace, righteousness, prosperity, and great cultural achievements.

Thus Jesus Christ gave to the ancient Americans—the Nephites-Mulekites (Toltecs or Nahuas)—their religion and culture; and then following the close of the Book of Mormon and the downfall of the Nephite nation, the Only Begotten's name was changed by the Lamanites and the descendants of the Nephites from Jesus Christ to Quetzalcoatl. It was by this name that the ancient "Culture Founder" was known to the Aztecs at the time of the Spanish conquest.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Psalms 100:2-5; 95:1, 3, 6-7.
[^2] Isaiah 40:10-11; Ezekiel 34:11-13, 1:30.
[^3] John 10:4.
[^4] Ibid., 10:11-13.
[^5] Ibid., 10:24-28; 1 Peter 2:25; 5:4; Hebrews 13:20-21.
[^6] Ibid., 10:14-16. (Italics supplied by the writer.)
[^7] Ibid., 10:6, 19-23.
[^8] Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1956), pp. 46-54, 70-80, 182-282.
[^9] William Foxwell Albright, Archaeology and the Religion of Israel (1941), pp. 4-5, 33-35, 176.
[^10] The Book of Mormon, "Preface"; 1 Nephi 1:17; 6:1-6; 9:2-5; 13:23-42; 2 Nephi 5:30-32; Jacob 1:1-6; Moroni 10:1-6.
[^11] 1 Nephi 11:33.
[^12] 2 Nephi 26:1, 9.
[^13] 1 Nephi 12:6-8; 11:7.
[^14] 3 Nephi 8:20-21, 23.
[^15] Ibid., 9:1, 15-22.
[^16] Ibid., 11:2-3.
[^17] Ibid., 11:7-14.
[^18] Ibid., 11:16-17.
[^19] Ibid., 27:4-8. (Italics supplied by the writer.)
[^20] Ibid., 27:13-14, 15-22.
[^21] Documentary History of the Church (Salt Lake City, 1908), vol. 4, p. 538.
[^22] 3 Nephi 15:16-17, 19, 21-22, 24.
[^23] 1 Nephi 13:41; 22:24-26; Alma 5:14-41; Moroni 5:9-24; Helaman 15:13; 3 Nephi 20:22; 21:23-24; Ether 13:3-10.
[^24] Doctrine and Covenants 107:3.
[^25] 3 Nephi 26:3-6.
[^26] Alma 46:13-16.
[^27] 2 Nephi 25:20; Mosiah 3:17; Moses 6:52.
[^28] 28. S. Linne, cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 285.
[^29] 29. A. L. Kroeber, Cultural Relations between North and South America, Proc. 23rd Int. Congr. Americanists, New York (New York, 1930).
[^30] 30. Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 285.
[^31] 31. Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South—the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (Mexico, 1946), p. 80.
[^32] 32. Sejourne, op. cit., p. 21.
[^33] 33. Helen Augur, Zapotec (Garden City, N. Y., 1954), p. 146.
[^34] 34. Ibid., pp. 143-144.
[^35] 35. Herbert J. Spinden, Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America, Handbook Series No. 2, American Museum of Natural History (New York, 1922), p. 136.
[^36] 36. Augur, op. cit., p. 120.
[^37] 37. 1 Nephi 17:13.
[^38] 38. Mosiah 1:4; 9:32.
