Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 4

CHRIST THE GOOD SHEPHERD

GOOD SHEPHERD OF ANCIENT ISRAEL

The Lord and God of the Old Testament, usually referred to by the ancient Hebrews as Jehovah and in the Meridian of Time as Jesus Christ, was designated by many of the ancient Hebrew poets and prophets as the "Good Shepherd." One of the most beautiful and perhaps the most widely known and deeply loved of the Psalms is number twenty-three. King David begins this thrilling hymn of worship with the following appealing sentence: "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want." Similar expressions of stirring praise and adoration to the "Good Shepherd" are found in some of the other Psalms. [^1]

The prophets Isaiah, Zachariah, and Ezekiel symbolized the Lord as the "Great and Good Shepherd" and those who loved him and received his message as the sheep of his fold. [^2]

GOOD SHEPHERD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

When Christ was upon the earth teaching the gospel in the Holy Land, he called himself the Good Shepherd, just as the ancient prophets of Israel had referred to him in the Old Testament times. Perhaps the outstanding discourse given by the Master on this subject was recorded by John. Jesus pointed out clearly that the shepherd and the sheep will enter into the door, but thieves and robbers attempt to climb into the sheepfold by some other method. He described the tender care given the sheep by the shepherd who owned the flock, saying: ". . . he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice"; [^3] and a little later in his discourse, Jesus said:

I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.

The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep. [^4]

After Jesus had said these things and made other important remarks regarding his position as shepherd and those who accepted him and his teaching as his sheep, many of the people who were listening to his discourse became angry. They were acquainted with the teachings of the Old Testament prophets who had predicted that Christ, their Messiah, would be the Good Shepherd, and so they said: "If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly."

Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me.

But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me:

And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. [^5]

"OTHER SHEEP I HAVE"

A few months before Jesus' death, he announced to the people in Jerusalem that he anticipated visiting an isolated branch of Israel. To quote:

I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep.

And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. [^6]

Those of the Palestinian fold did not understand the parable or the comments made by Christ and so he did not explain in more detail. In the same chapter, John wrote:

This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. . . . And it was at Jerusalem. . . . [^7]

If Jesus were literally resurrected from the tomb in the Holy City, as Christianity definitely proclaims, there would appear to be nothing inherently illogical, unsound, or incredible in the Book of Mormon's claim that he appeared thereafter to the inhabitants of the New World. In fact, the statement quoted from the Gospel of John calls for a personal visit by the Christ to a branch of Israel in a place other than Palestine. The Nephite record verifies that statement; otherwise it remains unexplained.

Now if the New World were colonized by a branch of the house of Israel-a hook-nosed, bearded, white-skinned group of settlers from the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, as the documentary and archaeological sources indicate it was-what would be more probable than that Christ would visit such a people? [^8]

It was Israel which anciently had attained to great heights of spiritual insight and ethical monotheism. [^9] Was it not Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and other great prophets of that race with whom the Lord made covenants and declared that he would be their God and they would be his people? Also, since one of the purposes that Jehovah had in mind in leading the Nephites and the Mulekites to the New World was that they would record their religious history in order that it might be brought forth in the latter days to convince the house of Israel that Jesus the Christ is the Messiah and universal Savior, he certainly would visit that people to add to that testimony. [^10]

Shortly after B.C. 600 Jesus Christ revealed to Nephi the fact that he would appear to the inhabitants of ancient America in the Meridian of Time. That ancient prophet saw in vision the earthly advent of the Messiah among the Jews, his missionary work, and his final rejection by them. He wrote, "And I, Nephi, saw that he was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world." [^11] He was also informed that the Messiah would be buried in a tomb, and after three days he would be resurrected and ascend into heaven. Nephi declared:

. . . after Christ shall have risen from the dead he shall show himself unto you, my children, and my beloved brethren; . . .

. . . the Son of righteousness shall appear unto them [the Nephites]; and he shall heal them, and they shall have peace with him, . . . [^12]

In describing his vision, Nephi wrote:

And I saw the heavens open, and the lamb of God descending out of heaven; and he came down and showed himself unto them [the Nephites].

And I also saw and bear record that the Holy Ghost fell upon twelve others; and they were ordained of God [Christ], and chosen.

And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the twelve disciples of the Lamb, who are chosen to minister unto thy seed. [^13]

Thus the ancient Americans from the time of their first prophet-historian, Nephi, were looking forward to the time when the resurrected Savior would appear to the inhabitants of this land and establish his Church and kingdom.

Without doubt the most important, dynamic, and choice portion of the Book of Mormon deals with Christ's visit to his other sheep in ancient America, the delineation of his teaching them the gospel-as he had the Jews in Palestine—and the description of the astounding miracles that he performed in this land. That marvelous story is told in 3 Nephi, chapters 8 to 28 inclusive.

TERRIBLE DESTRUCTION IN ANCIENT AMERICA

While Christ's body was hanging on the cross, a terrific storm occurred on the Western Hemisphere, causing an extensive destruction of human life and also of property. Complete cities were destroyed. Only the more righteous of the people were spared. [^14]

While this thick and distressing darkness prevailed, ". . . there was a voice heard among all the inhabitants of this land, crying":

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name.

I came unto my own, and my own received me not. And the scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled.

And as many as have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings.

And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.

Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin.

Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved. [^15]

After the darkness had dispersed, a great multitude of people gathered around the temple in the City of Bountiful to discuss the terrible things which had occurred during the three days of darkness.

And they were also conversing about this Jesus Christ, of whom the sign had been given concerning his death.

. . . while they were thus conversing one with another, they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn. [^16]

The voice spoke twice more, and the third time they understood what it said unto them. It was the voice of God the Eternal Father introducing the Savior. He said:

Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of hem; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought that it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying: Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

. . . when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

. . . the Lord spake unto them saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. [^17]

After the people had obeyed Jesus' command,

. . . they did cry out with one accord, saying:

Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him. [^18]

CHRIST'S CHURCH AND GOSPEL

Then Jesus selected twelve men, bestowed upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood, and ordained them to the office of apostles, as he had done with twelve other men prior to his crucifixion in Palestine. Thereafter he spent many days teaching the people the gospel. Numerous mighty miracles were performed, because of the faith and righteousness of the people. Christ established his Church, appointed the twelve disciples as apostles to preside over it, and then ascended into heaven. Soon thereafter the twelve whom he had selected fasted and prayed, and in response to their humble supplications Christ appeared unto them. He asked them what they desired. They answered that they desired to know what name to call the Church which he had established before his ascension into heaven.

And the Lord said unto them: Verily, verily, I say unto you, . . . Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day;

And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day.

Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake.

And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel. [^19]

And then Jesus Christ explained the meaning of his gospel which he had taught to the Twelve Apostles and to the other Nephites. Following is part of his explanation:

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you-that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil- . . .

And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world.

And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father.

And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do;

Therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall be lifted up at the last day. [^20]

The Prophet Joseph Smith described as follows the marvelous accomplishments of Christ, the resurrected Lord, on the Western Hemisphere, as delineated in the Book of Mormon:

. . . This book also tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing: that they had Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessings, as were enjoyed on the eastern continent, . . . [^21]

FURTHER COMMENT ON OTHER SHEEP

Before Jesus left the Nephites and ascended to his Father in heaven, he told them of the parable of "other sheep I have" which he had related to the Israelites in Jerusalem. The following quotation will give a full explanation:

This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them:

That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

But, verily, I say unto you that the Father hath commanded me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their iniquity that they know not of you. . . .

And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. . . .

But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me. [^22]

Christ's explanation to the Nephites shows why the "Fair God" singled out the people of the New World for a visit, and why such an important event was not called more forcibly to the attention of the Israelites in Palestine.

CHRIST THE UNIVERSAL GOOD SHEPHERD

The Book of Mormon serves as the American witness to Jesus Christ, confirming the teachings of the Hebrew prophets and of the Master himself wherein they declared that Christ is the Good Shepherd. This ancient American scripture boldly declares Christ to be the universal Shepherd of all righteous people throughout the earth who will take upon themselves the Master's name and keep his commandments, ". . . For there is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth." [^23] Certainly the Good Shepherd has visited his sheep, regardless of the country and age in world's history in which they lived. In fulfilment of prophecies made by holy men of God in ancient times, the Good Shepherd visited the Jews in Palestine, the inhabitants of ancient America, the lost tribes of Israel, and Joseph Smith in the latter days. To each of these, he gave the gospel plan of salvation, providing a way whereby those who desired might come into his fold and in due time gain an inheritance in celestial glory with the Good Shepherd.

SUMMARY OF CHRIST'S WORK IN ANCIENT AMERICA

It should be pointed out in summarizing Christ's phenomenal work in ancient America that he, the Only Begotten of the Father, established his Church and kingdom anciently on the Western Hemisphere, and gave its members the Melchizedek Priesthood or "the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God." [^24] The Master also gave to the Nephites all of the laws and ordinances of the gospel requisite for the salvation and exaltation of that marvelous race of people. He taught them the numerous details of the true and everlasting gospel. We read in the Book of Mormon:

And he did expound all things, even from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory-yea, even all things which should come upon the face of the earth, even until the elements should melt with fervent heat, and the earth should be wrapt together as a scroll, and the heavens and the earth should pass away;

And even unto the great and last day, when all people, and all kindreds, and all nations and tongues shall stand before God, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil-

If they be good, to the resurrection of everlasting life; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of damnation; being on a parallel, the one on the one hand and the other on the other hand, according to the mercy, and the justice, and the holiness which is in Christ, who was before the world began.

And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people; . . . [^25]

After Christ had completed his work with the Nephites in ancient America, he ascended once again into heaven to reign in glory and exaltation with the Eternal Father.

Thus, as Laurette Sejourne has found through her archaeological and historical research, Quetzalcoatl or Jesus Christ played the "essential role as founder of Nahuatl [Nephite] culture," and "the social and religious views that [he inaugurated] dominated Meso-America for over 1500 years" prior to the Spanish conquest. The Savior's memory was ardently worshiped by the Nephites, and later by the American Indians, because he was indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world, the same individual who inaugurated Christianity in Palestine prior to his crucifixion and set in motion the Christian era on the Eastern Hemisphere. Even in ancient America those who took upon themselves the name of Christ were called Christians. [^26] His influence was tremendous in both the Old and New worlds, even far beyond my ability to describe; and so the memory of the great works which he performed on both hemispheres will remain in the hearts of mankind forever, because ". . . as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ . . . whereby man can be saved." [^27]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Archaeology in Mexico (Mexico City, 1952), p. 14.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] Ibid., p. 15.
[^4] Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, 1950), pp. 264-273.
[^5] Ether 1:1-16, 32-43.
[^6] 1 Nephi 1:2; Mosiah 1:4; Mormon 9:32-33.
[^7] Archaeology in Mexico Today, op. cit., p. 15.
[^8] Laurette Sejourne, Burning Water—Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico (New York, 1956), pp. 86-87.
[^9] George C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (New York, 1950), pp. 71, 79.
[^10] Archaeology in Mexico Today, op. cit., p. 13.
[^11] Ibid., p. 15.
[^12] Milton R. Hunter, "Archaeology and the Book of Mormon," The Improvement Era (Salt Lake City, 1955), No. 7, vol. 58, p. 498. See also, Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1956), vol. 1, for an extensive study of this subject.
[^13] Helen Augur, Zapotec (New York, 1954), p. 161.
[^14] Moses 5:4-8.
[^15] Mark 14:23-24; 3 Nephi 18:2-12.
[^16] Moses 6:62.
[^17] 3 Ibid., 6:63.
[^18] Nephi 11:8-14.
[^19] Idem.
[^20] Ibid., 19:25.
[^21] Ibid., 18:39.
[^22] Bernardino de Sahagun, Introduccion al Primer Libro de la Historia, Libro 11, Cap. 2, Sec. 1.
[^23] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, California, 1947), p. 6.
[^24] Ibid., p. 197.
[^25] Ibid., p. 409.
[^26] 3 Nephi 11:10-11; 9:18; Alma 38:9; Mosiah 16:9.
[^27] Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races (New York, 1875), vol. 2, p. 511ff.
