Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 5

TEOTIHUACAN AND THE PLUMED SERPANT

VISITING TEOTIHUACAN—PYRAMIDS OF THE SUN AND MOON

Teotihuacan, situated approximately thirty miles northeast of Mexico City, is perhaps the outstanding tourist attraction in the Valley of Mexico. No one can really claim to have seen our neighboring country to the south if he has not been shown Teotihuacan (Ta-o-te wa-kan); and so—like all other American tourists—I placed that famous archaeological site on my itinerary during my first visit to Mexico in 1941.

When we arrived at Teotihuacan, our Mexican guide—who had resided half of his time in the United States and thereby knew both English and Spanish equally well and also the customs of both peoples—took us first to the Pyramid of the Moon. We were informed that this impressive structure, dating in the B.C. period, [^1] rises 115 feet high on a quadrangular base that measures 329 feet by 411 feet.

This pyramid was truncated at the top, where undoubtedly a temple stood. From a spacious court, a broad stairway once led up the south side of the ascending planes, which were broken to provide terraces. [^2]

Our guide next took us to the Pyramid of the Sun. It towered majestically above all other structures of that archaeological site, rising to a height of over 200 feet. Its base measured almost 700 feet on each side. The structure was built of adobe bricks and was solid throughout. The exterior was faced with volcanic stone covered with "pre-Spanish cement."

Five bodies in form of truncated pyramids, one on top of another and diminishing in size so as to form terraces, make up the pyramid proper. Here, too, on top, was a small temple, dedicated to the cult of Tonacatecutli, God of Sun, of warmth and of abundance. The temple was crowned with a gigantic monolithic statue of the god adorned with a gold breast plate that returned with almost equal brilliance the rays of the sun which struck it. Like so many other fine works of art of the ancient Mexicans, this statue was destroyed by the orders of Fray Juan de Zumarrago, Mexico's first Archbishop, in his zeal to abolish pagan rites. [^3]

Both pyramids in shape, size, and purposes of construction had certain resemblances to ancient pyramids, or temple-towers, of Egypt, [^4] Assyria, and Babylon, which is a significant fact, since the Book of Mormon claims that the Jaredites came from the great Tower of Babel [^5] in Babylon and that the Nephites brought with them a considerable amount of Egyptian culture. [^6]

We followed southward along a road called "Road of the Dead," [^7] because of numerous human skeletons discovered by the early Spanish settlers along its length, and came to the Temple of Quetzalcoatl.

QUADRANGLE AND TEMPLE OF QUETZALCOATL

Few times in my visiting of numerous archaeological sites have I been as deeply impressed as I was at my first visit at the quadrangle and Temple of Quetzalcoatl. In order to become introduced to this important archaeological site, we shall quote from the writing of Laurette Sejourne:

The quadrangle of Quetzalcoatl is surrounded by platforms six metres high, supported by the pedestals of sanctuaries that split up the whole surface into rhythmic parts.

The rear section of the quadrangle is a pyramid-shaped building completely covered with plumed serpents. The ramps of the stairway leading to the sanctuary which once crowned it are studded with great serpent heads. The plane surfaces above the sloping walls have, superimposed over relief carvings of the symbolic reptile, a series of heads of Quetzalcoatl and of Tlaloc, the rain god, alternating one with another. These two heads are different symbolic expressions of one and the same basic concept of the Nahuatl religion: the vital impulse arising from the unification of opposing elements. Later we shall see that, like Quetzalcoatl, Tlaloc is the bearer of the luminous seed which converts matter—in this case the earth—into creative energy [^8]

Our guide remarked:

"This is the famous Temple of Quetzalcoatl. It was built by an ancient people called by some writers the Teotihuacans and by others the Toltecs. This temple was erected during the early Christian centuries, perhaps as early as the seventh century A.D."

Dr. George C. Vaillant, director of the University of Pennsylvania Museum, gives the date for the beginning of the temple as 666 A.D.

SYMBOLS OF QUETZALCOATL

Dr. Vaillant points out that "The Feathered Serpent is the dominant decorative motive, and the great heads carved in rugged simplicity project from the balustrade and from the facades." [^9] These serpent heads, as can be seen from the accompanying photograph (Fig. 58), are surrounded with a motif representing quetzal feathers. Both the serpent heads and quetzal feathers are symbols of Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God."

We soon learned that

Quetzalcoatl, the Plumed Serpent, most revered god, was more frequently represented on pottery and in decoration [at Teotihuacan] than any other subject. [^10]

Speaking of the Temple of Quetzalcoatl, archaeologists declare that

This is a representation of Quetzalcoatl . . . . As proof that this temple was erected in honor of the Feathered Serpent, we see on the wall an enormous sculptured serpent, of the rattlesnake species, symbol of Quetzalcoatl. [^11]

The "enormous sculptured serpent" referred to in the foregoing quotation is carved completely across the lower front of the Temple of Quetzalcoatl, as is seen in the accompanying photograph (Fig. 58) on opposite page.

EFFORTS TO UNDERSTAND THE SYMBOLS OF QUETZALCOATL

My first impression of the serpent heads on the Temple of Quetzalcoatl was that they were grotesque, ugly creatures and certainly could not be symbols of Quetzalcoatl. Since I was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ, I was quite familiar with the Book of Mormon account of the appearance of Jesus Christ to the inhabitants of ancient America following his resurrection; and I had also heard that he had been identified with Quetzalcoatl. As I looked at those hideous serpent heads, I thought: "I see nothing here that reminds me of the beautiful account in the Book of Mormon of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. These snake heads are pagan representations or idols."

The idea that these venomous serpents were supposed to be symbols of the Savior was repulsive to me.

After returning to Utah from Teotihuacan, having had time to think more carefully, I realized that I had been looking through the eyes of a member of the true Church of Jesus Christ. My religious background had caused me to judge the symbols of Quetzalcoatl by the standard of the marvelous teachings of the Book of Mormon, the great revelations regarding Jesus recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the gospel doctrines contained in the Pearl of Great Price and the Bible.

Since my training had been in the Book of Mormon, and since the concept of the Savior taught therein was so superior to the concept of the serpent and the quetzal symbols shown at Teotihuacan, I was in no position to judge accurately nor intelligently; and so I decided that I must study archaeology and Indian traditions in order that I might more aptly place myself in the position of the pagan worshipers of Quetzalcoatl and thereby understand the significance of serpents and quetzal feathers as symbols of Quetzalcoatl or Jesus Christ. I was confronted with the problem of trying to ascertain why the inhabitants of ancient America employed such a noxious creature as the serpent, along with the resplendent quetzal bird, to symbolize the glorious and radiant resurrected Savior—the "White Bearded God"; and so I began the study of archaeology and anthropology. During the period since 1941, I have read whatever I could find concerning ancient America.

Thirteen years elapsed, and I made my second trip to Teotihuacan. This time I was accompanied by President and Sister Claudious Bowman, Jose Davila, and Sister Hunter. I also returned there the following year with a touring party, and have been there several times since. On each of these occasions we visited the famous Quetzalcoatl Temple and quadrangle.

I now possessed a background and viewpoint far different from the one I had on my first trip. I saw much more and certainly had a clearer understanding than I had had on my first visit to the Temple of Quetzalcoatl. I felt that now, at least to a certain degree, I was able to think, feel, understand, and appreciate as had the ancient builders of Teotihuacan.

The following discussion will portray my transition of understanding and feelings since my first visit to Teotihuacan, giving the results of my research and my efforts to explain why the ancient Americans used the quetzal bird and the serpent—the rattlesnake species—as symbols of Quetzalcoatl.

IMPORTANCE OF CHRIST'S APPEARANCE TO THE ANCIENT AMERICANS

By 400 A.D. the religion of the Nephites and Lamanites had degenerated into pagan practices, and the former people as a nation had been exterminated in a terrible war fought on and near the Hill Cumorah. The survivors of that last war—some of whom were white in color and of Nephite stock and others bronze in color and of Lamanite lineage [^12]—held sacred in their memories and traditions the knowledge of the greatest event that ever occurred in ancient America, namely, the visitation of Jesus Christ, the resurrected Lord, to their progenitors in the Book of Mormon days. Although a universal apostasy prevailed, the teachings received directly from the Master having been adulterated, yet certain momentous events had made an everlasting impression on the inhabitants of ancient America. The greatest of these was the appearance of Jesus Christ to the inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere, as has already been explained.

PRESERVATION AND TRANSMISSION OF INDIAN TRADITIONS

On February 4, 1956, in the city of Totonicapan, Guatemala, I and others had an interview with Jesus Carranza Juarez, a member of the Quiche Maya religion and an expert in Indian traditions, for the purpose of acquiring as much knowledge as possible regarding those people. One of the first things he told us was the fact that since men may be killed in war, the women have been the principal preservers of Quiche traditions from ancient times to the present day. Girls learned thoroughly the most cherished traditions, and when they grew to womanhood they in turn taught their daughters. Also, according to Quiche custom, certain women—perhaps the most intelligent ones of the tribe—were selected to be especially trained in Indian traditions. One of these, a woman 82 years of age, was brought in to rehearse to us certain of the Quiche Maya traditions.

Mr. Carranza also informed us that certain men were selected to become priests. As part of their training they became thoroughly conversant in Mayan traditions, which knowledge they transmitted to their successors. Through memory and by word of mouth Indian traditions have been accurately transmitted from generation to generation.

Thus mothers of the apostate descendants of Book of Mormon peoples have helped to keep alive the most cherished traditions by telling them to their children. Also, it would be natural for tribal chiefs to rehearse in their council meetings their distorted accounts of the "White Bearded God"; and perhaps the youth, especially those who were being trained for the priesthood, were quite thoroughly instructed by the Indian priests, since religion was the culture center and dominating force of the Maya, Aztec, Toltec, Zapotec, and other great Indian tribes of Mexico and Central America. In the words of Helen Augur:

The outstanding quality of the Middle America culture is that it was a tremendous religious movement. Every ancient site was a ceremonial city dedicated to the gods; all those beautiful objects we see in museums were visible forms of worship. . . . [^13]

Thus the story of the sudden appearance of the "White Bearded God" to the ancestors of the American Indians and his great contributions to their culture had its origin in the marvelous visitations of Jesus Christ, the crucified and resurrected Lord, whose descent from heaven to teach the ancient Americans is so beautifully delineated in the Book of Mormon. Of course the Indians told the story of Christ's ministry on the Western Hemisphere in a variety of distorted forms. In fact, many fables, erroneous conceptions, and false religious practices had crept into the principal body of teachings of the true gospel of Jesus Christ, according to Mormon and Moroni—the two last prophet-historians of the Nephites—even before the close of the Book of Mormon. These writers maintained that their people as a nation were destroyed because of this apostasy and the wicked lives that the people were living.

During the period of more than one thousand years' time that elapsed between the close of Nephite history (A.D. 421) and the discovery of America in 1492, no doubt the polluting of the true gospel continued to increase, resulting in corrupted, apostate, and untrue pagan practices. The worship of numerous gods, with religious beliefs and practices ranging from witchcraft to rather noble and true spiritual expressions, prevailed throughout the Americas. The peculiar thing is that such extremes in religious beliefs and practices could have existed side by side in the religious expressions of the same peoples. Enough perverted truths remained, however, in clearly defined forms to make possible the identification of Quetzalcoatl and his religion as adulterated forms and counterfeits of Christ and the true gospel which he established in ancient America shortly following his resurrection.

IMPORTANCE AND USE OF SYMBOLS IN RELIGION

How were the ancient Americans best to preserve through the generations their glorious traditions which were so dear to their hearts? They must have symbols. Throughout all of history symbols have been used by human beings, not only to convey to their minds important and great events, teachings, doctrine, and the understanding and remembrance of divine truths, but also to preserve truths from age to age. Since Jesus Christ's mission was to give to the world the gospel and through it and his death and resurrection bring about the atonement, a significant phase of the gospel has been the continuous use of symbols to remind faithful worshipers of the Messiah and his mission. For example, after the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden, God gave them the law of sacrifice to symbolize the atonement of Jesus Christ, the sacrificial lamb being offered in ". . . similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." [^14] Also, to symbolize the atoning sacrifice of the Messiah, the Lord commanded Moses to institute the Feast of the Passover. This was done the night prior to the departure of the Israelites from Egyptian bondage. From generation to generation following their exodus from Egypt, these people observed the Feast of the Passover. Perhaps the most important symbol used on these occasions was that of the paschal lamb—"a lamb without spot or blemish"—which symbolized the sacrifice of their long-looked-for Messiah. In the Meridian of Time the Master supplanted the law of sacrifice by sacrament. He gave his followers in Palestine, as well as the inhabitants of ancient America, the commandment to observe the Lord's Supper in memory of his flesh and blood which was shed for mankind. [^15] Since that day the Sacrament symbols have been held very sacred by Christians.

We learn from the Pearl of Great Price that through divine sources Enoch was taught the gospel of Jesus Christ. On a certain occasion the voice of the Lord spoke to him and explained the atonement, saying ". . . through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time" [^16] shall the atonement of mankind be consummated; and then the Lord declared:

And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me [Jesus Christ], both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me [Jesus]. [^17]

This chapter endeavors to show how even the pagan symbolism of the American Indians bore witness to Jesus Christ.

CHRIST'S RADIANCE AND SPLENDOR AS HE APPEARED TO THE NEPHITES

As has already been mentioned, the resurrected Lord appeared to the inhabitants of ancient America. A beautiful account of this visitation is given in the Book of Mormon. [^18] The people, vast numbers of whom had assembled in front of the temple at Bountiful, saw him ". . . descending out of heaven" as if he were a bird; "And he was clothed in a white robe." [^19]

Following these marvelous events, Jesus Christ taught the people the same gospel that he had previously proclaimed in Palestine. He also performed many unusual miracles.

During a period of many days, multitudes of people associated with the resurrected Lord. He was radiant and beautiful with a splendor which surpassed all description. The Nephite historian informs us that his garments and body ". . . did exceed all whiteness, yea, even there could be nothing upon earth so white as the whiteness thereof," and ". . . the light of his countenance did shine upon them." [^20] Finally he ascended back into heaven to dwell with God, the Eternal Father. [^21]

After the close of the Book of Mormon period, when mothers rehearsed the Indian traditions regarding the "White Bearded God" who had visited their ancestors, when native priests and Indian chiefs explained these astounding events to the young men, young women, and to the warriors, how best could they make their accounts of their traditions vivid and cause those whom they taught to comprehend most completely? The solution was by the employment of symbols.

QUETZAL BIRD A SYMBOL OF THE RESURRECTED SAVIOR

In certain sections of Honduras, Guatemala, and southern Mexico, there has lived since ancient times one of the most gorgeous birds in the world. Some people have called it "the bird of paradise," but "quetzal" is the name by which it is usually known. It has resplendent, long, green tail feathers, certain ones of which measure three and one-half feet in length. A famous Catholic missionary, Father Bernardino de Sahagun, described the quetzal bird as follows:

There is a bird in this land called Quetzalcoatl; it has very rich and colorful plumage; the bill is sharp and yellow, and the feet are yellow. It has a feather tuft on its head, like a rooster's comb. It is . . . the size of a magpie of Spain. The tail feathers are called Quezalli and they are very green and shiny. They are wide like the leaves of reeds and they bend when the wind hits them and they shine very beautifully. These birds have some black feathers in the tail with which it covers these rich [green] ones which are in the midst of the black ones. The black feathers are very black on the outside, and on the inside are the rich dark green feathers, they being not very long nor wide. The tuft this bird has on its head is very beautiful and glossy . . . and the bird has a red and glossy neck. . . . The neck, on the back, and entire back of the bird has resplendent green feathers. Under the tail and between its legs it has a delicate feather of clear green color, soft and resplendent; on the veins or elbows of the wings are green feathers, and black ones under the wings. . . . [^22]

Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley, one of the greatest Maya scholars who has ever lived, stated that the

. . . famous quetzal, the national bird of Guatemala, one of the most gorgeous birds in the world, is almost exclusively confined to the highlands of Guatemala and Honduras and the adjacent mountains of Chiapas, [Mexico]. [^23]

Morley also tells us that

The gorgeous, iridescent, blue-green tail feathers of the quetzal, sometimes three feet long, seem to have been reserved [in pre-Columbian time] for the rulers alone. [^24]

He points out that among the Indians of Guatemala today

The royal color is green because green is the color of the highly prized quetzal bird, whose plumage was reserved for the rulers. [^25]

As the quetzal bird flew through the air and the brilliant rays of sunlight reflected the resplendent gorgeousness of the colors of its plumage, especially the green, it may have reminded the ancient Americans of the beauty and glory of Jesus Christ who had descended from heaven through the air to visit them and later had returned into heaven in like manner as proclaimed in their traditions of the "White Bearded God." Since Christ did pass through the air in a manner that the people had seen only birds do in their time, what could be more appropriate to the minds of those people in symbolizing the central character in the greatest event that had occurred in the New World than to take as a symbol for him the beautiful quetzal bird? It portrayed all the splendor, the radiance, and the beauty of which the Indians' minds were capable of conceiving.

Perhaps at first when the story of Christ's appearance was told and retold, the "White Bearded God" was said to be as gorgeous, as radiant, as beautiful, and as splendid as the quetzal bird. As time passed, however, his name came to be more or less synonymous with the resplendent bird, the name "quetzal" actually becoming part of the name the Indians applied to the "White Bearded God."

Jesus Christ had informed the ancient Americans that he was the "resurrection and the life"—the "light and the life of the world." [^26] Following Book of Mormon days, the American Indians realized that when springtime came the world was filled with new life and growth, the vegetation which clothed mother earth being gorgeously green and beautiful. Since the quetzal bird was primarily green in color, this fact also made it a fitting symbol of Jesus Christ, the giver of light and life to the entire world.

JADE A SYMBOL OF QUETZALCOATL

Jade, being green in color, also was used extensively by the American Indians of Mexico and Central America, especially by the Mayas, as a symbol of Quetzalcoatl. Burial masks, beads, pendants, bracelets, and other ornaments made of jade have been dug up in large quantities in connection with ancient Indian burials. Murals on the walls of Bonampak and other archaeological places supply added evidence that the priests and rulers who were adorned with quetzal feathers were also bedecked elaborately with jade objects, all of which testify that these ancient Americans were worshipers of Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God."

COATL OR SERPENT A SYMBOL OF QUETZALCOATL

Coatl, the ancient Mexican word for serpent, [^27] constitutes the latter half of the name Quetzalcoatl, the title by which the "White Bearded God" was known by many of the aborigines at the time of the Spanish conquest. This appellation came about as a result of the Indians' extensive use of the serpent as a symbol of Quetzalcoatl, whom we have identified as Jesus Christ. The importance of the serpent-symbol was described by Edward H. Thompson as follows:

. . . The symbol of the Feathered Serpent—the body of the rattlesnake, covered with the plumage of the quetzal bird—was to this old civilization what the Cross was to the Christian and the Crescent to the Saracen. Under this symbol the culture hero Kukul Can—Feathered Serpent—of Yucatan, Quetzalcoatl of the Aztecs and earlier peoples, was first reverenced, then deified and worshipped. [^28]

Count Byron Khun de Prorok points out that

The God Quetzalcoatl, a white God, took the name "Feathered Serpent." . . . And there was a singular identification, significant in its completeness, of the sign of the Plumed Serpent with the signs of Egypt and the traditional delineation of the serpent in the Garden of Eden. [^29]

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are informed that in the very beginning of human history the serpent became identified with Satan and in a certain sense became a symbol of the Prince of Darkness; however, peculiar as it may seem and also in spite of the fact that the devil in the form of a serpent had played such a prominent role in the Garden of Eden story, history affirms that coatl or serpent in very early times became identified also with the crucifixion and atonement of Jesus of Nazareth and hence it became a symbol of the Son of Man.

The fact that ancient peoples adopted the serpent as a symbol of the Messiah does not necessarily classify them as devil worshipers. It merely indicates that a certain creature or object would be adopted by a people as a symbol of righteousness—even the Messiah—and during another period of human history the same creature or object may serve as a symbol of evil—even the devil.

In this chapter and throughout the book, the serpent will be presented as a symbol of Quetzalcoatl or Jesus Christ and no further reference will be made to its identification with the Prince of Darkness or Lucifer.

SERPENT SYMBOL IN ANCIENT ISRAEL

As far as is known, the coatl, or serpent, was first used in ancient Israel as a symbol of the crucifixion and atonement of Jesus Christ "the Anointed One." Since the Son of Man was proclaimed by the prophets to be the giver of resurrection and life to the world and eternal life to those who would keep all of his commandments the serpent, who played such a prominent part in the Garden of Eden story, became an appropriate symbol of the Master and of his crucifixion and atoning sacrifice.

While traveling through the wilderness on their exodus from Egypt, the Israelites had an experience which became the basis for an added interpretation of the serpent-symbol. Many of the Israelites were bitten by serpents and were thereby poisoned. God commanded Moses as follows:

Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass, that everyone that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live. And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived. [^30]

Prophets later compared the crucifixion and atonement of Christ with the brazen serpent that Moses placed upon the pole. Just as those who were obedient to God's commandment looked upon the serpent with faith and were healed, so are those healed of spiritual defects and eventually given resurrection and eternal life who take upon them the name of Christ and keep his commandments.

Dr. Maurice H. Farbridge, in his book Studies in Biblical and Semitic Symbolism, informs us that the serpent was the principal symbol of the hoped-for Messiah from the time of Moses until about 700 B.C. A brass serpent on a pole or beam was maintained as a representation of the Messiah in the chief temple of the Israelite nation during that period of approximately 500 years' time. [^31]

Jesus Christ while in mortality clearly identified the serpent symbol with his own crucifixion. We read the following in the New Testament:

And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. [^32]

SERPENT SYMBOL AMONG THE NEPHITES

The Nephites, who were of the seed of Israel, migrated from Jerusalem to America about 600 B.C. They brought with them to the New World the concept of the serpent as a symbol of Jesus Christ, his crucifixion, his powers to heal, and to give life, including eternal life. Nephi, the first historian of his people, wrote:

And now, my brethren, I have spoken plainly that ye cannot err. And as the Lord God [Jesus Christ] liveth that brought Isreal up out of the land of Egypt, and gave unto Moses power that he should heal the nations after they had been bitten by the poisonous serpents, if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which he did raise up before them, . . . there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved. [^33]

Approximately twenty years before the birth of Jesus Christ, another Nephite prophet, whom we know as Nephi, the son of Helaman, delivered a powerful sermon on the coming of the Messiah. In that sermon he definitely connected the serpent as a symbol of Jesus Christ. To quote:

Yea, did he [Moses] not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come.

And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal. [^34]

Alma also taught the Nephites that the serpent was a symbol of Jesus Christ. To quote:

Behold, he [the Son of God] was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it might live. And many did look and live. [^35]

And then Alma described the atoning powers of Jesus.

From the evidence already presented the fact becomes apparent that the serpent was a Christian symbol, established in ancient Israel at least as early as the days of Moses and carried forward on the Western Hemisphere by the Nephites to the close of the Book of Mormon period. Its purpose was to remind the people of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ and of his great saving powers.

QUETZAL-SERPENT SYMBOLS OF THE INDIANS

It was natural for the descendants of the Nephites and the Lamanites as the years passed to continue with such a symbol, adding adulterated religious practices and altered ideas to the more refined serpent symbol as held in the Book of Mormon days. Thus the Indian descendants of Book of Mormon peoples distorted the serpent symbol into the various pagan forms that were found in Mexico and throughout Central America by European missionaries following the Spanish conquest. Although the quetzal-serpent symbols are degenerated pagan reminders of the "White Bearded God," they also serve as reminders of the true Savior who had once visited ancient America and had given his gospel to its inhabitants.

While visiting thirty-two archaeological sites and museums in Mexico and Central America during the winter of 1954-55, I saw the quetzal-serpent symbolism practically everywhere. Feathered serpents appear on facades of temples and palaces, on ceramics, in stone sculptured works, and in gold representations. Also, according to Lord Kingsborough, "Representations of the lifting up of serpents occur in Mexican paintings," [^36] which show that they used them to symbolize the crucifixion of Quetzalcoatl.

INTERPRETATION OF QUETZAL-SERPENT SYMBOLS AT TEOTIHUACAN AND ELSEWHERE

Bearing all of the foregoing discussion in mind, what did I see on my last trip to Teotihuacan? Instead of repulsive, ugly, grotesque serpents, I saw on the front of one part of the temple six beautiful serpent heads, each surrounded by quetzal feathers, and six comparable ones on the other side, making twelve. I also observed that there had been twelve serpent heads up the edges of the staircase—six on each side. Each serpent head contained twelve teeth. I saw a repetition of the number twelve in temples, there being four on the north, four on the west, and four on the south side of the Quetzalcoatl quadrangle.

The Temple of Quetzalcoatl now appeared to me to be a beautiful building which had been erected in honor of Jesus Christ by a ". . . people who were skilled in many fields, mainly scientific and artistic. . . ." [^37] ". . . Teotihuacan must have exemplified the best work of which a culture was capable." [^38] I now observed their objects, which appeared to me to be beautifully carved. I had learned to admire the craftsmanship of the Teotihuacan artisans, and to agree with Vaillant's statement that ". . . the Temple of Quetzalcoatl, Feathered Serpent, the God of Learning, is splendid enough to qualify as the edifice for which Mitl [the builder of Teotihuacan] was renowned." [^39]

I had also learned that Teotihuacan means "the place where all go to worship the gods." [^40]

As I visited the various archaeological sites and museums, everywhere I looked I saw temples, pyramids, pottery, representations of men, and numerous other things, decorated with feathers of the "sacred quetzal, or bird of paradise," and serpents, as well as serpent heads, all symbolizing Quetzalcoatl or Jesus Christ. These had been made by master artists in murals, stone work, wood carvings, and clay. I marveled to learn that through many pagan generations following the close of the Book of Mormon period to the present time the American Indians had carefully, accurately, and artistically—although in a degenerated and adulterated form—in their quetzal-serpent symbols fulfilled the words of Jesus Christ wherein he declared that ". . . all things bear record of me."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 9:18; Mosiah 4:6-10; 15:19-20; Alma 12:30.
[^2] Ether 3:14; Mosiah 15:19, Alma 42:26.
[^3] Alma 42:7-9; 12:28-30; 2 Nephi 2:5-30.
[^4] Mosiah 16:9-11.
[^5] Alma 11:45.
[^6] 2 Nephi 2:19-29.
[^7] Ibid., 9:4-19; Mosiah 15:9-12; Alma 12:12-20.
[^8] Laurette Sejourne, Burning Waters—Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico (London, 1956), p. 62.
[^9] Angel Maria Garibay, "Romances de la Muerte," Las Letras Patrias (Mexico, 1954), No. 2, p. 18.
[^10] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 62.
[^11] Anales de Cuauhtitlan (Imprenta Universitaria, Mexico, 1945), p. 9.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 10-11.
[^13] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 63.
[^14] Ibid., p. 55.
[^15] Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia General de las Cosas de Nueva Espana (Editorial Nueva Espana, S. A., Mexico, 1946), vol. 1, p. 571, cited in Sejourne, p. 55.
[^16] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 84.
[^17] Ibid., p. 71.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 130-131.
[^19] Anales de Cuauhtitlan, op. cit., p. 9.
[^20] Angel Maria Garibay, Historia de la Literatura Nahuatl, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 311.
[^21] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 132.
[^22] Anales de Cuauhtitlan, op. cit., p. 9.
[^23] Sahagun, cited in Sejourne, op. cit., p. 158.
[^24] Ibid., p. 159.
[^25] Ibid., p. 157.
[^26] Ibid., pp. 160-161.
[^27] Laurette Sejourne, op. cit., p. 78, states: "The Nahuatl word for the place where the heavenly pair abide, Tlacapillachiualoya, means place where the 'children of men are made.'"
[^28] Sahagun, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 608.
[^29] Angel Maria Garibay, Las Letras Patrias (Mexico, 1954), No. 2, p. 12.
[^30] Popol Vuh, The Sacred Book of the Ancient Quiche Maya (Tr. into English by Delia Goetz and Sylvanus G. Morley, 1950, Norman, Oklahoma), p. 78.
[^31] Ibid., footnote no. 3.
[^32] Numbers 27:16.
[^33] Ibid., 16:22.
[^34] Psalm 82:6.
[^35] Ecclesiastes 12:7.
[^36] John 20:17.
[^37] Hebrews 12:9.
[^38] Romans 8:16-17.
[^39] 1 Nephi 11:6-7.
[^40] Ibid., 1:8, 14.
