Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 7

TEOTIHUACAN - CITY OF THE GODS

ANCIENT TOLLAN OR TULA

Ixtlilxochitl and other learned Indians who transmitted their knowledge either in writing or by personally informing the Spanish chroniclers claimed that the founders of their ancient civilization built a city called Tollan or Tula. In the Nahuatl language, the word Tollan means "Great city or metropolis." [^1] The most reliable archaeological and historical evidences indicate that the builders of Tollan were called Nahuas or Toltecs. The Works of Ixtlilxochitl, the writing of the scholarly Catholic padre, Sahagun, and other similar authoritative sources maintain that the city was built for the religious capital of the Toltecs. It was also claimed that Quetzalcoatl originated his religion at that place.

ORIGIN OF THE TOLTEC CULTURE

Father Bernardino de Sahagun stated that the Nahuatl religion had its beginning prior to B.C.500. To quote:

As to the antiquity of this people, it is proven that for more than 2,000 years they have lived in this land now called New Spain, because through their ancient pictures there is evidence that the famous city called Tollan was destroyed a thousand years ago or very nearly . . . and as to the time it took to build it and the time it prospered before it was destroyed, it is consonant with truth that over 1,000 years passed, from which it follows that this land was populated at least 500 years before the Incarnation of our Redeemer. This famous and great city of Tollan, very rich and well-ordered, very wise and powerful, suffered the adverse fortune of Troy. [^2]

One who is acquainted with the Book of Mormon knows that the founders of the Nephite (Nahuatl) culture left Jerusalem 600 years B.C. and that by 570 they were building a city in America which they named the City of Nephi after their prophet-leader. It is a marvel that Sahagun could have received from the Indians a date which corresponds so nearly with the time the Nephites arrived in the New World. The Toltecs or Nahuas, as described by Ixtlilxochitl, fit all the conditions corresponding to the Nephites as told about in the Book of Mormon.

The early writers say that Tollan was the ancient capital of the Nahuas. If it were founded as early as B.C. 500, as Father Sahagun claims, it could have been a Nephite city. Modern historians and archaeologists have searched diligently to identify this particular city. Since all of the capital cities of the plateau region of Mexico bore the name of Tollan, it has been impossible to identify definitely any of those cities as being the earliest capital of the Toltecs.

In 1941 a convention of American historians was held in Mexico City. One of the main topics for discussion was the identification of the ancient capital of Quetzalcoatl. The conclusion was drawn that the most favorable candidate for that city was the archaeological ruin of Tollan Xicotitlan (Tula, Hidalgo), situated 125 miles north of Mexico City. Laurette Sejourne vigorously opposes such a conclusion, claiming that Tula "dates back only to the tenth century, that is, to a moment when Meso-America suffered the brutal shock of mass invasion from nomad hunters and had strayed far from the mysticism of earlier epochs." [^3] She is of the opinion that such a decision which declares Tula, Hidalgo, to be the ancient Nahuatl religious capital cannot be sustained either by documentary or archaeological evidences. She presents the argument that archaeologists have been working at that site for ten seasons, and with the exception of a few remarkable sculptures, have not unearthed any significant things to indicate that it was a first-rate city. She also maintains that these were imported motifs, and that this city cannot be considered as the site of the cradle of a glorious ancient culture. "The origins of this high culture [meaning apparently the culture that Book of Mormon students identify as Nephite] are a complete mystery," she says. [^4] The Nephite culture was the forerunner of the Nahuatl culture, which developed the elaborate, paganized religion of Quetzalcoatl. This religion became filled with numerous symbols, many of which were undreamed of in Nephite days. Sejourne continues:

. . . Because of the appearance of certain tropical motifs, such as serpents, quetzal birds, tropical sea-shells and turtles, it has been thought to have come from the south; but though they may originally have emanated from other zones, these motifs are so strongly integrated into the spiritual unity of Teotihuacan that it is impossible to suppose they could have been transplanted there already converted into symbols. Of course the species represented must have been familiar to the Teotihuatecans, but archaeology has shown that the peoples of these regions used to travel extensively. We cannot, however, just for this reason pre-suppose that elaborate cultural forms were transferred from one region to another, especially since the characteristic Nahuatl symbolism is not known to have existed anywhere else at this period. Yet it existed in Teotihuacan in exactly the same form in which the Aztecs revived it centuries later. [^5]

Laurette Sejourne also maintains that the seeds of an earlier culture were transplanted to Teotihuacan,". . . took roots in the new soil, and blossomed luxuriantly into the Nahuatl religion in all its richness. While artists were painting and carving the religious symbolic language in this huge sacred metropolis, the whole body of knowledge which characterizes Meso-American civilization developed into its final form. . . . The facts, moreover, agree with what the chroniclers always affirm: that the king of Tollan was Quetzalcoatl, Creator of all human wisdom." [^6] Quetzalcoatl, she further states, was the one who established the "Parent Culture" in the New World about the time that the Man of Galilee established Christianity in the Holy Land.

In chapter three the writer identified the person who established this "Parent Culture" as the resurrected Messiah, who appeared to the Nephites in the City of Bountiful. It was also pointed out that Tula means "bountiful"; and so the ancient Nephites records, Indian traditions, and modern scholars all agree that the "White and Bearded God" appeared to the ancient Americans in the City of Tula or Bountiful and gave them their religion and culture.

The exact location of the City of Bountiful—or any other Book of Mormon city—is not known and will not be known until definite archaeological evidence or revelation from God gives us that information. Various people, however, make claims regarding the location of Zarahemla, Bountiful, the City of Nephi, and other Book of Mormon places. These claims cannot be sustained with the information and evidence available today.

Laurette Sejourne is of the opinion that Teotihuacan is the ancient Tula or Tollan where the "Fair God" appeared and established the religion of Quetzalcoatl. In presenting her viewpoint, it is not to be regarded that I accept her opinion as the correct one. It could be true that the religion of Quetzalcoatl could have developed at Teotihuacan, but that religion is merely a paganized form of the true gospel of Jesus Christ. It is not the original revelation of eternal verities from the mouth of the Master to the Nephites, who were perhaps the progenitors of the people at Teotihuacan.

According to Sejourne, a few centuries after the time of the Master, "Teotihuacan was already rising firm upon its foundation and had developed the religion, arts, and sciences that were to prevail for more than fifteen centuries. . . . By the fourth century [A.D.] Teotihuacan already possessed great buildings ornamented with plumed serpents, . . ." [^7]

NEPHITE RELIGION AND APOSTASY

At the time Christ appeared to the ancient Americans, the Nephites and Lamanites became one people. For approximately 200 years following that appearance, the people lived almost perfect lives, abiding continuously in harmony with the true gospel that the Master had given them.

During the third century A.D., numerous apostate ideas and practices appeared in their religious worship. Many churches arose. The people divided once again into Nephites and Lamanites. By A.D. 325 the major portion of the people—both Nephites and Lamanites—had dropped into a state of gross wickedness. A complete apostasy from the true gospel of the Messiah had occurred. A devastating war broke out between the Nephites and Lamanites, which ended about A.D. 400in the extermination of the Nephite nation.

It was during this period and following that the cult of Quetzalcoatl was profusely ornamenting the buildings at Teotihuacan with plumed serpents and the rain god symbols, according to Laurette Sejourne.

The hatred toward Jesus Christ was very intense during this period. Sometime between 400 and 421 A.D.—possibly toward the latter date—Moroni informed us in the Nephite records that he was hiding in a cave so he would not be apprehended by the Lamanites and apostate Nephites who had dissented and joined the darker race. [^8] He wrote:

. . . I make myself not known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me.

. . . Because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ.

And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. [^9]

During this period of gross apostasy, wickedness, war, and a determined effort to stamp out the gospel of Jesus Christ—even to obliterate his name—the name of Quetzalcoatl was substituted for Jesus Christ, and the symbols of the bird, the plumed serpent, Venus and numerous other symbols became prominent factors in the Toltec's religion. Thus the true gospel of Jesus Christ was completely adulterated from that which the resurrected Messiah nearly four centuries earlier had given to their ancestors.

Perhaps these reasons help to explain why the name of Quetzalcoatl was substituted for the true Messiah.

SPIRITUAL FORCE OF QUETZALCOATL RELIGION

It should be remembered, however, that there remained sufficient of the basic teachings of the Messiah in the Indian religions of Middle America to make it possible for us to identify those people with their predecessors of Book of Mormon days. Although the name of the Lord was changed from Christ to Quetzalcoatl and the religion of the Master corrupted, yet the memory of the "White and Bearded God" could not be completely erased from the minds of the common people. Christ continued to live as Quetzalcoatl.

Thus the builders of Teotihuacan carried the embers of their ancient Nephite culture and religion into their new religious capital and fanned those embers into a flame of an adulterated and apostate form of Christianity. The religion of Quetzalcoatl, however, retained a part of the spiritual force that had characterized Christianity during the "Golden Age" of Nephite history. To quote:

. . . Everything points to the plumed serpent being a symbol whose meaning penetrates far deeper than the representation of some object in nature.

Quetzalcoatl taught that human greatness grows out of the awareness of a spiritual order; his image must therefore be the symbol of this truth. The serpent plumes must be speaking to us of the spirit which makes it possible for man—even while his body, like the reptile's, is dragged in that dust—to know the superhuman joy of creation. They are thus, as it were, a song to the most exalted inner freedom. This hypothesis is confirmed by the Nahuatl symbolism where the serpent represents matter—being always associated with terrestrial gods—and the bird heaven. The plumed serpent is thus the sign of the revelation of the heavenly origin of man. [^10]

CITY OF THE GODS

Since most archaeologists and historians have not read the marvelous Book of Mormon account of Christ's appearance to the inhabitants of ancient America and become acquainted with the spiritual gospel message that he gave them, and also since most students are unfamiliar with the cultural traits of that superb civilization, these scholars are amazed at what seems to them to be a sudden emergence and spiritual force of the Quetzalcoatl religion at Teotihuacan. In the words of Laurette Sejourne:

It seems, because of its sudden emergence and creative vigour, that Teotihuacan must have been fashioned in the full glare of this revelation. It is like a vast poem, every detail an integral part of a highly inspired whole. [^11]

The writer is of the opinion that Teotihuacan—with its numerous Quetzalcoatl symbols and elaborate forms of worship—was fashioned after the full glare of the gospel of Christ—with its superb revelations of truth—had waned. Only the embers of eternal verities, the "seeds of the earlier Nephite culture," remained at Teotihuacan, and there—adulterated and paganized—formed the Quetzalcoatl religion.

It seems to the writer that the Mexican archaeologist, Laurette Sejourne, may have received a glimmer of light regarding what actually occurred in ancient America; but not having heard of Christ's appearance to the Nephites, she was unable to formulate in her thinking the true basis of the original revelation which finally resulted in the Quetzalcoatl religion; however, it is surprising to observe how near she came to ascertaining the truth through human reason, as will be shown by the following statement:

Surprisingly, no earlier examples of its [Quetzalcoatl's] principal motifs have been discovered, and its standards remain essentially unchanged until the time of the Spanish conquest. But if it is hard to believe that some of its cultural characteristics—such as its architectural style, the orientation of its buildings, and details of sculptures and painting—can have assumed their final shape right from the start, it is still more difficult to imagine how the system of thought upon which it is based could have appeared suddenly in a state of perfect development. There is no single trace to show how this prodigious work was elaborated. Was it a collective task, or that of one single man? The unchallenged position held by Quetzalcoatl seems to suggest the second hypothesis. However this may be, and in spite of the fact that Teotihuacan has its roots deep in the archaic world, it is clear that only a vision of the vastness of the human spirit—of the divine spark uniting and harmonizing—could possibly have given birth to the dynamic power that must have presided over the founding of a city such as this, built to the glory of the plumed serpent—that is, to conscious men. [^12]

It is a significant fact that the meaning of the Nahuatl word—Teotihuacan—is "City of the Gods."

MEN BECOMING GODS

Bernardino Sahagun gives us the following pertinent information regarding the City of Teotihuacan:

. . . The Lords therein buried, after their deaths were cannonized as gods, and it was said that they did not die, but wakened out of a dream they had lived; this is the reason why the ancients say that when men died they did not perish but began to live again, waking almost out of a dream, and that they turned into spirits or gods . . . and so they said to the dead: "Lord or Lady, wake, for it begins to dawn, now comes the daylight for the yellow-feathered birds begin to sing, and the many coloured butterflies go flying"; and when anyone died, they used to say of him that he was now teotl, meaning to say he had died in order to become spirit or god. [^13]

Laurette Sejourne is of the opinion that, ". . . far from implying any gross, polytheistic belief, the term Teotihuacan evokes the idea of human divinity and shows that the City of the Gods was the very place where the serpent learned miraculously to fly; that is, where the individual, through inner growth, attained to the category of a celestial being." [^14]

The worshipers of Quetzalcoatl believed that mortal life was a school, a preparation, for death, which represented true birth—birth into a spirit world where one was free from finite, mortal existence. The newborn child represented the tomb of the spirit, a tomb opened only by death; and so Sahagun wrote, ". . . the hour of parturition . . . is called the hour of death." [^15] Wise Aztec teachers declared:

. . . that they did not die but woke from a dream they had lived . . . and became once more spirits or gods. . . . They said, too, that some were transformed into the sun, others into the moon, and others into various planets. . . . [^16]

According to the religion of Quetzalcoatl, not all men received this glorious birth into the celestial realm. Father Sahagun states that it was the princes and high dignitaries who were changed into spirits or gods. This transformation was made possible for them only by their being initiated into the highest level of the Quetzalcoatl Mysteries. These initiations were rigorously controlled by the religious leaders.

In ancient Mexico the most important religious order was that of the Knights of the Eagle and Tiger. During the Aztec period, however, these Knights had assumed a predominantly warlike character, changing vastly from the original purpose. Munoz Camargo gathered data about the initiatory rite of the Knights of the Eagle and Tiger as it existed in some of the Nahuatl cities prior to its being greatly altered by the Aztecs.

. . . This ceremony of knighting the natives of Mexico and Tlaxcala and other provinces of the Mexican tongue, is worthy of note. . . . They knighted men with great ceremony, for first of all they were locked for forty or seventy days in a temple of their idols; and they fasted all that time and communicated with none but those who served them; at the end of that time they were taken to the Great Temple and were there given important doctrines of life which they must keep and guard; and before all this they taunted them with many insulting and satirical words, and struck them, even in the face, with many reprimands. . . . Throughout their fast they did not wash. Before this they should conceive and reach so great mercy and reward, watching over their arms throughout their fasting according to the ordinances, uses and customs so well kept among them. They were also in the habit of keeping the doors where they were fasting closed with branches of laurel, a tree much valued among the natives. [^17]

The various tests in this initiation show that the devotees believed in subjecting the flesh by fasting and humiliating it in order that the spirit might develop. This detachment from the physical is part of the doctrine of Quetzalcoatl; however, it was a paganized ceremony not practised in Book of Mormon days.

Sahagun informs us that spirits of those initiated went "into the sky where the sun lives. Those who go to heaven are those killed in wars and prisoners who have died in their enemies' power." [^18]

He also wrote:

. . . Another place where they said the souls of the dead went, the earthly paradise name Tlalocan, in which it was said there was much rejoicing and comfort, and no sorrow whatever. . . . They go there who are killed by thunderbolts, drowned in water, those suffering from leprosy, sores, scabs, gout, hydropsy, those dying of contagious diseases; they do not burn, but bury the bodies of these sick people. [^19]

QUETZALCOATL MYSTERIES

It is claimed that Teotihuacan, the "City of the Gods," was constructed as a religious center for the purpose of initiating Nahuatl worshipers into the higher Quetzalcoatl Mysteries with the belief that the devotees would eventually become gods.

This ritual center was divided into two principal sections, perhaps symbolizing heaven and the earth, joined by a vast ascending avenue. At the highest extremity of this avenue were situated the pyramids of the Sun and Moon. The larger of the two, the Pyramid of the Sun, seems to pierce the heavens. The quadrangle of Quetzalcoatl stands at the lower end of the avenue. Toward the end of this quadrangle is located the famous building known as the Temple of Quetzalcoatl. Long undulating serpents are carved along the front of the temple. Its front is also studded with heads of the serpent surrounded by quetzal feathers, representations of the plumed serpent. These are alternated with heads of Tlaloc, the rain God, who, according to the Nahuatl belief, worked closely with Quetzalcoatl in giving life to the human family. Serpent heads also appear at certain places on the ramps of the staircase. Another motif of Quetzalcoatl, the seashell, said to be a symbol of revelation, is also found on the temple.

All of these religious motifs denote that Quetzalcoatl was the giver of light, life, and substance to the human family; also, that he was responsible for the immortality of all people, and for making some of them into gods.

It is claimed by certain archaeologists that the initiation requisite for becoming gods in the Quetzalcoatl Mysteries began at the Temple of Quetzalcoatl. Mexican literature speaks of a place called Calmecac,"the house where the body buds and flowers," as the Aztecs called the religious college where the nobility was educated. Some writers are of the opinion that the Temple of Quetzalcoatl was that place. Evidence that this was the case lies in the fact that Calmecac in Tenochtitlan was under Quetzalcoatl's patronage. In regards to the latter place, in Book Two, pages 36-37, General History of the Things of New Spain (Aztec version translated into English by Charles E. Dibble and Arthur J. O. Anderson in 1951), Sahagun stated:

In the sign named ce acatl, in the first house, the lords and the leading men celebrated a great festival to Quetzalcoatl, god of the winds. This feast they observed in the house called calmecac,which was the house where dwelt the priests of the idols, and where were trained the boys. In this house, which was a monastery, was the image of Quetzalcoatl. On this day they adorned it with rich ornaments and placed before it offerings of perfumes and food. They said this was the sign of Quetzalcoatl.

Although very little is known about the details of the initiation, it is believed by some archaeologists that after performing some initiatory rites in front of the Temple of Quetzalcoatl, the neophites and the priests went out of the quadrangle of Quetzalcoatl and along the ascending avenue, known as the "pathway of the dead," towards the Pyramid of the Sun. It is believed that at various places along the "pathway of the dead" perhaps additional important initiatory rites were performed. Finally the procession reached the superimposed narrow steps which lead to the top of the Pyramid of the Sun. These they climbed. In front of a gorgeous representation of the sun made of gold, which radiated the sun's rays brilliantly in various directions, the concluding ceremony in the initiation was performed. Here the devotees received the final initiatory rites which were requisite to their becoming gods. Now they were no more to be mortals, but potentially gods. Thus the final act was completed which assured them that following death they would go on in immortality as divine beings and would be assured of the highest rewards in the world to come known in the pagan rites of the religion of Quetzalcoatl. For these reasons Teotihuacan received its name—"the City of the Gods."

In accord with Nahuatl cosmology, all of the ritual buildings at Teotihuacan were constructed in relation to the sun. The east-west axis which runs through the Pyramid of the Sun lies seventeen degrees north of the true line. Through investigation modern scholars have ". . . discovered that the cause of the displacement arises because the pyramid points toward the spot where the sun falls below the horizon on the day of its passage through the sky's zenith." [^20] Since the highest point that the sun reaches in its travels represented the center of the firmament, "the sun when it reaches this point becomes the heart of the universe, and this is an attribute belonging to Quetzalcoatl's Sun. That is to say, the pyramid is dedicated to the Fifth Sun, which was expressly created in Teotihuacan. The seventeen-degree shift to the north has thus so fundamental a meaning that this orientation was used until Aztec times." [^21]

MEN MAY BECOME GODS

The crowning doctrine of the gospel of Jesus Christ relates to the principle of men becoming gods. It is marvelous that such a doctrine, although in a polluted form, should have been retained by Indian pagans from the time of the close of the Book of Mormon to the coming of the Spaniards.

Through modern revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors, the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints not only know that they are spirit children of a Heavenly Father and a Heavenly Mother, but they also know that there is a possibility for some of them ultimately to become exalted to Godhood.

As early as February 16, 1832, Jesus Christ revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the sublime truth that "men may become gods." Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were shown in vision the three degrees of glory. In speaking of some of those who would inhabit celestial glory, the Master told them:

They are they who are of the church of the Firstborn [Church of Jesus Christ]. They. . . are priests of the Most High after the order of Melchizedek, . . . which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God-. . . These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ for ever and ever. [^22]

President Joseph F. Smith beautifully expressed the doctrine as follows:

Man is a child of God, formed in a divine image and endowed with divine attributes and even as the infant son of earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable by experience through ages of aeons of evolving to God. [^23]

President Lorenzo Snow stated that ". . . as God is, man may become." [^24] President Charles W. Penrose wrote: "Mormonism does not tend to debase God to the level of man, but exalts man to the perfection of God." [^25]

The principal purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the ultimate goal of eternal progression is to receive eternal life, i.e., to become as God is. It is thoroughly understood, however, that a vast majority of the human family will never become gods, because to do so they must accept the true gospel, receive all of the ordinances—including celestial marriage—and obey all of God's commandments faithfully to the end.

CONCLUSION

If Joseph Smith, Lorenzo Snow, and the other latter-day prophets had lived at the days of the Spanish conquest and the gospel had been restored at that time, the Indians of Meso-America would have understood on the subject of men becoming gods what they were talking about. These aborigines had lost the true pattern which must be followed by our Heavenly Father's children to become gods, and yet they had retained the heart of the doctrine which had been lost by Christendom in the Old World.

It is a remarkable and a pertinent thing that not only a spark of divine truth but even the heart of the gospel of Jesus Christ persisted among the American Indians in the doctrines that mortals are children of God and that men may become gods. Since these sublime truths are so important in the plan of salvation, certainly Christ would have revealed them to the Nephites, and thereafter the doctrines filtered down among the aborigines to the time of the discovery of America.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel G. Brinton, The Myths of the New World (Philadelphia 1905), p. 143.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Laurette Sejourne, Burning Waters-Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico (London, 1956), p. 25.
[^4] Ibid., p. 84.
[^5] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, 1946), p. 214.
[^6] Daniel G. Brinton, The Myths of the New World (Philadelphia, 1905), p. 140.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 141-143.
[^8] Works of Ixtlilxochitl, cited in Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, 1905) pp. 203, 211.
[^9] J. Eric S. Thompson, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization (Norman, Oklahoma, 1954), pp. 103, 114, 19Off., 227ff.
[^10] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 101.
[^11] Desire Charney, The Ancient Cities of the New World (New York, 1887) p. 454.
[^12] Juan de Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, Tome I., p. 205.
[^13] Works of Ixtlilxochitl, op. cit., pp. 190-191.
[^14] Torquemada, op. cit.
[^15] Bernardino de Sahagun, General History of the Things of New Spain (Florentine Codex, tr. from Aztec by Arthur J. O. Anderson and Charles E. Dibble, Santa Fe, 1950), pp. 2-3.
[^16] Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia General de Las Cosas de Nueva Espana (Mexico, 1946), vol. 1, p. 23.
[^17] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 136.
[^18] Sahagun, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 16.
[^19] Sejourne, op. cit., p. 77.
[^20] Matthew 8:24-27; Luke 8:22-25.
[^21] Ether 2:24.
[^22] Ibid., 6:5-12.
[^23] Ibid., 9:28-30, 35.
[^24] 1 Nephi 18:9-22.
[^25] 2 Nephi 15:6.
