Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 9

VIRACOCHA—THE "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD" OR JESUS CHRIST

SPANIARDS' ARRIVAL IN PERU

In 1527, when the Spanish conquistadores sailed into one of the harbors on the west coast of South America, Pedro de Candia, a lieutenant in the freebooter armada of the mighty Pizarro, stepped from the boat, helmet and breastplate freshly burnished and glistening, his gun over his shoulder, and a huge double-handed sword in his sword-belt. His gigantic stature, his mighty shoulders, and his complete attire made of him an impressive figure. He was followed by others from the ship.

As Pedro walked forward, a crowd of dark-skinned natives dropped to their knees and groveled in the dust as though they were paying obeisance before a god come down from heaven. Pedro was puzzled, embarrassed, perplexed.

With head erect and shoulders straight, he walked between a lane of beardless, bowed figures whose foreheads were pressed to the dust on either side of his path. All around him rose the whisper-"Viracocha, Viracocha" (ve' ra ko' cha).

Pedro de Candia had no idea what the natives meant. He felt ill at ease, flustered, and even somewhat irritated. Impulsively and suddenly he lifted his gun from his shoulder and fired a shot into the air.

The natives became terrified and, cringing, they whispered "Illa Tiki, Illa Tiki!" This appelation meant "The god of lightning." [^1]

Pedro grew more confused. He had no idea that the beardless, brown-skinned natives actually took him for the "White and Bearded God," Viracocha or Con (Kon) Tiki, who had been so thoroughly known and so highly reverenced by the Indians' Andean ancestors. Nor did he know that Huayne Capac the Great, the last Inca to reign prior to the Spanish invasion, had predicted that white bearded men, similar in appearance to the ancient Peruvian settlers, would soon come and conquer the land. As Huayne Capac, the great Inca ruler, lay on his deathbed, he had called to him the chiefs of the Ayllus, the leading clans of the kingdom, and among the things he told them is the following:

Many years ago it was revealed to me by our father, the Sun, that after the rule of twelve of his children, an alien people would come which had never been seen before in these regions and would conquer and subdue this kingdom and many others as well. I am inclined to suppose that this refers to the people recently sighted off our shores. They are said to be a powerful race, superior to us in everything. Now we know that with me the number of twelve Incas has been reached. Therefore, I predict to you that a few more years after I have gone to my ancestors, that strong people will appear and bring fulfillment of the prophecy of my father, the Sun; they will conquer our kingdom and rule over us. I command you to obey and serve them, for they are superior to us in everything, because their laws are better than ours, their weapons more powerful and invincible.

Peace be with you-I go now to my father, the Sun, who has called me. . . . [^2]

This could all sound like myth if it were not for the fact that the Aztec Indians of the Valley of Mexico, as well as the Maya Indians of Yucatan, cherished similar prophecies regarding their great empires. [^3] Those predictions were primarily responsible for the fact that the Inca, Aztec, and Maya rulers all capitulated after offering relatively little resistance; and their empires, composed of millions of inhabitants, came under the control of a mere handful of Spanish conquistadores.

INDIANS' TRADITIONS OF WHITE BEARDED MEN ANCIENTLY

Furthermore, the Spanish soldiers and Catholic padres who first visited Mexico, Central America, and also South America were apprised by the Indians that back in the distant past the Americas were inhabited by ". . . a race described as white and with beards—. . ." [^4] At that time a "Fair God" had visited the ancient white peoples-ancestors of the American Indians-and had given them their religion and culture.

Also, when the Spaniards entered Peru in 1527, they were greeted by the Peruvian Indians, with frightened awe, as "Viracocha!" A German scholar, Paul Herrmann, recently concluded:

[The foregoing facts,] . . . as Siegfried Huber has pointed out in his book In the Kingdom of the Incas, would be "utterly inexplicable in the absence of some pre-existent tradition, that is, unless white, bearded men had been known in olden times and their return in later ages expected." It is therefore certain that the Viracocha myth is not an invention of either Indian or Spanish priests; . . . [^5]

Faithful members of the Church of Jesus Christ read statements made by great scholars, such as the foregoing one made by Paul Herrmann and Siegfried Huber, and with joy in their hearts meditate on the marvelous story so beautifully delineated in the Book of Mormon.

INDIANS' TRADITIONS OF A "FAIR GOD"

As explained in the preceding chapters, the peoples of practically all the countries of Mexico and Central America had their traditions of a "Fair God" who had given them their culture. [^6] The same fact holds true with the countries of South America. This chapter will be confined to the Indian traditions of the Andean region of that country. Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, one of the most reliable research scholars of the past century in the field of American Indian traditions, described this "White and Bearded God" of South America as follows:

His hair was abundant, his beard fell to his waist, and he dressed in long and flowing robes. He went among the nations of the plateau, addressing each in its own dialect, taught them to live in villages and to observe just laws . . . and then he departed . . . he rose up to heaven. [^7]

MEANING OF VIRACOCHA

Viracocha! More than four hundred years have passed since the Spanish conquests, and today the word Viracocha is the form of address meaning simply "lord" in Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Also, in practice it is identical with "white man," for today white people are still considered to be the sons and people of Viracocha the Almighty.

Who then, and what, is Viracocha?

In brief, according to Peruvian traditions, he was the God who created the heavens and the earth, placed the human family on the earth, gave them their religion and culture, suddenly came to the ancient Peruvians and lived among them for some time, performed many miraculous deeds, and then disappeared just as suddenly as he had arrived.

PERUVIAN NAMES FOR THE "WHITE BEARDED GOD"

Fortunately, the early Catholic padres and Spanish conquistadores of the Andean countries carefully recorded many of the traditions of the Indians. Their accounts give us much information regarding the "White Bearded God," under the various names applied to him by different Indian tribes. This God constituted the central figure of the Indian traditions of the several Andean countries of South America.

According to the information recorded by the early Spanish chroniclers, the ancient Peruvians who pre-dated the Incas made common use of the name of Con Tici, (Con Ticci or Kon Tiki), while the Incas preferred the name of Viracocha for their "Fair God." Dr. Philip Ainsworth Means, an outstanding scholar in the field of Andean traditions, described the "Fair God" of Peru as follows:

The Creator-god most celebrated in the Chronicles of Peru is known under various names. . . . He has generally been referred to as Viracocha or as Pacha-Camac, the former designation being used in the highlands, the latter on the coast. Both of them, however, are Quechua and, consequently, more or less late in date. It seems clear enough that pre-Incaic names for the Creator-god were Con, Con-Tici, Illa-Tici, and sundry approximations thereto, sometimes prefixed to the name Viracocha in later times. . . . [^8]

Thor Heyerdahl, author of the famous Kon Tiki, adds the following information to that given by Means:

. . . With the prefix Illa meaning "light," and Con, being an alternative name for the creator, we know that the early Peruvian culture-hero Con-Tici or Illa-Tici was venerated as Tici-the-Creator and Tici-the-Light.

Tici is a word of ancient origin, adopted in Quechua mythology from an earlier language, distinct from their own. It is preserved as a live word in Quechua dialects either as tecsi or ticsi, meaning "origin." Thus Markham says, in referring to Blas Valera, the best-informed mestizo chronicler of the sixteenth century, whose major works are unfortunately lost: "The names given for God by Valera, as used by the ancient Peruvians, are also given by some others of the best authorities. They are Illa Tici Uira Cocha. The first word means light. Tici is the foundation of things, or beginning." [^9]

TRADITION OF VIRACOCHA AND HIS WHITE FOLLOWERS BUILDING TIAHUANACO

In the words of Heyerdahl:

There is within the borders of the former Inca Empire no prehistoric site with monuments and other architecture of more impressive dimensions, and with evidence of a higher cultural level, than the ancient megalithic ruins of Tiahuanaco in the Bolivian highland plains south of Lake Titicaca. [^10]

When the Incas first immigrated into Peru and Bolivia, so they reported to the Spanish conquistadores, they obtained traditions from their predecessors that in ancient times a "White Bearded God" had visited a superior white race of people in the Andean region and had assisted them in establishing an unusually high culture and superb civilization. [^11] This "Fair God" was also accredited with having assisted that bearded race of white people in the construction of the massive archaeological structures of the Andean region, such as those at Tiahuanaco.

The Incas adopted the traditions of the people whom they supplanted and carried those traditions on to the time of the Spanish conquest. Regarding this fact, Paul Herrmann wrote:

. . . It is certain, however, that when the Incas discovered the giant city Tiahuanaco on Lake Titicaca, allegedly built by Viracocha and his followers, and even more when they came upon the grandiose divine city Pachacamac, south of Lima, they invoked this strange god by the name of Con Tiki, the Eternal, and that they called him Pachayachachi, Creator and Ruler of the World. [^12]

INDIANS' TRADITIONS OF VIRACOCHA

Thor Heyerdahl has made an extensive study of the traditions of the Indians of the Andean countries and the archaeology of that region. He published his findings in an 800 page volume entitled American Indians in the Pacific. Heyerdahl maintains that:

The memory of the hero-god Viracocha was vividly preserved among aborigines in wide regions of the former Inca Empire, even through the last century. [^13]

And then, speaking from personal experiences, he states that "in many places Viracocha stories still survive to-day among the elder natives."

Daniel G. Brinton, in his book American Hero-Myths, quoted Zegarra, a leading Peruvian scholar of the past century, as having described the "White Bearded God" who visited the people in the Andean region in ancient times as follows:

"The tradition was that Viracocha's face was extremely white and bearded." [Brinton then adds]: There is, indeed, a singular uniformity of statement in the myths. Viracocha, under any and all his surnames, is always described as white and bearded, dressed in flowing robes and of imposing mien. [^14]

Pascual de Andagoya (1541-1546), the Spaniard whose explorations from Panama led to Pizarro's discovery of Peru, wrote:

The first lord, of whom there was any recollection in Cuzco, was the Inca Viracocha. This was a man who came to that land alone; but there is no record of whence he came, except that Viracocha, in the language of the people, means "Foam of the sea." He was a white and bearded man, like a Spaniard. The natives of Cuzco, seeing his great valour, took it for something divine, and received him as their chief. He ordained many excellent laws and regulations for the government of the land; . . . [^15]

Pachacuti-Yanqui Salcamayhua (1620), himself a beardless Quechua Indian writer, in his book, An Account of the Antiquities of Peru, specifically pointed out that

. . . an immigrant creator with a beard had been active among his forefathers before the advent of the Spaniards. He relates that at a very remote period shortly after Peru had been populated, there came from Titicaca Island to the tribes of the mainland an old man with a beard, dressed in a long robe. He went about in the highlands preaching his religious beliefs to the Indians. [^16]

Another early Spanish conquistador, Cieza de Leon (1553-1560), collected the Peruvian traditions which affirmed that long before the reign of the first Inca, men, "white and bearded like the Spaniards," had lived in Vinaque and on Titicaca Island. Cieza was also highly impressed by the Incas' memory of Viracocha, who they reported had visited these ancient Peruvians and accomplished mighty works among them. To quote:

The natives had heard from their forefathers that Viracocha was much beloved, because he was humane and benevolent to all, and because he cured sick people, . . . [^17]

Another Indian account states that the "White Bearded God" . . . healed the sick and restored sight to the blind. Everywhere, at his approach, the demons took to flight. [^18]

Cieza de Leon also recorded in his journal that

. . . before the rule of the Incas in these realms, and even before they were known, these Indians relate other things much older than all that has been told. . . .

. . . they tell that from the south [of Cuzco] there came and stayed a white man of tall stature, who, in his appearance and person showed great authority and veneration, and that as they saw he had great power, turning hills into plains and plains into hills, making fountains in the solid rocks, they recognized such power in him that they called him Creator of all made things, Beginning thereof, Father of the Sun, because, besides this they say that he made greater things, as he is said to have given men and animals their existence, and finally that wonderful benefits came from his hands.

And the Indians who told me this had heard from their forebears, who had also heard it from the songs which these had had since very ancient times, that he went off northwards along the Sierras while accomplishing these wonders, and that they never saw him again.

In many places they tell how he gave rules to men how they should live, and that he spoke lovingly to them with much kindness, admonishing them they should be good to each other and not do any harm or injury, but that instead they should love each other and show charity.

In most places they generally call him Ticci Viracocha, . . .

In many parts temples were built to him, in which they placed stone statutes in his likeness, in front of which they made sacrifices. The large stone statues which are at the site of Tiahuanaco must be from those times. And although they relate of his former fame this which I tell of Ticci Viracocha, they cannot tell more of him, neither that he returned to any part of his kingdom. [^19]

STONE STATUES OF VIRACOCHA

When the early Spaniards first arrived at the site of Tiahuanaco, they found a considerable number of anthropomorphic monoliths, or stone statues of men, which had been carved at an early date. Many of these were bearded figures representing the "Fair God." One in particular was a stone statue erected south of Cuzco, on the main Inca road from Titicaca, by the Indians of Cacha. According to Garcilisso de la Vega (1609), it had been erected in honor of Tici Viracocha. He informs us that this statute was placed on the great pedestal inside an Inca temple built of cut stone. To quote Garcilisso:

The image represented a man of good stature, with a long beard measuring more than a palmo [one palmo is about nine inches], in a wide loose robe like a cassock, reaching to the feet. [^20]

The early Spaniards marveled at the close resemblance of this image, found among beardless Indians, to their Old World saints and apostles. According to Cieza de Leon (1553-60), several of the early Spanish writers came to the conclusion that the Viracocha statute represented not a heathen god but one of the apostles who must have come to Peru before the days of Columbus. [^21]

In order to protect the statute of Viracocha, some of the Indians hid it near Cuzco; but, according to R. Karsten, it was re-discovered by a pious Spaniard and destroyed. [^22]

Daniel G. Brinton, quoting from Religion Anonyma, written in 1615, described a marble statute of Illa Tici Viracocha which stood in the great Cuzco Temple. This statute was claimed to have been ". . . both as to hair, complexion, features, raiment and sandals, just as paintings represent the apostle, St. Bartholomew. . . ." [^23] This statue was destroyed, as was the other one of Viracocha.

Thor Heyerdahl quotes Francisco de Avila (1608) as stating that

. . . in Peru an idol called Coniraya Viracocha was invoked and worshipped almost down to the coming of the Spaniards. . . . "This invocation and custom of calling the idol by the name of Viracocha certainly prevailed long before there were any tidings of Spaniards in the country." [^24]

Fortunately some of these statues of Viracocha, the "White Bearded God," survived to the present time. A photo of one of them is reproduced in this book. (See Fig. 105, page 205.)

BETANZOS' ACCOUNT OF VIRACOCHA

When the Inca Empire was first discovered and conquered, Juan de Betanzos came from Spain to Peru, married an Indian girl, and lived among the natives the remainder of his life. This gave him an unusually good opportunity to collect and preserve the aboriginal Peruvian beliefs and traditions. Like nearly all early chroniclers, he paid much attention to Peruvian accounts of the pre-Inca "White Bearded God," Viracocha, or Con Tici Viracocha. Betanzos wrote his account in 1551, and it was published in Madrid in 1881 under the title, Suma y narracion de los Incas. Since this book is not available to me, I shall have to depend on the information presented by Thor Heyerdahl.

Betanzos claimed that the Indians had told him that Con Tici or Viracocha

. . . made the sun and day, and ordered the sun to move in the course it now moves and afterwards, they say, he made the stars and the moon. [^25]

Then Betanzos gives an elaborate story of God's coming down to earth and creating the human family on the shores of Lake Titicaca. As part of that story, he explained the Indian tradition of the origin of the massive buildings and the huge stone statues of human beings found there by the Spaniards, the credit for their construction being given to Viracocha. After the work of creating the human family was completed, this "Fair God" left the earth but returned many, many years later to live among the people a certain length of time. Regarding this event, Thor Heyerdahl makes the following significant comment:

. . . We learn through Betanzos that Viracocha only "returned" to earth when he moved with his followers from the shores of Titicaca to the nearby site of Tiahuanaco. Long before this appearance he had, according to Betanzos' informants, created heaven and earth and the original population of the country who dwelt in darkness until he came and established himself in human shape at Tiahuanaco. [^26]

Betanzos gave the following interesting description of the "Fair God" of Peru:

. . . when I asked the Indians what shape this Viracocha had when their ancestors had thus seen him, they said that according to the information they possessed, he was a tall man with a white vestment that reached to his feet, and that this vestment had a girdle; . . . and that he carried in his hands a certain thing which today seems to remind them of the breviary [book] that the priests carry in their hands. . . And when I asked them what this person called himself . . . they told me that his name was Con Tici Viracocha Pachayachachic, which in their language means God, Maker of the World. [^27]

SARMIENTO'S ACCOUNT OF VIRACOCHA

Sarmiento de Gamboa (1572), another Spanish chronicler of the colonial period, recorded the traditions of the ancient Peruvians of pre-Incan times. His account confirms Betanzos'. Sarmiento informs us that the Incas believed that after the creation ". . . Ticci Viracocha sent a great flood to punish the sins of the first men, but the ancestors of the Cuzcos . . . were saved and so left some descendants." [^28] Later ". . . Viracocha suddenly appeared on the Titicaca plateau with his servants, to help restore mankind and give them light." [^29]

Sarmiento's description of Viracocha, as he appeared at the time of his preaching among the ancestors of the Peruvian Indians, is much the same as was Betanzos'. Referring to the Indians from whom he had received reports, Sarmiento wrote:

. . . all agree that Viracocha was the creator of these people. They have the tradition that he was a man of medium height, white and dressed in a white robe like an alb secured around the waist, and that he carried a staff and a book in his hands. [^30]

Viracocha ordered these people that they should live without quarreling, and that they should know and serve him. He gave them a certain precept which they were to observe on pain of being confounded if they should break it. . . . [^31]

In regards to the compiling of his history, Sarmiento wrote:

I have collected the information with much diligence so that this history can rest on attested proofs from the general testimony of the whole kingdom, old and young, Incas and tributary Indians. [^32]

MILES POINDEXTER'S STATEMENT REGARDING VIRACOCHA

Miles Poindexter, in his book The Ayar-Incas, wrote:

There was a universal Inca tradition reported by Cieza de Leon, Sarmiento, and Salcamayhua of a white teacher who had appeared in the highlands in the very earliest times and given the people their civilization. . . . Cieza de Leon relates that this legendary leader was first seen coming from the south. . . . [^33]

Sarmiento said that this teacher ". . . preached to the people with loving words. . . . He worked miracles and punished the wicked." [^34] It is claimed that Viracocha had such power and authority that he commanded the forces of nature, and they obeyed.

BOCHICA, THE VIRACOCHA OF THE CHIBCHAS

The peaceful and highly cultured Nuyscas or Chibchas, who lived in the lofty plateau of the northern Andes at the time of the arrival of the Spaniards, had a sufficiently high cultural level and social standing to place them with the Mayas, the Aztecs, and the Incas, among the most outstanding nations of aboriginal America. They, like most other highly cultured Indian groups, attributed their ancestors' culture to a foreign teacher generally referred to as Bochica. He is also known by the names of Nemterequetaba and Xue. According to native tradition it was claimed that he had come from the East and entered the territory of Bogota at Pasca on its southern border. The following is quoted from W. B. Stevenson:

North of Peru, the Nuysca Indians of the plain of Cundinamarca in Colombia had a legend of one called Bochica, a white man with a beard, who appeared suddenly amongst them, while savages, and taught them how to build and sow, and formed them into communities, settling their government. [^35]

Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, in his book American Hero-Myths, quotes Lucas Fernandez Piedrahita, an author, who wrote A.D. 1688, as follows:

The knowledge of these various arts they attributed to the instructions of a wise stranger who dwelt among them many cycles before the arrival of the Spaniards. He came from the East, and from the Ilanos of Venezuela or beyond them, . . . His hair was abundant, his beard fell to his waist, and he dressed in long and flowing robes. He went among the people of the plateau, addressing each in his own dialect, taught them to live in villages and to observe just laws. Near the village of Coto was a high hill held in special veneration, for from its prominent summit he was wont to address the people who had gathered around its base. . . . For many years . . . did he rule the people with equity, and then he departed, going back to the East whence he came, said some authorities, but others averred that he rose up to heaven. At any rate, before he left he appointed a successor in the sovereignty, and recommended him to pursue the path of justice. . . . [^36]

A Catholic padre named Pedro Simon is quoted by Lord Kings-borough as stating:

Other names applied to this hero-god were Nemterequeteba, Bochica, and Zuxu or Sua, the last mentioned being also the ordinary word for the Sun. He was reported to have been of light complexion, and when the Spaniards first arrived they were supposed to have been his envoys, and were called sua or gagua, just as from memory of a similar myth in Peru they were addressed as Viracocha. [^37]

Several points in the quotations relative to Bochica definitely connect him with Christ. He, like the Messiah, was white and bearded, appeared suddenly among the people, gave them their religion and culture, was the god of light, and finally ascended to heaven.

TRADITION THAT VIRACOCHA TAUGHT THE INHABITANTS OF ANCIENT AMERICA FROM A BOOK

Several different Catholic padres and Spanish chroniclers of the colonial period reported that Indians of the Andean region had told them that Viracocha, or the "White Bearded God," taught their ancestors from a book. Also, Spanish conquistadores and Catholic priests reported that they had actually seen statues representing the "Fair God" with a book in hand, hands, or under his arm. Most of these statues were destroyed; however, at least one survived, and a photograph of it is reproduced in connection with this chapter. Thor Heyerdahl made a very important observation regarding the representation of the book on this statue. To quote:

. . . Regular books, as known from pre-Columbian Mexico, have never been discovered in Peru, yet an unidentifiable object, the memory of which the sight of a "book" or a "breviary" might well recall to a native mind, appears carved in the hands of the pre-Incan Tiahuanaco stone statue. . . . [^38]

JESUS CHRIST TAUGHT THE NEPHITES FROM A BOOK

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ, and others who have studied the history and religion of this people, are cognizant of the fact that the inhabitants of ancient America, particularly the Nephites, possessed many books written on metal plates, [^39] and perhaps they used other types of writing materials and were acquainted with methods of writing which would be much more rapid than could be applied in engraving on gold plates. To illustrate this point, the readers are referred to King Benjamin's sermon. His congregation was so large that he had a tower erected on which to stand; and even then

. . . they could not all hear his words because of the greatness of the multitude; therefore he caused that the words which he spake should be written and sent forth among those that were not under the sound of his voice, that they might also receive his words. [^40]

Further evidence of books and methods of writing among the Nephites is clearly given in connection with the account of Christ's appearance to the people on the Western Hemisphere shortly after his resurrection. He taught them his gospel; and in doing so he read to them from a book. He also made reference to the various books and records which they possessed, giving instructions regarding the continuance of keeping records. The resurrected Lord declared:

Therefore give heed to my words; write the things which I have told you; and according to the time and the will of the Father they shall come forth to the Gentiles. . . .

. . . after he [Jesus] had expounded all of the scriptures unto them which they had received, he said unto them: Behold, other scriptures I would that ye shall write, that ye have not.

And it came to pass that he said unto Nephi: Bring forth the record which ye have kept.

And when Nephi had brought forth the records, and laid them before him, he cast his eyes upon them and said: . . .

And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it [Samuel's prophecy] should be written; therefore it was written according as he commanded. [^41]

The principal purpose the Nephite prophets had in writing their records was to preserve all available information and revelations from heaven which maintained that Jesus was the Christ, the Savior of the world, the Only Begotten Son of the Eternal Father in the flesh. [^42] One of the Lord's avowed purposes in having these Nephite records preserved was to bring them forth in the latter days ". . . to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." [^43]

Since these sacred records were regarded so highly and used so extensively throughout the entire course of Nephite history, and since their contents were taught to the people by the resurrected Christ, who is the central figure in them and the principal purpose for which they were written, is it not possible that such a profound impression would have been made on the inhabitants of ancient America that they would preserve—not only in their traditions but also in stone—a definite remembrance of their "Holy Book" and its connection with the "White and Bearded God"? Indian traditions have supplied an abundance of evidence to the effect that such was the case.

VIRACOCHA IDENTICAL WITH JESUS CHRIST

Perhaps by now the readers have arrived at a conclusion regarding the question asked earlier in the chapter, namely, "Who, then, and what is Viracocha?"

An analysis of the numerous Indian traditions regarding the "White and Bearded God," who played such a prominent role in the traditions of the aborigines of South America, has supplied ample evidence to convince the writer that these traditions are survivals in distorted forms of the true knowledge of Jesus Christ held by the inhabitants of ancient America in Book of Mormon days. In other words, the writer maintains that Viracocha, or the "White and Bearded God" under whatever name he may have been known by any of the Indian tribes, could have been none other than Jesus of Nazareth, the Only Begotten Son, the Savior of mankind, who, after his resurrection, visited the ancestors of the Indians here on the Western Hemisphere, taught them the gospel, and then ascended into heaven to dwell with the Eternal Father.

Students of the religion and history of the Andean peoples recognize the fact that Viracocha is so similar to the God of the ancient Hebrews and of Christianity that he must be accepted as the same Eternal Being; for example, Miles Poindexter wrote:

. . . Viracocha, . . . in all essentials, was the same omnipotent spirit as our own God. All through the chronicles appears the thought, like the imprecations of the Prophets of the Jews, that disaster and death were the penalty of apostasy, blessings and power the reward of fidelity to the true God. [^44]

According to the Latter-day Saints' belief, the God of the Old Testament—he who appeared to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and others of the ancient Hebrew prophets—was none other than Jesus of Nazareth; therefore, Jehovah, the God of the Jews, is the same as Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the Christians. Following his resurrection, the same God who had lived among the Jews and given them the true plan of salvation, did a similar work among the inhabitants of ancient America. Thus the memory of Christ's appearance to the progenitors of the Indians, as well as many of his teachings, although somewhat adulterated, persisted more than fifteen hundred years in the Indians' traditions of the "White Bearded God," he being called Viracocha in Peru, Quetzalcoatl in Mexico, and other names among various other Indian tribes.

INDIAN TRADITIONS OF VIRACOCHA, AND BOOK OF MORMON

QUOTATIONS REGARDING JESUS CHRIST LISTED FOR COMPARISON

To assist in sustaining and clarifying the foregoing conclusion and to provide a basis for comparisons, short quotations from Indian traditions from the preceding material discussed in this chapter are listed in one column and quotations from the Book of Mormon are listed in a parallel column.

Quotations from Indian Traditions Quotations from the Book of Mormon

regarding Viracocha, the "White regarding Jesus Christ:

Bearded God":

[Viracocha was the] Creator of all Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of

things, Beginning thereof, God. I created the heavens and the

Father . . . earth, and all things that in them

are. . . .—3 Nephi 9:15.

[He was the] foundation of all . . . I am Alpha and Omega, the

things or the beginning . . . beginning and the end.—Ibid.,

9:18.

[Jesus is] . . . the all-powerful

Creator of heaven and earth . . .

—Jacob 2:5.

[Viracocha] called himself . . . [Jesus is] . . . a God of miracles,

God, Maker of the world. . . . that same God who created the

heavens and the earth, and all things

He made the sun and the day. that in them are.

He made the stars and the moon. . —Mormon 9:11.

. .

[Viracocha] created heaven and earth . . . I [Jesus], the Lord your God,

and the original population . . . have created all men, . . .—2 Nephi

29:7; 1 Nephi 17:36.

. . . man have I [Jesus Christ]

created after the body of my spirit;

. . .—Ether 3:16.

[He] placed the human family on Behold, the Lord hath created the

the earth. earth that it should be inhabited;

and he hath created his children that

they should possess it.—1

Nephi 17:36.

[The "White Bearded God"] had . . . it behooveth the great Creator

great concern over it [the human that he suffereth himself to become

family]. subject unto man in the flesh, and die

for all men, . . .—2 Nephi 9:5.

[Viracocha] was venerated as Tici- Behold I am Jesus Christ, . . .

the-Creator and Tici-the-Light. . . . I am the light and the life of

the world; . . .—3 Nephi 11:10-11;

9:18; Alma 38:9.

[He was the] God of Light. He [Jesus] is the light and the life

of the world; yea a light that is

endless, that can never be darkened;

. . .—Mosiah 16:9.

[Viracocha controlled the forces [Christ declared:] . . . the winds

of nature, being] the giver of rain. have gone forth out of my mouth,

and also the rains and the floods

have I sent forth.—Ether 2:24.

[Jesus Christ] . . . the Lord . . .

caused that rain should fall upon the

earth, . . .—Helaman 11:17.

[Viracocha was the] giver of (The entire Book of Mormon teaches

culture, industries, and religion that Jesus Christ was the giver of

to mortals. culture and industries.)

[In ancient times Viracocha] . . . if it were not for the prayers

sent a flood to punish the sins of the righteous, who are now in this

of . . . men. land, that ye would even now be

visited with utter destruction; yet

it would not be by flood, as were the

people in the days of Noah,

. . .—Alma 10:22.

[Viracocha] suddenly appeared And I saw the heavens open, and the

[to the ancient Americans.] Lamb of God descending out of heaven;

and he came down and showed himself

unto them.—1 Nephi 12:6.

He came [to earth] . . . in human . . . they [the ancient Americans]

shape. cast their eyes up again towards

He was a tall man with a white heaven; and behold, they saw a Man

vestment . . . [which] had a descending out of heaven; and he

a girdle. [Jesus] was clothed in a white robe;

[The "Fair God" wore a] long robe and he came down and stood in the

[or was] dressed in a white robe. midst of them; . . .—3

Nephi 11:8.

[Viracocha] was extremely white, . . . the light of his [Christ's]

bearded, and beautiful. countenance did shine upon them, and

[Viracocha's] face was extremely behold they [the twelve disciples]

white and bearded. were white as the countenance and

also the garments of Jesus; and

behold the whiteness thereof did

exceed all the whiteness, yea, even

there could be nothing upon earth so

white as the whiteness thereof.—

Ibid., 19:25.

[Viracocha appeared to a] white . . . [Some of the Book of Mormon

race of people. people] were white, and exceedingly

fair and delightsome, . . .—2 Nephi

5:21.

. . . Lamanites who had united with

the Nephites were numbered among the

Nephites;

. . . and their skin became white like

unto the Nephites; . . .—3 Nephi

2:14-15.

[Viracocha possessed] both divine [Jesus asked the multitude] Have ye

and miraculous powers. any that are sick among you? Bring

[He] healed the sick and restored them hither. . . . all the multitude,

sight to the blind. Everywhere, with one accord, did go forth with

at his approach the demons took to their sick and their afflicted, and

flight. their lame, and with their blind, and

. . . Viracocha was much beloved, with their dumb, and with all them

because he was humane and benevolent that were afflicted in any manner;

to all, and because he cured sick and he did heal them every one as

people, . . . they were brought forth unto him.—

Ibid., 17:7, 9.

He carried . . . a book in his [After Jesus] had expounded all the

hands. scriptures unto them which they had

[Viracocha] read and taught the received, he said unto them: Behold,

people from a book. other scriptures I would that ye

should write, that ye have not.

—Ibid., 23:6-7, 14.

[Viracocha taught] his religious And he [Jesus] did expound all

beliefs to the Indians. things even from the beginning until

the time that he should come in his

glory—. . .

And now there cannot be written in

this book even a hundredth part of the

things which Jesus did truly teach

unto the people; . . .—Ibid.,

26:3,6.

He taught the people to observe Behold, I [Christ] am he that gave the

just laws. law, and I am he who covenanted with

my people Israel; . . .—Ibid.,

15:5.

He gave rules telling men how they Behold, I have given unto you the

should live. commandments; therefore keep my

commandments. And this is the law and

the prophets, for they truly testified

of me.—Ibid., 15:5, 9-10.

[Viracocha] taught with love and And it came to pass that when Jesus

kindness. had thus spoken, he cast his eyes

round about again on the multitude,

and beheld they were in tears, . . .

And he said unto them: Behold, my

bowels are filled with compassion

towards you.—Ibid., 17:5-6.

He spoke lovingly to them with But behold I [Jesus] say unto you,

much kindness, admonishing them love your enemies, bless them that

that they should be good to each curse you, do good to them that hate

and other and not do any harm or you, pray for them who despitefully

you injury, but instead they should use and perse6cute you; . . .

love each other and show charity. —Ibid., 12:44.

Disappearing suddenly, . . . [the . . . he [Jesus] departed from them,

"White Bearded God"] rose up to and ascended into heaven. And the

heaven. disciples saw and did bear record that

he ascended again into heaven.

—Ibid., 18:39.

A comparison of the foregoing quotations shows that a surprisingly large number of the divine truths contained in the Book of Mormon were preserved in Indian traditions in an adulterated form. Furthermore, it is evident from the quotations that both sources—Indian traditions and the Book of Mormon—sustain each other in bearing witness to the fact that Viracocha—the "White Bearded God" and Jesus Christ are the same individual.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Victor W. Von Hagen, Realm of the Incas (New York, 1957) pp. 29-30.
[^2] Ibid., p. 40.
[^3] Idem.
[^4] John Rowe, "Inca Culture at the Time of the Conquest," Handbook of South American Indians (Washington, 1946), vol. 3, p. 198.
[^5] Miles Poindexter, The Ayar-Incas (New York, 1930), vol. 1, p. 107.
[^6] Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1956), vol. 1, pp. 89-92.
[^7] Von Hagen, op. cit., pp. 161-163.
[^8] Ibid., p. 164.
[^9] Ibid., p. 166.
[^10] 1 Nephi 18:25; 2 Nephi 5:15; 20:34; Jarom 1:1-8; 2 Nephi 12:7; Enos 1:21; 3 Nephi 3:22; 4:4; Ether 9:19.
[^11] Alma 18:9-12; 26:6.
[^12] Von Humboldt, cited in Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians in the Pacific (Stockholm, 1952), p. 230.
[^13] W. Bollaert, cited in Ibid.
[^14] Cieza de Leon, cited in Ibid., p. 231.
[^15] Poindexter, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 232.
[^16] Ibid., p. 236.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 237-239.
[^18] 2 Nephi 5:15; 20:34; Jarom 1:8; Mosiah 11:3, 8; Ether 7:9; 10:23.
[^19] Cieza de Leon, cited in Von Hagen, op. cit., p. 116.
[^20] Poindexter, op. cit., p. 89.
[^21] Von Hagen, op. cit., p. 34.
[^22] Ibid., p. 32.
[^23] Brinton, op. cit., p. 148.
[^24] Francisco de Avila, cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 254.
[^25] Juan de Betanzos, Suma y narracion de los Incas (Madrid, Spain, 1881), cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 235.
[^26] Idem.
[^27] Betanzos, cited in idem.
[^28] Sarmiento de Gamboa, History of the Incas, cited in idem, pp. 247-248.
[^29] Idem, p. 247.
[^30] Idem.
[^31] Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, History of the Incas (1572, in Works issued by the Hakluyt Society, Series No. XXII, Cambridge, 1907), p. 28.
[^32] Ibid., p. 29.
[^33] Miles Poindexter, The Ayar-Incas (Rahway, N. J., 1930), vol. 2, p. 86.
[^34] Sarmiento, cited in ibid., p. 87.
[^35] W. B. Stevenson, A History and Descriptive Narrative of Twenty Years' Residence in South America (London, 1825), vol. 1, p. 398.
[^36] Daniel G. Brinton, American Hero-Myths (Philadelphia, 1882), p. 300.
[^37] Pedro Simon, Noticias Histiales de las Conquistas de Tierra Firma en el Neuvo Reyno de Granada, Pt. 4, chapters 2, 3, 4, cited in Lord Kingsborough, Mexican Antiquities, vol. 8.
[^38] Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 248.
[^39] 1 Nephi 1:16-17; 6:1-6; 9:1-5; 19:1-6; Helaman 3:13-15; Omni 1:18; 3 Nephi 8-11; Mosiah 21:25-28; 8:6-19.
[^40] Mosiah 2:6-8.
[^41] 3 Nephi 23:4, 6-8, 13.
[^42] 2 Nephi 26:12; Mormon 5:9-14; Jacob 1:4.
[^43] "Preface," Book of Mormon.
[^44] Miles Poindexter, The Ayar-Incas (New York, 1868), vol. 1, p. 235.
