Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 10

A VISIT TO PERU AND BOLIVIA

FLIGHT TO LIMA, PERU

The plane to Peru left Miami, Florida, at 4 o'clock in the morning, which was a delightful time and advantageous to the passengers to afford them the opportunity to see the country over which we were flying. While daylight was coming, we flew over the gulf of Mexico and then over Yucatan and Honduras. Our first landing was at Tegucigalpa, Honduras. The next landing was at Managua, Nicaragua. From there we passed above the other Central American countries and on over Colombia and Ecuador in South America.

The entire route to the north border of Peru supplied us with beautiful scenery, the terrain below us being covered with thick vegetation. Since the Central American countries are quite narrow, we could see the blue waters of both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans part of the time.

TOPOGRAPHY OF PERU

When we reached the northern end of Peru, the terrain changed abruptly. The beautiful green foliage of Central America, Colombia, and Ecuador was replaced by a barren, sandy, desert strip, ranging from ten to one hundred miles in width and extending along the western coast of South America for practically 2,000 miles.

As I looked from the plane at the earth below me, I saw only sand hills and sand plains—sand! sand! miles and miles of glistening, white, and glaring sand, as it reflected the sun's rays. Now and then, however, I could see a town or city, surrounded by a green patch made possible through the waters of a stream which was making its way from the high Andes to the Pacific Ocean.

During the following month, I traveled by car and by air along the coastal plain from the north border of Peru to the Chilean border on the south and can verify that the Peruvian coastal plain is a vast, sandy desert, perhaps in many respects like the Sahara Desert in northern Africa.

From a geographical and topographical viewpoint, Peru can be divided into three distinct types of country: first, the sandy coastal plain; second, the massive, high, and rugged mountain range, which is scantily covered with low-growing vegetation; and third, the tropical east side of the majestic Andes, which slope rapidly, forming the upper Amazon basin. The vegetation changes completely in this area, soon becoming a dense jungle composed of a profuse growth common to tropical areas.

ARRIVAL AT LIMA

We arrived at Lima, Peru, that evening. Since I was acquainted with very few people there, I was delighted to see Frederick S. Williams and his wife waiting at the airport when I arrived. President Williams had served as the Argentine Mission president and was also the man who opened the Uruguay Mission. Between those missions and up to the present time, he has spent many years in South America and is now in Lima in business. Fortune could not have smiled upon me more favorably than to have a man of his experience and acquaintance with the language and customs of the South American people to meet me at the plane and to be, with his wife, my personal guide and escort during the entire month of July, except while I was in Bolivia. Their kindness and generosity were beyond my words to describe; and so for all they did for me, I express deep appreciation.

President Williams made numerous contacts for me with government officials, with directors of museums—both public and private—and with touring agencies. He and his wife also took me in their automobile to a number of the Peruvian archaeological ruins, a courtesy which was most helpful in furthering the purpose of my trip.

ANCIENT CULTURES OF THE ANDEAN REGION

When the Spaniards conquered the Indians of Peru in 1532, the Inca ruler had an extensive empire over which he and his forefathers had held control for many centuries. Many of the Catholic padres and others of the Spanish colonizers who were interested in the various Indian cultures made extensive inquiries of the aborigines regarding the history of their ancestors. The major portion of the information obtained, however, pertained to the Inca empire and not to the pre-Inca peoples. At the time of the Spanish conquest, the history of the earlier Andean cultures was quite vague in the minds of the Indians. When the Catholic chroniclers asked who built the great ancient City of Tiahuanaco and other similar places, they were merely told that these places were built by white and bearded men long before the time of the rise of the Inca empire.

Archaeologists, through their painstaking research and careful work, however, have shown that numerous important ancient cultures thrived in Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia long before the rise of the Inca empire; in fact, the people of the Andean region were civilized as early as B.C. 1,500. Recent carbon 14 tests show that people were living in Peru as early as B.C. 3,000. [^1] In his book Realm of the Incas, published in 1957, Dr. Victor W. Von Hagen describes and dates various Peruvian cultures.

The Andean cultures reached unusual heights in several fields of endeavor, particularly in metallurgy, in weaving, in pottery making, in medicine, in dentistry, in agriculture, and in rockwork.

The marvelous Tiahuanaco culture, one of the earliest established by white men in the Andean region, is claimed to have reached a high stage of development in the B.C. period. The Tiahuanacans lived in Bolivia on the shores of Lake Titicaca in an extensive valley of the mighty cordillera, which has an altitude of 12,000 feet. The "White and Bearded God" was regarded as the person responsible for that ancient culture; and it was he, under the name of Viracocha, who was devotedly worshiped for many centuries by those ancient people. After the Tiahuanaco culture had flourished many centuries near Lake Titicaca, the Tiahuanacans established an extensive empire, controlling the country between the lake and the Pacific Ocean. This empire is claimed to have flourished from A.D. 1,000 to 1,300.

In addition to the Tiahuanacans, the people of several other high cultures—such as the Chavin, the Paracas, the Chimu, the Nasca, the Mochica, and the Inca cultures—played important roles in Andean history prior to the Spanish conquest. The one best known of any other of these ancient cultures is that of the Incas with the capital city named Cuzco, Peru, situated in a valley approximately 11,000 feet in altitude.

According to tradition, the ancestors of the Inca originally lived on the Isle of the Sun in Lake Titicaca, Bolivia. The "Sun-God," it was believed, created the first Inca, Manco Capac, and his sister-wife, instructed them in the arts of civilization, and commanded them to take their culture to other people. In this way began the line of Inca, or ruling class of people.

From Lake Titicaca, the first Inca, his wives and associates, wandered northward, passing between two high ranges of the Andes, and came to the Valley of Cuzco. Upon their arrival, they established the City of Cuzco, which was the beginning of a mighty empire. According to archaeologists, as well as Indian tradition, Manco Capac established Cuzco around A.D. 1,000 to 1,050. He was a worshiper of Viracocha, or Kon-Tici, the "White and Bearded God," as were many other peoples of the Andean Region. Dr. Victor W. Von Hagen quotes from one of the early chroniclers as follows:

"In the year 1,000 A.D.," wrote Pedro de Cieza de Leon, ". . . in the name of [Kon] Tici-Viracocha and the Sun and the rest of his gods, Manco Capac founded the new city." [^2]

And then Von Hagen states that in 1545 Pedro de Cieza de Leon received from the Indians of Cuzco an account of their history which was "as good and simple a premise as any. The Inca tradition emphasizes the fact that those people developed within the Cuzco Valley, and the excavations of Dr. John Rowe have confirmed this." [^3] Dr. Rowe wrote:

Enough has been done . . . to show that the Inca civilization was a product of long development in the Valley of Cuzco itself and that consequently it is unnecessary to look farther afield for the civilization's cultural origins. [^4]

After the founding of Cuzco by Manco Capac, the first Inca or ruler, gradually one after another of the stalwart Inca emperors extended his control over other valleys throughout Peru. The result was that a mighty empire arose which controlled a vast territory from Quito, Ecuador, to Santiago, Chile, by the time of the coming of Pizarro and his Spanish conquistadores.

History speaks not only of the line of rulers at Cuzco as the Incas, but also of the rulers and their subjects—the entire population of the empire—as Incas.

PACHACAMAC

Shortly after my arrival in Lima, Frederick S. Williams and his wife took me in their automobile southward approximately twenty miles on the coast highway from Lima to the vast archaeological ruins of Pachacamac. The buildings in this ancient city were composed of sun-dried adobe blocks. Walls of numerous private dwellings, palaces, chiefs' houses, and a citadel join one upon another on a hill near the present-day highway. A central street, intersected and paralleled by many narrow streets, extends through the ancient city. The street is walled by the high sides of the principal houses.

After driving through the center of this ancient city, we turned westward and went through what is termed "the Valley of the Dead," or the old cemetery. Farther to the west overlooking the Pacific Ocean, we came to a large pyramid called the Pyramid of the Sun. The principal god of the ancient Incas and their subjects was the sun. We climbed the steps, ascending a series of terraces to the top of this pyramid. Red paint, we observed, was still plainly visible on the plastered sides of some of the pyramid. On the summit of the pyramid, facing the Pacific Ocean, stands a row of a dozen tall niches ". . . which are still grim and black with the smoke of torches which centuries ago illuminated sacrificial rites or signaled to passengers upon the sea. What a spectacle from the sea, or from the neighboring islands, must have been this level row of high-flaming chambers on the summit of the great pyramid which crowned the sea-girt hill!" [^5]

The views both to the west and to the east from the top of this pyramid are very inspiring. To the west we saw the mighty Pacific with its blue, placid waters. To the east the view of the majestic Andean mountains filled us with awe. As we gazed toward the majestic cordillera, our vista extended in the interminable perspective of the mighty canyon of Lurin, which opens into the far heart of the Andes. We saw peaks lifting themselves higher and higher on either side of the canyon into what appear to be endless heights in the dim distance until they finally blended into indistinguishable shapes in the clouds which hung in dense masses above the higher summits.

From the top of the Pyramid of the Sun, looking to the northeast, we had a good view of the restored Temple of the Moon. It stands near the edge of the main part of the ancient city. An old swimming pool—now restored—used extensively perhaps by the ancient Peruvians, is situated near the Temple of the Moon.

BAPTISMAL FONT

We descended the Pyramid of the Sun and crossed the Valley of the Dead, where we came upon a very important archaeological structure. It is a cistern-like structure, rectangular in shape and about the size of baptismal fonts commonly used by the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Frederick S. Williams remarked: "President Hunter, I am thoroughly convinced that we are looking at a baptismal font which was used by the ancient inhabitants of this land for the practice of baptism by immersion. I have been here with various people on several occasions and all of them were of the opinion that this structure could have served for no other purpose than for baptisms."

"It certainly appears to me that it is an ancient baptismal font. I can think of no other reason for which such a structure could have been used," I replied.

The font was constructed of hewn rock so closely fitted together that it would be impossible for water to leak through any cracks. The rocks were placed together, however, without the use of mortar or cement. The rockwork was masterfully done. The font is approximately ten feet long and six feet wide. It is about as deep as a tall man's shoulders, as can be seen in the photograph, with President and Sister Williams standing in it. Steps lead into it from its northeast corner. Still to be seen is a little rock ditch which carried water in ancient times and emptied it into the font. On the west wall near the floor, a square hole, approximately three inches in diameter, constitutes the end of a rock pipe which had served as a drain to empty the water from the baptismal font. This pipe extends underground for perhaps twenty yards and then opens into a rock ditch.

A few feet away from this baptismal font—lying to the south and extending around to the southwest—are the remains of rock foundations for what appear to have been three rooms. President Williams remarked: "These rock foundations are possibly the remains of what were at one time three dressing rooms, which no doubt were used by those preparing for the rite of baptism."

"That could very well be," I replied. "They are certainly suited for such a purpose."

Since returning from Peru, I have shown the photograph of the Pachacamac baptismal font to many groups of people. Most of those who have seen it agree that it certainly appears to be an ancient baptismal font. A few of them, however, have asked: "Why could not this structure have served as a bath instead of a baptismal font?"

I have replied to that inquiry: "I saw baths in some of the ancient ruins in Peru, and they differed greatly from this particular structure. This baptismal font is a much larger basin than were the ordinary ancient Peruvian baths." The accompanying photograph (Fig. 110) will show that the baths were quite small. Also, as may be observed in the photograph, the bath provided a rock seat for the person using it, as well as running water in which he could put his feet while taking his bath.

I also saw some ancient swimming pools in connection with the Peruvian archaeological ruins, such as the one situated near the Temple of the Moon shown in Fig. 111. Those ancient swimming pools are quite large, as are swimming pools today. A study and comparison of these various structures indicate that the one that President Williams classified as a baptismal font was not large enough for a swimming pool and was too large for a bath. It seems to me, therefore, that the only logical conclusion is that the one under consideration was a baptismal font used at one time for immersion.

BAPTISM IN NEPHITE DAYS

Certainly to find a baptismal font at Pachacamac, Peru, is not surprising nor out of line with what one could expect to find in American archaeological ruins. As has been pointed out, the inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere in ancient times, the Nephites, had the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is a well-known fact that one of the most important ordinances of that gospel as they practiced it was the rite of baptism by immersion. Nephi and other Book of Mormon prophets taught the people the doctrine of baptism. The ancient record describes Alma performing this ordinance in the Waters of Mormon. Furthermore, when Christ appeared to the inhabitants of the New World following his resurrection, he gave the twelve men whom he commissioned to preside over his Church specific instructions regarding how to baptize, and he commanded them to practice the rite after his departure.

BAPTISM PRACTICED BY AMERICAN ABORIGINES

Numerous writers—including Catholic padres, early Spanish chroniclers, and Indian historians—maintain that when the Spaniards first arrived in America the Indians in many parts of the New World were practicing the ordinance of baptism. As had happened in the Old World among the Christians, however, many of the Indian tribes had changed the true order of baptism in various ways, but a resemblance to the ancient ordinance as given by Christ to the Nephites existed.

There is a cistern-like structure at Chichen Itza which, according to the guides, was used by the Mayas before the discovery of America for baptism by immersion. [^6] When I was shown that cistern-like structure and told by the guide that it was a baptismal font, I studied its appearance and structure carefully and concluded that it certainly could have been used for that purpose, and so I published a photograph of it on page 90 of Archaeology and the Book of Mormon, Volume I.

VISITING ANDEAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

My purpose for making this trip to South America was to visit archaeological sites and museums; and so after our trip to Pachacamac, I made arrangements to fly from the coastal city of Lima to the Incan and Tiahuanacan ancient archaeological cities. I wanted to visit Cuzco—the ancient Inca capital; Machu Picchu—the Inca city built on a mountain peak and discovered by Hiram Bingham; Lake Titicaca; the famous ruins of Tiahuanaco in Bolivia, as well as numerous other places of archaeological interest situated high up in the rugged Andes.

While Frederick S. Williams was making arrangements with government officials and museum directors for me to photograph many of the archaeological collections after my return to Lima, Elder Monte B. McLaws, Elder Dee Wilde, and I visited a number of ancient cities of considerable archaeological importance, situated in the high altitudes of the Andes.

We rode in a non-pressurized plane, which went 22,000 feet in the air. The pilot had to attain that altitude, because many of the mountain peaks ranged that high. One passenger lost consciousness because of the great altitude at which we were flying. This was a trip long to be remembered.

The first stop made by the airplane in which we were riding was at the famous city of Cuzco, Peru, the ancient capital of the Inca empire. As the plane landed, we saw painted in large letters on the slope of the mountain the statement Viva El Peru (Long Live Peru).

We were taken from the plane to a hotel and advised to go to bed for the remainder of the day while our bodies adjusted to the change of altitude from sea level to 11,000 feet. None of us were inclined, however, to spend precious daylight time in bed; and so we secured a guide who showed us a number of places of interest in Cuzco, an unusual city nearly 1,000 years old.

Many of the streets are the narrowest I have ever seen. I measured an ancient one and found it to be six feet and two inches wide. It is evident that it was not made for automobiles and other modes of modern-day traffic, but perhaps for llamas and mules, and, of course, for people on foot.

We visited the Temple of the Sun and other ancient Inca historic sites. On some of the buildings I observed carved representations of serpents, the symbol of Quetzalcoatl in Meso-America. I learned that the serpent was also the symbol of Viracocha in the Andean region.

Perhaps the most interesting of all the features shown to us by the guide was the superb stonework in the ancient buildings. Some of the rocks were six feet wide, equally as high, and perhaps four feet thick. I had read before going to Peru that the rocks were placed together without the use of mortar or cement and that they were fitted so closely that it was impossible to put a knife blade in the crack between two rocks. We decided that most of them were fitted so closely that it would be difficult to put a razor blade in the joints between them.

I was astonished to observe that the ancient stonemasons had cut the mammoth rocks with many angles. We counted twelve angles on one rock—a rock over six feet square. The angles were cut and the rocks placed in such a way that all joints overlapped each other; in other words, each rock was placed across the joint of the two rocks under it. This intelligent process employed by master workmen of the Andean region perhaps one thousand years ago—and at some of the archaeological sites even earlier—has resulted in the masonry's standing throughout the ages in spite of earthquakes or any other force of nature which would ordinarily destroy a building. We concluded that few if any builders anywhere in the world have surpassed the ancient peoples of the Andean region as efficient rock masons. Elders McLaws, Wilde, and I spent many exciting hours, as we intently examined the workmanship of those master builders who did their work hundreds and hundreds of years ago.

STONEWORK IN THE ANDES

After examining the stonework done by the ancient builders of the Andean region, numerous writers have speculated regarding how such superbly masterful work could have been accomplished and also what types of tools the ancient workman used. Dr. Von Hagen states:

It is now upon us to see how the builders worked.

One of the positions taken by many writers on these problems—and included therein are many archaeologists—is this: that the Cyclopean stone-work that one sees in Cuzco and especially in the fortress of Sucsahuaman (one of the greatest single structures ever reared by ancient man), was pre-Inca, and all this stone-work is attributed to some vague and shadowy anterior civilization called by them the "Megalithic empire." This position has little archaeological support. . . .

And of stone. When the gigantic size of the stones that form these structures is viewed for the first time, the utter enormity of the task of shaping, transporting them, and putting them into place—the edges so chamfered as to join without even a semblance of joining—is such that the viewer refuses to submit to the inescapable conclusion that the stone was quarried, pulled into place without dray animals, fashioned by stone instruments, and raised by crude leverage. Although such monoliths be as much as 20 tons in weight and variously shaped, they were made and fitted easily without cement, seemingly as a Chinese craftsman handles a piece of ivory. Such structures, unless destroyed by man, have resisted the insults of time for hundreds of years. [^7]

Then Dr. Von Hagen presents his theory regarding the methods employed by the ancient stonemasons. He maintains that all the work was done with stone tools. He described the quarrying of stone as follows:

Rock was searched for natural faults; after boring, the holes were filled with wooden wedges, swollen with water, and in time this swelling action cracked the huge rock masses. . . .

Transport of stone was by manpower. We know no more of transport techniques than we have from deduction. Although the Indian did not have the wheel, he used wood and stone rollers, and the rock in the rough was pulled by ropes with manpower. They used levers operating on bosses, perhaps sledges for dragging, but had only the most elementary knowledge of dynamics and of methods for handling mass-weight. [^8]

And then only two pages later, he states: "How the Inca mason obtained this minute precision in which the enormous stone had to be lifted and set down a hundred times before the massive [stone] fitted perfectly on all sides like a bottle stopper, still cannot be satisfactorily explained." [^9] I would agree that if one accepted his theory he would experience difficulty in explaining satisfactorily the processes and tools used by the highly efficient ancient Andean stonemasons.

In direct opposition to Dr. Von Hagen's theory, a number of statements are found in the authoritative history of the ancient Americans—the Book of Mormon—which maintain that the ancient builders possessed iron, steel, and practically all other metals, as well as draft animals, including horses, asses, and elephants—the latter being the most useful of all. [^10] They also not only knew the use of the wheel but drove horses on wheeled carriages and perhaps used wheels for other purposes. [^11]

Dr. Von Hagen pointed out, "many writers . . . including many archaeologists" maintain that a pre-Inca civilization was responsible for the magnificent stone structures found throughout the Andean region.

WHITE MEN AND STEEL

As was suggested in the previous chapter, the early Spanish chroniclers maintained that in ancient times white settlers arrived in Peru. It is claimed that these men with fair skins were responsible for the construction of the marvelous stoneworks at Cuzco, Machu Picchu, Sucsahuaman, Tiahuanaco, and other famous archaeological sites. Tradition affirms that most of these great structures were made prior to the development of the Inca empire and that the Inca and his subjects merely made additions to those structures. We observed that the top parts of certain buildings were composed of masonry much inferior to the lower parts, and our guides informed us that the inferior masonry was made by the Incas, especially during the later period.

In regards to the archaeological ruins of Tiahuanaco, Von Humboldt, the famous explorer, wrote: ". . . at the arrival of the Spaniards the natives attributed the construction of them [Tiahuanaco buildings] to a race of white and bearded men who inhabited the ridge of the Cordilleras long before the foundation of the empire of the Incas." [^12] In 1863 Bollaert wrote in his paper on "The pre-Incarial Ruins of Tiahuanaco": "There are vague traditions that Tiahuanaco was built by white and bearded men." [^13] Cieza de Leon was one of the first Europeans to view Tiahuanaco (1553-1560). To quote his words: "I asked the natives . . . if these buildings had been constructed in the time of the Incas. They laughed at this question, affirming . . . that they had been made long before they ruled"; and then Cieza informs us that the pre-Inca builders were white and bearded men." [^14]

Miles Poindexter collected much valuable information regarding the traditions of the ancient Peruvians. He published his findings in two large volumes. He wrote:

Nearly everywhere, however, there existed the tradition of a superior white race who had brought an ancient culture and erected the great monuments. The well-preserved Peruvian tradition was that the stone structures . . . had been built by "bearded white men" with iron tools. [^15]

Again Poindexter writes:

It is not impossible that the ancient builders—whose works would never have been believed possible but that their imperishable solidity and excellence have preserved them as bodily evidence of an achievement which otherwise all the archaeologists would have proved to be preposterous—had steel tools. [^16]

And then he discusses some of the traditions regarding the ancient white Peruvians which maintain that these early settlers had "instruments of iron." He even cited cases where steel and iron tools have been found in archaeological excavations. [^17]

The Peruvian traditions and Poindexter's observations are not only interesting but are also important, since the Book of Mormon writers claim that "a superior white race" migrated to America from western Asia and that this race had iron and steel tools; in fact, the Nephite record claims that the people worked ". . . in all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper, and of brass, and of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores, which were in great abundance." [^18]

VIRACOCHA, THE "WHITE AND BEARDED GOD"

As previously mentioned, the Spanish chroniclers and Peruvian Indian writers maintained that Viracocha—the "White and Bearded God"—visited the white people in ancient Peru and gave them their religion and culture. I was interested while visiting in South America to learn that the Indians of Peru still retain this tradition. Oscar Nin Echegaray, the guide who took us to several archaeological sites near Cuzco, told us a number of traditions that he had obtained from the Indians relating to Viracocha. He maintained that the tradition was still prevalent among the natives that Viracocha had visited their ancestors, that he was a white and bearded man, and that he had brought the cross to the ancient Peruvians many years before the arrival of the Spaniards. Mr. Echegaray has an excellent command of the Quechua language, which was the language of the people of the Incas, and is the language of the Indians of the highlands of Peru at the present time, and so he obtains Indian traditions from them in their own language.

As was the custom of the aborigines of Meso-America in regards to Quetzalcoatl, the Indians of Peru erected temples to Viracocha. Writing in 1548, Cieza de Leon informs us that at Cacha, fifty miles south of Cuzco, stood a great temple of Kon-Tiki Viracocha. [^19] The remains of the walls of that temple still stand, the structure being made of worked stone with adobe.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES NEAR CUZCO

We went to the marvelous and famous fortress called Sucsahuaman, situated near Cuzco. We also went to Pisac, Machu Picchu, and several other archaeological sites in the neighborhood of Cuzco, and at all the places we saw stonework which astounded us.

At this point I would like to draw to the reader's attention the fact that the ancient inhabitants of the Andean region developed irrigation. Aqueducts brought water from adjacent mountains, and the fructifying streams were conveyed from terrace to terrace by conduits so arranged as to prevent the washing of soil. [^20] The photograph (Fig. 117) shows some of these ancient waterworks still in use. They date back, according to some authorities, nearly to the time of Christ.

The water in these waterworks was conveyed in pipes made of stone. It has already been mentioned that in the coastal city of Pachacamac we observed ancient rock aqueducts as well as a pipe running from the baptismal font to such an aqueduct. A few days after seeing these aqueducts in Peru, I saw similar stone aqueducts at Tiahuanaco, Bolivia. The latter ones, however, are not now in use.

During July of 1958, J. David Billeter, Robert Wright, Ellsworth Knudson, my son M. Reed Hunter, and I saw rock aqueducts among the archaeological remains of ancient Sparta, Greece, which are almost duplicates of those I had seen a year earlier in Bolivia and Peru.

FROM CUZCO TO LAPAZ

Elders McLaws, Wilde, and I had a very interesting trip on the train and boat from Cuzco, Peru, to LaPaz, Bolivia. While traveling we were able to observe many things regarding the life and customs of the Indians of the Andean region. We saw group after group of natives with their domesticated llamas, each animal with a pack on its back, while the Indians trudged along on foot. We photographed many groups of Indians with their llamas.

Since our native land is North America, where we see no llamas except in zoos, these were very interesting to us. These peculiar animals, sometimes referred to as "Andean camels," moved with an aristocratic deliberation. Their ostrich-like heads, which they hold high in the air, their tails jauntily curled, and their straight slender legs give an impression of grace and fastidiousness as they daintily pick their way. We were told that each of the mature animals carries 75 pounds—no more—if the Indian wants his animal to cooperate. We observed that there are many colors of llamas, just as there are many colors of cattle or other animals. To me they were most attractive—in fact, beautiful.

At the various places where the train stopped en route from Cuzco, Peru, to the border of Bolivia, numerous Indians were at the train platform to sell their wares to the tourists. The articles of most attraction to the North Americans were the beautiful rugs, house slippers, and other items made from alpaca skins.

The alpaca is an animal similar to the llama; however, it is a little shorter in height and heavier in build. The principal difference is that it has long, fur-like wool in contrast to the shorter hair of the llama. This is the principal wool-bearing animal of the Andean region, supplying large quantities for the purpose of making cloth, rugs, and other wares appropriate to that region. The alpacas, too, vary in color. The Indians take the fur of several animals, each of a different color, and from them make colorful rugs of various designs. Fgure 120 is a photograph of an alpaca rug that I purchased from the Indians which will serve as an illustration of their rugs.

LAKE TITICACA

When we arrived at the border of Bolivia, we came into a large valley in which lies the beautiful Lake Titicaca. This lake is approximately 12,500 feet above sea level. In the distance beyond the lake to the east, serving as a picturesque background, the gigantic Andes rise heavenward. Natives have lived for thousands of years on islands in this lake and in the valley surrounding it; in fact, this is the region which is said to have been the home of the earliest Andean civilizations.

The lake is located entirely in Bolivia; however, its western and northern shores constitute part of the boundary between the countries of Peru and Bolivia. We left the train in Peru at the shore of Lake Titicaca and entered a ship which took us across its beautiful waters. The lake trip was most interesting and unusual. We saw a number of Indians on the lake fishing in their little balsa boats made of reeds. Many of those people, we were told, secure a considerable part of their food from this body of water.

LAPAZ, BOLIVIA

We went by train from Lake Titicaca to LaPaz, the capital of Bolivia. This city is located between 13,000 and 14,000 feet above sea level and in the same extensive valley as the lake. It is surrounded by the high Andes, a number of peaks extending upward to an altitude of over 22,000 feet. They are perpetually snow-capped, constituting a most beautiful mountain range.

We stayed in LaPaz for three or four days as guests of Robert and Alwina Hulme, most hospitable and wonderful people. We appreciate deeply all that they did for us.

While at LaPaz we visited and photographed the artifacts in the Tiahuanacan National Museum and in private museums. A number of gigantic stelae and other archaeological relics have been moved from Tiahuanaco to LaPaz. They now stand in the public plaza. Among the latter are some very tall stelae in human form which, according to the report of the Indians to the early Catholic chroniclers, were made by the white and bearded worshipers of Viracocha.

TIAHUANACO

While driving to Tiahuanaco, we passed through a number of small Indian villages and encountered several caravans of llamas with packs on their backs. The barefooted Indian women caused us to marvel. They hurried along the graveled road on a little trot, carrying heavy loads on their heads or backs, and never seemed to flinch.

The most exciting experience we had while in Bolivia was to visit Tiahuanaco. This famous archaeological site is situated approximately twenty-five miles north of LaPaz and a few miles south of Lake Titicaca. Mrs. Hulme, one of her friends—an archaeologist—along with Elder McLaws, Elder Wilde, and I went there in a rented car.

The most important archaeological artifacts at Tiahuanaco are the mammoth-sized stones, many of which stand on their ends like tall stelae, and the gorgeous gateway of that ancient city. The latter is composed of stones beautifully carved.

We were told that a few of the largest objects made of single rocks at Tiahuanaco weigh 150 to 300 tons. We saw a massive tier of steps carved from one rock which was estimated to weight nearly 300 tons. "The stonework of Tiahuanaco is some of the best in the Andes. Stones are fitted together with insets and tenons; larger stones are bound with copper clamps. All this architectural megalithic stonework presupposes a social organization, a strong central government which could divert the use of manpower into non-productive channels of so large a scale." [^21] Certainly the people must have had a long technical tradition in order to construct such gigantic and beautifully carved stonework.

Tiahuanaco was a city built for religious purposes—a place to worship the gods. It is claimed that it ". . . must have been the greatest ceremonial center in all the Andes." [^22] The most important god worshiped at Tiahuanaco was Viracocha. There is still a large stone representation of that god, holding a book in his arms (Fig. 124) at that place.

We also observed carved serpents on some of the stelae, indicating that in far-off Bolivia the serpent was regarded as one of the symbols of the "White and Bearded God," even as it was a symbol of Quetzalcoatl in Meso-America.

Serpent designs appear many times on pottery of the ancient Peruvians, and they are also found woven into their cloth. Thus these symbols of Viracocha were represented in a variety of ways.

A point of significance and interest is the fact that in faraway Lebanon and Israel even today the natives are still using the serpent as a design on their pottery. Dr. Winslow Whitney Smith, while on a visit to Israel two or three years ago, purchased from roadside merchants some pottery decorated with serpents. He was not seeking such pottery but merely purchased what the people were making and selling. It is quite unusual that two peoples so far apart in distance and time should make pottery so similar in design. The answer could be that the two peoples had a common heritage which caused them to use the same religious symbol.

Since the puma was also a symbol of Viracocha in Peru, the god was ofttimes represented with large puma teeth, as the photograph of a vase shows. A photograph of Viracocha, shown with puma teeth, hangs on the wall of the office of Dr. George C. Muelle, the director of the National Archaeological Museum at Lima. It is reproduced in this book through his courtesy.

In ancient Egypt the falcon was a sacred symbol having a religious significance. Such was also the case in ancient Peru. Observe the falcon on a vase of the Paracus culture. In 1957 this vase was found in a tomb and photographed by Paul Cheesman of Miami, Florida.

RETURN TO SALT LAKE CITY

The day following our trip to the marvelous archaeological site of Tiahuanaco, I flew from LaPaz—whose airport is 14,404 feet in altitude, the highest one in the world—to Lima, Peru.

I stayed in Lima two more weeks, saw many marvelous things, and took archaeological trips in various directions before I returned to Salt Lake City by way of Miami, Florida.

This visit to Peru and Bolivia constitutes one of the outstanding experiences and archaeological excursions of my life. I am indeed grateful to C. N. Shelton, president of the TAN Airlines, and his brother and vice president, Ralph V. Shelton, for making possible this trip. Ralph Shelton and Paul Cheesman, both of Miami, Florida, are avidly interested in the archaeological evidences of the Book of Mormon. They have outstanding collections of photographs of the South American ruins.

The trip to the Andean region gave me the opportunity to observe numerous evidences indicative of high civilizations in ancient America, including the existence of a white race of people, and numerous archaeological artifacts which are in harmony with the claims made by the Book of Mormon.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, History of the Incas (1572). (Hakluyt Society, Second Series No. XXII, Cambridge, 1907), p. 28.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] Ibid., p. 29.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 30-32.
[^5] Ibid., p. 32.
[^6] Idem.
[^7] Ibid., p. 31.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 32-33.
[^9] Ibid., p. 33.
[^10] Abraham 3:21-28; 4:1-31.
[^11] Ibid., 3:27-28; Moses 4:1-4.
[^12] Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1951), pp. 67-73; Milton R. Hunter, The Gospel through the Ages (Salt Lake City, 1945), pp. 104-110.
[^13] Sarmiento, op. cit., pp. 32-35.
[^14] Genesis 1:27.
[^15] Ibid., 1:28.
[^16] Ibid., p. 236.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 237-239.
[^18] 2 Nephi 5:15; 20:34; Jarom 1:8; Mosiah 11:3, 8; Ether 7:9; 10:23.
[^19] Cieza de Leon, cited in Von Hagen, op. cit., p. 116.
[^20] Poindexter, op. cit., p. 89.
[^21] Von Hagen, op. cit., p. 34.
[^22] Ibid., p. 32.
