Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 11

VIRACOCHA THE CREATOR

THE CREATOR

All of the early Spanish chroniclers, receiving their information from the Indians shortly after the discovery of the New World, maintained that the "Fair God" was the Creator of man, of the heavens, of the earth, and of all that is in the universe.

The Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo, who governed Peru from 1569 to 1581, appointed Captain Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa to collect accurate information from the Indians and write a history to send to Philip II, king of Spain. Sarmiento maintained that he "collected the information with much diligence so that this history can rest on attested proofs." [^1] He gathered his material from various classes of Indians, which included both the Incas and tributary nations. His account was written in A.D. 1572. In it he states:

The natives of this land affirm that in the beginning, and before this world was created, there was a being called Viracocha. He created a dark world without a sun, moon and stars. Owing to this creation he was named Viracocha Pachayachachi, which means "Creator of all things." And when he had created the world he formed a race of giants of disproportioned greatness, painted and sculptured, to see whether it would be well to make man of that size. He then created men in his own likeness as they are now; and they lived in darkness. [^2]

Sarmiento continued by stating that Viracocha gave the people many good laws, ordering them ". . . that they should live without quarreling, and that they should know and serve him. . . . They kept this precept for some time, . . . But as there arose among them pride and covetousness, they transgressed the precept of Viracocha Pachayachachi and falling, through this sin, under his indignation, he confounded and cursed them." [^3]

This sounds exactly like another version of the great role in the human drama played by Jesus Christ as the Creator of the world and man, and of giving the human family the gospel plan of salvation.

DELUGE

Sarmiento's account stated that Viracocha sent a great flood to destroy the human family. To quote:

They say that it rained 60 days and nights, that it drowned all created things, . . .

Some of the nations, besides the Cuzcos, also say that a few were saved from this flood to leave descendants for a future age. Each nation has its special fable which is told by its people, of how their ancestors were saved from the waters of the deluge. [And then the writer tells some of these fables.] [^4]

Sarmiento gives a very remarkable account which he claims differs in details from what the "true Scriptures teach us"; however, what he accounts is directly in harmony with the story told in the Book of Mormon. To quote the words of Sarmiento:

. . . One thing is believed among all the nations of these parts, for they all speak generally and as well know of the general flood which they call unu pachacuti. From this we clearly understand that in these parts they have a tradition of the great flood, . . . [^5]

He then gives a significant account of Indian traditions which declare that the Andean region was populated from across the ocean following the flood. Continuing his account, we quote:

. . . and now the Indies of Castille or America must have begun to receive population immediately after the flood, although, by their account, the details are different from those which the true Scriptures teach us. This must have been done by divine Providence, . . . [^6]

All of this fits in perfectly with the true account of Jehovah's (Jesus') bringing the Jaredites from the Tower of Babel to America following the flood. This story is given in Ether, the next to last book in the Book of Mormon.

Sarmiento stated that the story given by the Incas at Cuzco differed from the account of the flood given by most of the other Indian nations. He wrote:

. . . But the Incas and most of those at Cuzco, those among them who are believed to know most, do not say that anyone escaped from the flood, but that Viracocha began to create men afresh, as will be seen further on. . . . [^7]

GRAND COUNCIL

Later Sarmiento stated:

It is related that everything was destroyed in the flood called unu pachacuti. It must now be known that Viracocha Pachayachachi, when he destroyed the land as has already been recounted, preserved three men, and one of them named Taguapaca, that they might serve and help him in the creation of new people. . . .

Viracocha gave various orders to his servants, but Taguapaca disobeyed the command of Viracocha. [^8]

For this disobedience, his hands and feet were tied, and he was launched on a balsa raft which was placed on Lake Titicaca. "He was carried by the water down the drain of the lake, and was not seen again for a long time." [^9]

Father Abraham, as accounted in the Pearl of Great Price, had a vision regarding a "Grand Council" that was held in heaven by the Gods when they were planning the creating and peopling of this world. [^10] The four most important persons at the council were God the Father, Christ the Only Begotten Son, Michael or Father Adam, and Lucifer or Satan. The latter rebelled against the others and, with his followers, was cast out of heaven. [^11] The other three worked together as the Gods who created this earth and man. [^12] The story of Taguapaca seems to be a distorted account of Satan's rebellion and banishment from the presence of Elohim, Jehovah, and Michael, and the sons and daughters of the Eternal Father who accepted Christ as their Savior.

CREATION ACCOUNT

Sarmiento continued his account of the creation of man as follows:

The flood being passed and the land dry, Viracocha determined to people it a second time; and, to make it more perfect, he decided upon creating luminaries to give light. With this object in mind he went, with his servants [the three men that Viracocha had saved from the flood], to a great lake in the Collao, in which there is an island called Titicaca [Tee-tee-ca'ca], . . . Viracocha went to this island, and presently ordered that the sun, moon, and stars should come forth, and be set in the heavens to give light to the world, and it was so. . . .

Leaving the island, he passed by the lake to the main land, taking with him the two servants who survived. He went to a place now called Tiahuanacu [Tiahuanaco] in the province of Colla-suyu, and in this place he sculptured and designed on a great piece of stone, all the nations that he intended to create. . . .

Others affirm that this creation of Viracocha was made from the Titicaca site where, having originally formed some shapes of large strong men which seemed to him out of proportion, he made them again of his stature which was, as they say, the average height of men, and being made he gave them life. Thence they set out to people the land. . . . This was from the residence of Viracocha, their maker. . . .

[Viracocha-the God Creator-commanded the people], . . . saying with a loud voice, "Oh, you tribes and nations, hear and obey the order of Ticci Viracocha Pachayachachi, which commands you to go forth and multiply and settle the land." [^13]

Sarmiento and other Spanish chroniclers were surprised and perplexed to find that the American Indians already possessed many of the teachings of the Bible when they first met the Spaniards. Viracocha's command to the people is almost identical with the command given by Jehovah when he created Adam and Eve.

In Genesis we read:

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them, . . . [^14]

It should be recalled that Indian tradition claimed that Viracocha "created men in his own likeness as they are now"; or again we quote, Viracocha ". . . made them again of his stature which was, as they say, the average height of men, and being made he gave them life."

To continue with the Bible quotation:

And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: . . . [^15]

SUMMARY—VIRACOCHA THE CREATOR

Practically every writer who obtained his information directly from the Indians of the Andean region shortly following the Spanish conquest maintained that there was a universal tradition crediting Viracocha with being the "Creator of all things." In order to summarize, perhaps we could do no better than to quote a summary of this subject found in a footnote of Sarmiento's History of the Incas (pp. 28-29):

Uiracocha (Viracocha) was the Creator. Garcilasso de la Vega pointed out the mistake of supposing that the word signifies "foam of the sea." . . . Blas Valera said the meaning was the "will and power of God"; not that this is the signification of the word, but by reason of godlike qualities attributed to Him who was known by it. Cieza de Leon says that Tici-Uiracocha was God, Creator of heaven and earth: Acosta said that to Ticci-Uiracocha they assigned the power and command over all things; Montesinos claimed that Illa-tici-Uiracocha was the name of the Creator of the world; Molina that Tesci-Uricocha was the Creator and incomprehensible God; the anonymous Jesuit maintained that Uiracocha meant the great God of "Pirua"; Betanzos stated that the Creator was Tici-Uiracocha.

. . . Tici or Tici is based on foundation, hence the founder. Illa means light. The anonymous Jesuit gives the meaning "Eternal Light" to Illa-Ticci. . . .

Pachacamac and Pachayachachi are attributes of the deity. Pacha means time or place, also the universe, Camac is the Ruler, Yachachi the Teacher—"The Ruler and Teacher of the Universe."

It seems to the writer that a careful study of the part played by Jehovah (Christ) in creating the world and all that is in it as described in the Bible and the numerous statements regarding Christ's work as a Creator delineated in the Book of Mormon should give the reader sufficient evidence to convince him that Viracocha, as God and Creator, is the same person as Jesus Christ, our Creator, God and Savior. [^16]

---
Notas:
[^1] Laurette Sejourne, Burning Water—Religion and Thought in Ancient Mexico (London, 1956), p. 55.
[^2] Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia General de las Casas de Nueva Espana (Editorial Nueva Espana, S. A., Mexico, 1946), vol. 2, pp. 15-16.
[^3] Leyendas de Los Soles (tr. from Nahuatl by Angel Maria Garibay and cited in Historia de la Literatura Nahuatl (Editorial Porrua, Mexico, 1953), pp. 295-296, cited in Sejourne, op. cit., pp. 72-73.
[^4] Anales de Cuauhtitlan (Imprenta, Universitaria, Mexico, 1955), p. 61.
[^5] Sejourne, op. cit., pp. 35-40.
[^6] Alfonso Caso, El Pueblo del Sol (Fondo de Cultura Economica, Mexico, 1953), p. 40.
[^7] 3 Nephi 9:15.
[^8] Mosiah 3:8.
[^9] Helaman 14:12.
[^10] 2 Nephi 9:5-6.
[^11] Omni 1:17.
[^12] Mosiah 29:19.
[^13] Ibid., 5:15.
[^14] Jacob 4:8-9.
[^15] Mosiah 16:9; Alma 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:18; 15:9; 11:11; Ether 4:12.
[^16] Von Humboldt, cited in John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 202.
