Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 12

QUETZALCOATL THE CREATOR AND CULTURE GIVER

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

The previous chapter presented traditions and evidence to the effect that Viracocha, the "White and Bearded God" of the Andean region, was regarded as the creator of the heavens and the earth and of the human family. In this chapter we shall devote our attention to Indian traditions of Meso-America and examine the evidence given in Mexican and Maya documents pertaining to Quetzalcoatl as a creator and culture giver.

"SUN OF QUETZALCOATL"

Laurette Sejourne presents an elaborate and detailed discussion of the various Nahuatl and Aztec myths of the Creator-God, Quetzalcoatl; and then she expressed her viewpoint as to why the Indians considered him the creator of man. To quote:

The Meso-American people have pointed out the transcendence of his message. In most of their myths of creation, for instance, it is said that during the four eras previously destroyed the earth was populated only by animals, and it was not until the advent of the era of Quetzalcoatl that humanity was created. This suggests that it is only after the discovery of the spiritual principle as lived by Quetzalcoatl that man could be. This is doubtless the reason why Quetzalcoatl was considered as creator of the human being and all his works! [^1]

Quetzalcoatl as "God of Wind" was accredited by the Indians as the deity who set the sun in motion, thereby becoming its creator. The Quetzalcoatl myth states that there had been four previous suns, each ending in disaster. Eventually, however, the "Fifth Sun" came into the sky; ". . . and when it . . . began to rise it seemed very red. It lurched from side to side, and none could look at it, for it took sight from the eyes. It shone, and threw out rays splendidly, and its rays split everywhere; . . ." [^2] However, the sun seemed incapable of movement and thereby was "no more capable of life than the previous ones that had been annihilated."

Thereupon the "God of Wind," Quetzalcoatl, breathed upon it and as a result of that dynamic spiritual breath, the Fifth Sun was set in motion in the heavens. "That is why the Fifth Sun (five is the number of the center) is the Sun of Movement, meeting in man. . . . The name of this Sun is Naollin (Four Movements), now it is ours, by which today we live . . . It was the Sun of Quetzalcoatl. . . ." [^3]

QUETZALCOATL: CREATOR AND CULTURE GIVER

An Aztec document stated that Quetzalcoatl was ". . . lord over all and maker of all creatures. . . ." [^4] He was regarded by those people as ". . . an invisible god and creator. . . . Moreover it is well known that the maker of all creatures was none other than Quetzalcoatl." [^5]

A Mexican archaeologist, Dr. Alfonso Caso, gives an excellent summarizing statement regarding the accomplishments of the Creator-God:

. . . Quetzalcoatl appears as god of life, constant benefactor of humanity, and so we see that, after having created man with his own blood, he searches for a way to nourish him, and discovers the maize that the ants had hidden inside a mountain. He turns himself into an ant and steals a grain which he afterwards gives to men.

He teaches them how to polish jade and the other precious stones and how to find where these stones lie; how to weave many-colored fabrics, with a miraculous cotton that existed already dyed in different colours, and how to make mosaics with quetzal plumes, from the blue bird, the humming bird, the parrot and other birds of bright plumage.

But above all he taught man science, showing him the way to measure time and study the revolutions of the stars; he showed him the calendar and invented ceremonies and fixed the days for prayers and sacrifice. [^6]

CHRIST THE CREATOR

Since at the time of the discovery of the New World the Indians of Meso-America had such a positive conviction that Quetzalcoatl was the creator of the heavens, the earth, and the human family, we shall now turn to the teachings of their forefathers, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, and study their claims regarding the Messiah.

Jesus Christ was known to the ancient Americans by numerous titles which connoted his divine nature or Godship. He played such a prominent part in the great creation program of the heavens, the earth, and man, that they regarded him as the omnipotent Creator of all things. He was the medium through which the Eternal Father did all his work. Christ was the Father's representative. So important was the Messiah's part in the creation program that he declared to the Nephites: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. . . ." [^7] An angel told King Benjamin that

. . . he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary. [^8]

Samuel the Lamanite stood on the wall of the city of Zarahemla and called the people to repentance. He told them that he was preaching to them ". . . that ye might know of the coming of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning;. . ." [^9] Jacob reminded the Nephites:

Yea, I know that ye know that in the body he [Jesus Christ] shall show himself to those at Jerusalem, from whence we came;. . . for it behooveth the great Creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto him.

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection,. . . [^10]

We read (Jacob 2:5) that Jacob also informed his people ". . . that by the help of the all-powerful Creator of heaven and earth I can tell you concerning your thoughts, . . ." Another Book of Mormon writer named Amaleki claimed that the Jaredites were destroyed because ". . . they denied the being of their Creator;. . ." [^11] King Mosiah II stated that: ". . . were it not for the interposition of their all-wise Creator [Jesus Christ],. . . they [the Nephites] must unavoidably remain in bondage until now." [^12]

King Benjamin also instructed the Nephites as follows:

Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all. Amen. [^13]

The Prophet Jacob described the great and marvelous work accomplished by the Eternal Father through his Only Begotten Son Jesus Christ. He said:

Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. . . .

For behold, by the power of his word man came upon the face of the earth, which earth was created by the power of his word. Wherefore, if God being able to speak and the world was, and to speak and man was created, O then, why not able to command the earth, or the workmanship of his hands upon the face of it, according to his will and pleasure? [^14]

Not only was Christ thought to be the Only Begotten Son and the Creator, but he was also regarded by the ancient Americans as man's constant and eternal enlightener. "The Light, the Life, and the Truth of the world," and "he that leadeth men to all good." This doctrine is taught very forcefully throughout the entire Book of Mormon. [^15]

QUETZALCOATL THE CREATOR AND HIS EARTHLY ADVENT

Von Humboldt, an explorer, author, and collector of Indian traditions and old manuscripts, maintains that the Indians believed that Quetzalcoatl was originally a God and the creator of all things before his sojourn in mortality and his appearance to the inhabitants of ancient America. Von Humboldt wrote:

. . . authors might be adduced to show that the Mexicans believe that this Quetzalcoatl was both God and man; that he had previously to his incarnation existed from eternity, and that he had been the Creator both of the world and man; and that he had descended to reform the world by endurance. [^16]

The following is quoted from the Nephites' records to aid the readers in observing how accurately the Indians preserved in their traditions the story of Christ's position as a God, the Lord, and the divine Son, and of his crucifixion and resurrection, which events were followed by his descent from heaven to proclaim the gospel to the inhabitants of ancient America:

. . . they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; . . .

. . . he . . . spake unto the people, saying:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning. . . .

. . . the Lord spake unto them saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. [^17]

Dr. De Roo summarized the work accomplished by the "White Bearded God," according to the traditions of the Indians of Mexico, as follows:

. . . They say it was Quetzalcoatl who effected the reformation of the world, but men had given themselves up to vice, on which account it had been frequently destroyed, but now had Tonacatecotl sent his son into the world to reform it.

Quetzalcoatl undertook the reformation of the sinful world through preaching, by word and example, the virtues of self-denial and fasting, of chastity and piety, of charity towards men, and of a pure religion towards the one true God. For a time he succeeded in Tula, where, according to some reports, his virgin-mother, Chimelma, lived; but in spite of all the wondrous good he did in that province, like Christ, he was persecuted, and finally driven out by the majority of the people. Carrying a cross, he came to the valley of the Zapotecs. . . . [^18]

INDIANS' KNOWLEDGE OF GODHEAD RECEIVED FROM QUETZALCOATL

The early Spanish missionaries who labored in Middle America were greatly surprised to find that the Indians had an extensive knowledge of the Godhead or Holy Trinity. The natives made the claim that their knowledge had been given to them originally by Quetzalcoatl, which would be in harmony with the claims made by the Book of Mormon that Jesus Christ appeared to the inhabitants of ancient America and taught them his gospel in its fulness. Relying on the famous Catholic missionary, Padre Sahagun, for his information, Dr. De Roo wrote:

The natives of Campeche assured the Spanish missionaries that their religious teacher, Quetzalcoatl, had given them images to explain his doctrine, and, in particular, a triangular stone, as an illustration of the Blessed Trinity, with which mystery they were well-acquainted, says Sahagun, and in whose name they were baptized. [^19]

Hubert Howe Bancroft informs us that the Quiche Maya Indians in Guatemala also held in their traditions a belief in a Godhead, composed of three divine personages. The names by which they were known were Tohil, Awilix, and Gucumatz. [^20]

Bishop Bartholome de las Casas, a famous Spanish Catholic priest who did extensive missionary work among the Indians of Chiapas, Mexico, and who recorded their traditions, reported that Francis Hernandez, a priest laboring under his direction, wrote him a letter in which he claimed that the Indians had a tradition of a Godhead, composed of three members, similar to the Holy Trinity worshiped by the Christians. The writer has found no statement among the Indian traditions which more clearly expresses this doctrine than the following which Bishop de las Casas attributed to Hernandez:

. . . I found a good secular priest [Francis Hernandez], of mature age and honorable, who knew the language of the Indians, having lived among them several years; and because I was obliged to travel on to the chief town of my diocese, I appointed him my vicar, asking him and giving him charge to visit the tribes of the inland, and to preach to them in the manner that I gave him.

The same priest, after some months, or even a year, as I think, wrote to me that he had met with a chief from whom he had made inquiries in regard to his ancient belief and religion, which they were used to follow in that country. The Indian answered him that they knew and believed in God who dwells in the heavens, and that God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father's name was Icona, and he had created man and all things; the Son had for name Bacab, and he was born from a maiden always virgin, called Chibirias, that lives in the heavens with God. The Holy Ghost they called Echuac. They say that Icona means the Great Father of Bacab, who is the Son. . . .

When the Indian was asked the meaning of Bacab or Bacabab, he said that it meant Son of the Great Father, and that the name Echuac signified Merchant. And, in fact, the Holy Ghost brought good merchandises to earth, since he satiated the world, that is, the people of the world, with his abundant divine gifts and graces. [^21]

Hernandez also informed Bishop de las Casas that he had received the foregoing tradition from one of the old chiefs who claimed that that tradition had come to him from his ancient ancestors. [^22]

CONCLUSION

The foregoing tradition of the Chiapan Indians gives a clear statement regarding the aborigines' knowledge of the Godhead, a doctrine thoroughly known by the inhabitants of ancient America, as is attested in the Book of Mormon. It seems evident that the basic ideas in the Godhead doctrine as proclaimed anciently by the Nephite prophets came down among the various Indian tribes from age to age to the time of the Spanish conquest.

It is also true that the knowledge of Christ's or Quetzalcoatl's work as the Creator and the knowledge of his contribution to the human family in giving them their religion and culture—truths originally proclaimed to the ancient Americans by Book of Mormon prophets and by the resurrected Messiah—came down through Indian traditions to the time of the discovery of America. The aborigines were as definite in their traditions that Quetzalcoatl was the Creator and culture giver as were their predecessors, the Nephites.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Nephi 11:13, 18.
[^2] 2 Nephi 17:14.
[^3] Alma 7:9-10
[^4] Daniel H. Brinton, American Hero-Myths (Philadelphia, 1882), p. 172.
[^5] Ibid., p. 214.
[^6] Von Humboldt, cited in John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1882), pp. 201-202.
[^7] P. De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), vol. 1, p. 430.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 427-428.
[^9] Ibid., p. 427.
[^10] Paul Gaffarel, Histoire de la Decouverte de l'Amerique (Paris, 1892), cited in De Roo, op. cit., pp. 426-427.
[^11] Omni 1:17.
[^12] Mosiah 29:19.
[^13] Ibid., 5:15.
[^14] Jacob 4:8-9.
[^15] Mosiah 16:9; Alma 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:18; 15:9; 11:11; Ether 4:12.
[^16] Von Humboldt, cited in John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 202.
[^17] 3 Nephi 11:8, 10-11, 13-14.
[^18] P. DeRoo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), vol. 1, pp. 430-431.
[^19] Ibid., p. 372.
[^20] Bancroft, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 648.
[^21] Las Casas, cited in De Roo, op. cit., pp. 373-374.
[^22] Idem., p. 373.
