Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 13

QUETZALCOATL'S VIRGIN BIRTH

JESUS CHRIST'S VIRGIN BIRTH

Another significant historical event, the virgin birth of Jesus Christ, was thoroughly known by the inhabitants of ancient America, as is set forth in the plain teachings found in the Book of Mormon. A few examples of Nephite teachings will be quoted. Nephi saw in vision the following:

. . . in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white. . . .

And he [the angel] said unto me: Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh. [^1]

It is also written in the Book of Mormon:

. . . Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. [^2]

Alma informed the Nephites that it had been revealed to him that

. . . the Son of God cometh upon the face of the earth.

And behold, he shall be born of Mary, . . . she being a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a son, yea, even the Son of God. [^3]

Even before the time of Alma, another ancient American prophet, King Benjamin, knew of the virgin birth of the Messiah. As recorded in the Nephite records (Mosiah 3:3, 5, 8), one night an angel from the presence of God visited that prophet-king and said unto him:

. . . Awake, and hear the words which I shall tell thee; for behold, I am come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy.

For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and dwell in a tabernacle of clay, . . .

And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary.

INDIANS' TRADITIONS OF QUETZALCOATL'S VIRGIN BIRTH

With such doctrine being thoroughly taught among the inhabitants of ancient America, it is natural that those teachings would carry forward from age to age as part of the traditions of the "White Bearded God." History affirms that such was the case. Daniel G. Brinton commented on the wide dissemination of the virgin birth tradition as follows:

Many of the goddesses were virgin deities, as the Aztec Coatlicue, Xochiquetzal, and Chimelma; and many of the great gods of the race as Quetzalcoatl, Manibozho, Viracocha, and Ioskeha, were said to have been born of a virgin. Even among the low Indians of Paraguay, the early missionaries were startled to find this tradition of the maiden mother of the god, so similar to that which they had come to tell. [^4]

In speaking specifically of Quetzalcoatl, Dr. Brinton wrote:

Quetzalcoatl was born of a virgin in the land of Tula or Tlapallan, in the distant Orient, and was high priest of that happy realm. [^5]

Von Humboldt's statement regarding the tradition of the virgin birth of Quetzalcoatl is as follows:

How truly surprising is it to find that the Mexicans, who seem to have been unacquainted with the doctrine of the migration of the soul and the Metempsychosis should have believed in the incarnation of the only Son of the supreme God, Tomacateuctli. For Mexican mythology, speaking of no other Chimelma, the virgin of Tula (without man), by his breath alone, by which may be signified his work or will, when it was announced to Chimelma, by the celestial messenger, whom he dispatched to inform her that she should conceive a son, it must be presumed this was Quetzalcoatl, who was the only son. [^6]

Dr. P. De Roo described Quetzalcoatl's virgin birth thus:

Both the mode and the object of our Lord's incarnation are represented in the rare and valuable Mexican codices, if we can believe the learned interpreters of their paintings. Quetzalcoatl is he who was born of the virgin, called Chalchihuitzli, which means the precious stone of penance, says the author of the "Explanation of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis." Tonacatecotl, the Mexican supreme deity, begot Quetzalcoatl, not by connection with woman, but by his breath alone, when he sent his ambassador to the virgin of Tula. [^7]

Dr. De Roo also discussed the Indian traditions of the virgin birth of the "White Bearded God," as reported by the early Spanish missionaries who worked among the American aborigines. It is quite evident that the traditions are merely adulterated forms of the true story of Christ's birth. To quote De Roo:

. . . Mendieta states that according to other traditions, no mention is made of his father, but only of his mother, Chimelma, who, as she was sweeping the temple one day, found a small green stone, named chalchiuite, which she picked up; and through the virtue of this emerald she became miraculously pregnant.

Torquemada, relating still another version of the same original tradition, says, "The Mexicans knew of the visitation of the angel to Our Lady, but expressed it by a metaphor,—namely that something very white, similar to a bird's feather, fell from heaven, and a virgin bent down, picked it up, and hid it below her cincture, and she became pregnant of 'Huitzilopochtli,' or better 'Teo-Huitz-lopochtli,' which name Borunda explains as meaning the Lord of the thorn or wound in the left side. It is always the same, . . . God the virgin's son." [^8]

De Roo adds the following pertinent information:

. . . We have mentioned already the belief of the Chiapans, according to which the god Bacab was born of a virgin, Chibirias, who is now in heaven with him.

Sahagun relates that the Tlascaltecs designated one of their principal gods by the name of "Camaxtle," which means the Naked Lord. He was to them what Christ represents on the cross to us, for they asserted that he was endowed with both the divine and the human natures and was born from a devout and holy virgin named "Coatlicue," who brought him forth without lesion of her virginity, on the mount Coatepeo de Tula. All this information, says Sahagun, was first given to the Toltecs by Quetzalcoatl. [^9]

Paul Gaffarel claimed that the Manica Indians of Brazil reported to the Catholic padres the following virgin-birth tradition of their "Fair God":

. . . a woman of accomplished beauty, who had never been wedded to man, gave birth to a most lovely child. This child, after growing up to man's estate, worked many wonders, raised the dead to life again, made the lame walk and the blind see. Finally having one day called together a great number of people, he ascended into the air and was transformed into the sun who enlightens this earth. [^10]

No book, including the Bible, tells about the virgin birth of Jesus more clearly than does the Book of Mormon; and, since Christ is identified as Quetzalcoatl in the religion of the American aborigines, it was natural for the knowledge of that important event to become attached to him. History affirms that the ancient Americans' knowledge of the virgin birth of the "White and Bearded God" persisted in the New World to the time of the coming of the Europeans, as shown in this chapter; and that knowledge thereby serves as an additional witness that Jesus was resurrected from the grave and is the universal Savior.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^2] 2 Nephi 6:9.
[^3] Ibid., 10:3.
[^4] Mosiah 3:9.
[^5] Von Humboldt, cited in John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 202.
[^6] Lord Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, cited in Taylor, idem.
[^7] Juan de Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana (Madrid, Spain, 1613-1732 ed.), tomo, p. 15.
[^8] Las Casas, cited in De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), p. 373.
[^9] Ibid., p. 431.
[^10] 3 Nephi, chapters 8, 9, 10.
