Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America ( 1959)

CHAPTER 14

QUETZALCOATL'S CRUCIFIXION, RESURRECTION, ASCENSION, AND SECOND COMING

KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION IN ANCIENT AMERICA

The knowledge of Christ's crucifixion was well known in Book of Mormon days. Nephi taught the people that

. . . the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, . . . and to be crucified, . . . [^1]

Nephi's brother, Jacob, told the Nephites of Christ's crucifixion. To quote:

. . . And he also has shown unto me that the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, should manifest himself unto them in the flesh; and after he should manifest himself they should scourge him and crucify him, according to the words of the angel who spake it unto me. [^2]

Somewhat later Jacob declared:

Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ—for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name—should come among the Jews, . . . and they shall crucify him—. . . [^3]

King Benjamin gave a marvelous sermon regarding the Savior to the people in ancient American in which he made the following statement:

And lo, he [Jesus] cometh unto his own, . . . and . . . they shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him. [^4]

INDIANS' KNOWLEDGE OF QUETZALCOATL'S CRUCIFIXION

With such an important event so thoroughly known among the Nephites and Lamanites, it would be natural for a knowledge of it to be carried down from age to age among their descendants, the American Indians. History testifies that such was the case. Several Catholic padres were told by the Indians that Quetzalcoatl had suffered death by crucifixion. Von Humboldt, an important explorer and collector of Indian traditions during the past century, states that the "Fair God" ". . . was crucified for the sins of mankind, as is plainly declared in the tradition of Yucatan, and mysteriously represented in the Mexican paintings." [^5]

Lord Kingsborough collected numerous Indian legends and writings of Catholic fathers and published them in nine massive volumes under the title of Antiquities of Mexico. In his famous collection he presents much evidence of the crucifixion of the "White Bearded God." Speaking of an early Mexican document, President John Taylor quotes Kingsborough as stating:

"Quetzalcoatl is there painted in the attitude of a person crucified, with the impression of nails in his hands and feet, but not actually upon the cross." Again: "The seventy-third plate of the Borgian MS. is the most remarkable of all, for Quetzalcoatl is not only represented there as crucified upon a cross of Greek form, but his burial and descent into hell are also depicted in a very curious manner."

In another place he observes: "The Mexicans believe that Quetzalcoatl took human nature upon him, partaking of all the infirmities of man, and was not exempt from sorrow, pain or death, which he suffered voluntarily to atone for the sins of man." [^6] (Italics were Pres. Taylor's.)

In his book entitled Monarquia Indiana, first published in Spain in A.D. 1613, Juan de Torquemada wrote the following interesting report:

A friar named Diego de Mercado, a grave man and a dignitary of his Order, one of the most exemplary religionists of his time, told and wrote above his signature that years ago he had held a conversation with an Otomi Indian over seventy years old on matters relating to our holy faith. The Indian narrated to him how, long ago, the Otomis were in possession of a book, handed down from father to son and guarded by persons of importance, whose duty it was to explain it. Each page of that book had two columns, and between these columns were paintings which represented Christ crucified, whose features wore the expression of sadness; and such is the God who reigns, they said. For the sake of reverence, they did not turn the leaves with their hands, but with a tiny stick kept along with the book for that purpose. The friar having asked the Indian what the contents of the volume were and its teachings, the old man could not give the details, but said that, were it in existence yet, it would be evident that the teachings of that Book and the preaching of the friar were one and the same. But the venerable heirloom had perished in the ground, where its guardians had buried it at the arrival of the Spaniards. [^7]

Bishop Bartholome de las Casas, a famous Spanish missionary, devoted most of his life to teaching the Indians of Chiapas, Mexico, and recording their beliefs. He received a letter from Francis Hernandez, a priest laboring under his direction, which stated that one of the old native chiefs claimed that the following story had come down to him from his ancient ancestors:

". . . They [the Chiapan Indians] tell that Eopuco put him [Bacab, the 'White Bearded God'] to death, had him scourged, placed a crown of thorns on his head, and hung him with extended arms from a pole; not meaning that he was nailed but bound to it; and to better explain, the chief extended his own arms. There he finally died, . . ." [^8]

The foregoing tradition of the Chiapan Indians constitutes one more version of the crucifixion of the "Fair God." De Roo adds the following information concerning their tradition:

We have noticed before that the Chiapan son-god, Bacab, who had been scourged by Eopuco and crowned with thorns, had also been the divine son of the Mexican virgin goddess. This same son of Chibirias or Chimelma had been put to death by crucifixion; and this sacrilegious crime had been perpetrated on a Friday. So had the Chiapans been informed by bearded men who in ancient times had taught them to confess their sins and to fast every Friday in honor of the death of Bacab. . . . [^9]

The foregoing quotations from several writers indicate that at the time of the discovery of America—even before the aborigines had had opportunities to receive information from European Christians—the knowledge of the crucifixion of the "Fair God" was widespread. Since this event was thoroughly known by the inhabitants of ancient America, as is attested in the Nephite records, it is logical to conclude this event is the source of the Indian traditions.

DARKNESS AT THE TIME OF CHRIST'S DEATH

A graphic and vivid account is given in the Book of Mormon of the terrible destruction which took place upon the Western Hemisphere at the time of Christ's crucifixion and the excessive darkness that prevailed while the Master's body lay in the tomb. [^10]

It is not strange that the knowledge of such momentous events would survive until after the discovery of America by Columbus, and documentary sources testify that this was the case.

As a result of his extensive study of the American aborigines, Dr. P. De Roo made the following statement:

Another circumstance of our Saviour's death seems to be remembered in Mexico, for it is related in its traditions that, at the disappearance of Quetzalcoatl, both sun and moon were covered in darkness, while a single star appeared in the heavens. [^11]

Compare the following description from the Book of Mormon with De Roo's statement:

And it came to pass that there was thick darkness upon all the face of the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof who had not fallen could feel the vapor of darkness;

And there could be no light, because of the darkness, neither candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceedingly dry wood, so that there could not be any light at all;

And there was not any light seen, neither fire, nor glimmer, neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars, for so great were the mists of darkness which were upon the face of the land. [^12]

APPEARANCE OF A NEW STAR

Students of the Book of Mormon readily recognize the fact that the Indians' tradition, mentioned by De Roo, that ". . . a single star appeared in the heavens" at Quetzalcoatl's death, confuses an event that took place at the birth of Christ with the events that occurred at his death; for the Nephites' records declare:

. . . Samuel, the Lamanite did prophesy. . . .

. . . Behold, I give unto you a sign; for five years more cometh, and behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name.

And behold, there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign [of Christ's birth] unto you. [^13]

The fulfilment of this prophecy is recorded as follows: "And it came to pass also that a new star did appear, according to the word." [^14]

The appearance of the new star affected the thinking of the inhabitants of Middle America so profoundly that the major Indian nations—such as the Toltecs, Aztecs, Zapotecs, and Mayas—regarded "Venus as the great star of Quetzalcoatl." The fact has already been mentioned that Venus played a prominent part in the religious life of the American aborigines; in fact, that star was one of the prominent symbols of the "White and Bearded God" at the time of the coming of the Europeans.

EVENTS AT THE TIME OF CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION

A marvelous account of the destruction which took place on the Western Hemisphere at the time of Christ's crucifixion was recorded by Ixtlilxochitl, an Indian prince who lived near the city of Mexico (1600 A.D.).

To quote:

. . . the sun and the moon eclipsed, and the earth trembled, and the rocks broke, and many other things and signs took place,. . . This happened in the year of ce Calli, which, adjusting this count with ours, comes to be at the same time when Christ our Lord suffered, and they say that it happened during the first days of the year. . . .

A few days after he [Quetzalcoatl] went from there, the destruction and desolation related of the third age of the world took place, and then was destroyed that memorable and sumptuous building and tower in the city of Cholula, which was like another tower of Babel, which these people were building almost with the same designs, it being destroyed by the wind. And later those who escaped the extermination of the third age built a temple on its ruins to Quetzalcoatl, whom they placed as god of wind, because the wind was the cause of its destruction, they understanding that this calamity was sent by his hand; and they likewise called it ce Acatl, which was the name of the year of his coming. And, as it seems through the mentioned histories and annals, the aforementioned happened some years after the Incarnation of Christ our Lord. [^15]

Certain historians have maintained that Ixtlilxochitl received his information from the Catholic priests. It is logical to believe that the Catholic fathers could not have given Ixtlilxochitl any information regarding the terrific destruction and unusual phenomena of nature on the Western Hemisphere at the time of Christ's crucifixion, since they knew nothing of those events. Such information could have come from only one of three sources, namely: first, from the Book of Mormon—not published until 230 years later; second, from the heavens through direct revelation; and third, from records handed down from his ancestors and traditions received from the old people. The third, Ixtlilxochitl claimed to be the source of the information he used in writing his marvelous account of the history of the American Indians. Thus it seems to the writer that the Works of Ixtlilxochitl must be taken very seriously by students and in general esteemed as genuine and authoritative.

Other Indian nations far removed from the Valley of Mexico also testify that, according to sacred records handed down from their ancestors, an unusual catastrophe occurred in ancient America. For example, at the time of the coming of the Spaniards to Yucatan, the Itza Maya priests were well informed regarding a period of intense darkness in ancient times. The following marvelous statement, which appears on page 103 of his book Kukulcan the Bearded Conqueror, is quoted by T. A. Willard from an early Maya manuscript:

It was bitten, the face of the sun; and then it was darkened, the face of the sun; and then it was extinguished, its face. Then they [the people] were frightened. There it was burned [eclipsed] said their priests to them."

An even more amazing statement comes from far-off Peru. Cieza de Leon (a Spanish soldier who arrived in Peru in 1548 and published his book in 1553) was one of the first chroniclers to visit Cuzco, the capital of the Incas, and other important cities of the Andean region, and to obtain from the natives their traditions. His book, therefore, can be considered as very reliable. To quote Cieza:

. . . before the rule of the Incas in these realms, and even before they were known, these Indians relate other things much older than all that has been told.

They affirm that for a long time they were without seeing the sun, and that suffering a great deal on that account, they prayed and made vows to those of whom they looked as their gods, and begged them for the light which they needed. And while this was going on the sun rose in great splendour from the island of Titicaca, which is within the great lagoon of the Collao, so that all were delighted.

And immediately after this event there came and stayed a white man of tall stature, who, in his appearance and person showed great authority and veneration, . . ." [^16]

The Indian legends as reported by the Catholic missionaries, the statements made by Ixtlilxochitl, and the story given in the Book of Mormon all agree on several important points relative to the events which occurred in America at the time of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ or Quetzalcoatl; for example, the Works of Ixtlilxochitl speak of a terrible "destruction and desolation" which took place in ancient America, and then the significant statement appears: "This happened . . . at the same time when Christ our Lord suffered." That statement is in complete agreement with the account given in the Book of Mormon. Ixtlilxochitl also wrote: ". . . and it seems through the ancient histories and annals, the aforementioned happened some years after the incarnation of Christ our Lord." As part of the Book of Mormon's detailed account of the terrific "destruction and desolation" which occurred on the Western Hemisphere, the Nephite historian placed the event at the time of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. [^17]

The records of the Itza Mayas of Yucatan, Mexico, and Cieza's important account from the Andean region of South America—places separated by thousands of miles from each other—show how accurately the knowledge of the events that occurred at Christ's crucifixion and resurrection, including his appearance to the ancient Americans, was preserved by the aborigines. The readers should observe how closely Cieza de Leon's statement corresponds to the account given in the Book of Mormon. He makes it clear that immediately after the darkness dispersed a "white man of tall stature, . . . showing great authority and veneration," appeared to the ancient Americans; and the Nephite record declares that the people saw a white man, clothed in a white robe, descending from heaven. This glorious personage told them that he was Jesus Christ who had been crucified for the sins of the world.

The Indian traditions quoted supply irrefutable evidence that the historical data relative to Christ's death, resurrection, and appearance to the ancient Americans, as recorded in the Book of Mormon at the time the events occurred, were widely disseminated anciently among the inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere, also that that information became a common heritage for numerous Indian nations. Thus all of these things bear witness that Jesus is the Christ and the universal Savior of man.

"THE CHANGING OF THE TIMES"

Another significant point is made by both Ixtlilxochitl and the Book of Mormon writers. Each account declares that Jesus was crucified during the early part of their year, which perhaps would be in early April according to our calendar. Ixtlilxochitl states, "And they say it happened during the first days of the year"; and the Book of Mormon declared that the event occurred, according to their system of reckoning time, "in the first month, [and] on the fourth day of the month." [^18] (Italics supplied by author.)

The parallels between these accounts are so remarkable that they indicate that the Indians of Mexico held in remembrance the Nephites' dating of events and the knowledge of what occurred down to the time of Ixtlilxochitl, which postdated the Spanish conquest. Therefore, the historical data relative to Christ's crucifixion and resurrection were recorded in the Book of Mormon at the time the events occurred, widely disseminated among the people, and then handed down from age to age among the Indian descendants of the Nephite-Lamanite peoples.

Not only did the people of Mexico retain the same system of reckoning time that the Nephites had established at Christ's birth, but, according to Stacy Judd, the Maya Indians also retained in their traditions the knowledge of the fact that their ancestors—the Nephites—altered the point from which they reckoned time. This they termed "the Changing of the Times." To quote Stacy Judd's significant statement:

It will be remembered that in the answer to the questionnaire of King Charles V of Spain, the words, "the Changing of the Times," appear. The expression, "the Changing of the Times," indicated the period of the arrival of Kukulcan, or Quetzalcoatl, as he was known in Mexico, whence he came. Both names, Kukulcan and Quetzalcoatl, have the same meaning, "The Plumed Serpent." "The Changing of the Times" was of vital importance to the Mayas. [^19]

Students of the Book of Mormon know that "the Changing of the Times" took place in ancient America at the time of Christ's birth, and not at the time of his arrival in ancient America, as is suggested by Mr. Judd. The marvelous thing is that the tradition as handed down among the Indians until after 1500 A.D. should have been maintained as accurately as it was.

KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST'S RESURRECTION

Ancient American prophets bore witness of Christ's crucifixion, and prophet after prophet throughout the entire course of Nephite history testified of his resurrection and ascension; in fact, no book gives one a stronger assurance of these facts than does the Book of Mormon. [^20] Alma predicted the "resurrection of Christ, and his ascension into heaven," [^21] declaring that thereafter he would appear to the Nephites. [^22] King Benjamin gave even a more detailed explanation of his resurrection, in which he predicted that ". . . he shall rise the third day from the dead; . . ." [^23] Samuel, the Lamanite, also prophesied that following Jesus' death ". . . the space of three days" shall pass, and then "he shall rise again from the dead." [^24]

Since these facts were widely disseminated among both Nephites and Lamanites, it was natural for them to be handed down through the ages in Indian traditions. During the early colonial period, Francis Hernandez, a Catholic priest, was sent by Bishop de las Casas to do missionary work among the Indians of Chiapas, one of the states in southern Mexico. He sent a detailed written report to Bishop de las Casas concerning the beliefs of the natives of Chiapas as they had been reported to him by one of their leading priests. Francis Hernandez's report concerning the natives of Chiapas shows how accurately this knowledge had been retained by these Indians to the time of the Spanish conquest. According to his report, Bacab, the "Fair God" of Chiapas

. . . remained dead three days, and the third day he came to life again and ascended into heaven, where he is now with the Father. Immediately after came Echuac, who is the Holy Ghost and who supplied the earth all that was needed. [^25]

Dr. P. De Roo was of the opinion that "Our Lord's resurrection is plainly brought to mind by the [foregoing] statement of the venerable Chiapan chief. . . ." [^26]

CHRIST'S BENEVOLENT WORK AMONG THE NEPHITES AND ASCENSION INTO HEAVEN

Following his resurrection and ascension, according to a beautiful account given in the Book of Mormon, Jesus Christ appeared to the inhabitants of ancient America and performed a mighty work. King Benjamin predicted these events as follows:

. . . the Lord Omnipotent . . . shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of disease. [^27]

After Christ had visited the Nephites and returned back into heaven, the historian summarized his benevolent works as follows:

. . . after having healed all their sick, and their lame, and opened the eyes of their blind and unstopped the ears of the deaf, and even had done all manner of cures among them, and raised a man from the dead, and had shown forth his power unto them, . . . [Jesus] ascended unto the Father— [^28]

Compare Paul Gaffarel's report of the folklore of the Indians of Brazil with the foregoing quotations from the Book of Mormon. He stated that the "Fair God" had

. . . raised the dead to life again, made the lame walk and the blind to see. [^29] Finally, having one day called together a great number of people, he ascended into the air and was transformed into the sun who enlightens this earth. [^30]

According to the Nephites, after Jesus had accomplished his benevolent works he ". . . departed from them and ascended into heaven. And the disciples saw and did bear record that he ascended into heaven." [^31] Mormon also wrote:

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights . . . ? [^32]

The legend of the Mixtec Indians of Mexico maintained that the "Fair God," Wixipecocha, ". . . first went off to the mountains on the summit of which he appeared to them for a few moments and then vanished. . . ." [^33]

CHRIST'S SECOND COMING

Before his final ascension, Jesus Christ informed the inhabitants of ancient America of his second coming. To quote: "And he expounded all things, even from the beginning until the time that he shall come in his glory—" [^34] (Italics supplied by author.) The Master also declared:

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a new Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you. [^35]

These predictions of his second coming and the promises that he would bless the people at that time were preserved also in the beliefs of the various Indian tribes; for example, Ixtlilxochitl reported Quetzalcoatl's prediction of his return to earth as follows:

And at the time he went about taking leave of these people, he told them that in time to come, in a year which he called ce Acatl, he would return, and then his doctrine would be received, and his children would be masters and would possess the land. . . . [^36]

Regarding the second coming of Quetzalcoatl, William H. Prescott wrote:

. . . After presiding over the golden age of Anahuac, [Quetzalcoatl] disappeared as mysteriously as he had come, . . . As he promised to return at some future day, his reappearance was looked for with confidence by each succeeding generation. [^37]

Prescott also wrote:

The Mexicans looked confidently to the return of the benevolent deity [Quetzalcoatl]; and this remarkable tradition, deeply cherished in their hearts, prepared the way . . . for the future success of the Spaniards. [^38]

An archaeologist named A. Hyatt Verrill, speaking of the promise of Quetzalcoatl's second coming, wrote:

. . . before he disappeared [he] prophesied that long after his departure . . . eventually he would return and re-establish the Aztecs and their faith. . . . There are countless Mexicans today who are still expecting their Plumed Serpent God to reappear and they still superstitiously make offerings to him in the ancient temple of Quetzalcoatl. [^39]

Dr. P. De Roo cites Father de Mercado, an early Catholic missionary, as claiming that he had obtained from the Totonac Indians who lived near Tampico, Mexico, the following legend:

Father de Mercado continues, telling what further discoveries he made in regard to the natives' dogmatic theology,—namely, that in some provinces of New Spain, as among the Totonacs, the people expected the advent of the Son of the great God into this world; and it was said he had to come in order to renew all things; meaning by this not a spiritual renovation, but an earthly material improvement, as they expressed it by saying that at his coming the loaves of bread would be much larger and everything else would grow better in like manner. With the intention of hastening the arrival of the Son of God, they celebrated a religious feast at a certain season of the year and sacrificed eighteen persons, men and women, whom they encouraged to die with the thought that they were to be messengers of the country to the great God, sent to ask and beg him that he would deign to despatch them his Son, . . . [^40]

STONE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE "WHITE BEARDED GOD"

Near the close of the Book of Mormon period the inhabitants of ancient America apostatized from the true religion of Jesus Christ, retaining, however, many of the truths in an adulterated form. One of the pagan practices which developed among their descendants, the Indians, was the making and worshiping of stone statues of the "White Bearded God." The Catholic padres who first visited Indian tribes in various countries in Meso-America reported that they saw a number of these stone representations of the "Fair God." Some of the statues were destroyed by the Catholic conquistadores; others, however, have survived to the present time.

On each of the four trips that I have made to Guatemala, I have been intensely interested in a representation in jade of the "White and Bearded God," which is housed in the Guatemala National Museum, Guatemala City. A photograph of this jade figurine (Fig. 6) is found on page twenty-five of this book. The director of the Guatemala museum claimed that the figurine was a representation of Quetzalcoatl, and that as nearly as could be ascertained it would date during the early Christian period.

In December, 1954, only two or three days after visiting the museum in Guatemala City, the members of a touring party which I was conducting throughout Mexico and Central America and I visited Chichicantenango, Guatemala. There in a small museum we were shown a stone statue of the "Fair God," a rather grotesque representation, however. A photograph of this statue (Fig. 16) is found on page forty-three. The Quiche Maya Indians of Chichicastenange paid unusual reverance to it.

Several other representations of "White and Bearded God" have have survived until the present time. For example, a photograph of a jade head of Quetzalcoatl (Fig. 2, page 18) and one of an Aztec stone statue of the "Fair God" (Fig. 13, page 37), both from the Valley of Mexico, are shown in this book. Also, on page thirty-two (Fig. 11) a photograph of a Zapotec stone statue of Quetzalcoatl is reproduced. A photograph of the Haida Indians' "Fair God" is found on page fifty-eight and one of the youthful Itzamna—the Itza-Maya Messiah—is reproduced on page forty-one. In addition to these, three photographs of Viracocha are reproduced in this volume. This makes eight statues of the "Savior God" of the American aborigines of which the writer has produced photographs and published them herein; and he knows of others which he has not photographed. Also, it is very likely that a number of other representations of the "White and Bearded God" have survived in Mexico, Central America, and South America to our day which have not come to the writer's attention.

Although these representations are somewhat crude, depicting a degenerated conception of the Savior, yet they are important, tangible evidence, showing that the Indians did have deep-rooted traditions of the "White Bearded God" long before Columbus discovered America.

BOOK OF MORMON TEACHINGS AND INDIAN TRADITIONS

It should be remembered that the central theme of the Book of Mormon is that Jesus Christ is the author of the plan of salvation and the Savior of the world, crucified and resurrected for the salvation of mankind; and the principal purpose in preserving the Nephites' ancient records was that they might come forth in the latter days ". . . to the convincing of the Jew and the Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations—" [^41] It should be recalled also that in all their teachings the holy prophets and teachers of righteousness in ancient America proclaimed a similar central theme to that recorded in the Book of Mormon. Effectively they proclaimed Jesus Christ as the God who provided the gospel with its promised rewards for all mortals who will obey; and he who was crucified and broke the bands of death for every member of the human family.

All the Indian traditions presented in this book regarding Quetzalcoatl, the "Fair God," and many other legends not mentioned, show how effectively Jesus Christ was proclaimed to the inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere in ancient times. Although an apostasy from the true gospel occurred, Indians in all parts of the Americas retained the basic doctrines pertaining to the life, the crucifixion, the resurrection, and the mission of Jesus Christ—the "White Bearded God," generally known to the Indians in Meso-America as Quetzalcoatl.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^2] 2 Nephi 6:9.
[^3] Ibid., 10:3.
[^4] Mosiah 3:9.
[^5] Von Humboldt, cited in John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 202.
[^6] Lord Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, cited in Taylor, idem.
[^7] Juan de Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana (Madrid, Spain, 1613-1732 ed.), tomo, p. 15.
[^8] Las Casas, cited in De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), p. 373.
[^9] Ibid., p. 431.
[^10] 3 Nephi, chapters 8, 9, 10.
[^11] De Roo, op. cit., p. 190.
[^12] 3 Nephi 8:20-22.
[^13] Helaman 14:1-2,
[^14] 3 Nephi 1:21.
[^15] Works of Ixtlilxochitl, cited in Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, 1950), p. 190.
[^16] Cieza de Leon, cited in Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians in the Pacific (Stockholm, 1952), p. 715.
[^17] 1 Nephi 19:8-13; Helaman 14:14, 20-24; 3 Nephi 8:1-6, 19-22.
[^18] Ibid., 8:5.
[^19] Stacy Judd, Ancient Mayas, p. 54.
[^20] 3 Nephi 6:20.
[^21] Alma 40:20.
[^22] Ibid., 16:20.
[^23] Mosiah 3:10.
[^24] Helaman 14:20.
[^25] Francis Hernandez's letter to Las Casas, cited in De Roo, op. cit., p. 373.
[^26] Idem., p. 430.
[^27] Mosiah 3:5-8.
[^28] 3 Nephi 26:15.
[^29] Mosiah 3:5-6; 3 Nephi 17:7-10; 4 Nephi 1:5.
[^30] Paul Gaffarel, Histoire de la Decourverte de l'Amerique (Paris 1892), p. 428, cited in De Roo, op. cit., p. 427; 3 Nephi 11:10-11; Mosiah 16:9; Alma 38:9; D C 88:5-13.
[^31] 3 Nephi 18:39; 19:1; 26:15; Mosiah 15:9. [^42]
[^32] Moroni 7:27.
[^33] De Roo, op. cit., p. 433.
[^34] 3 Nephi 26:3.
[^35] Ibid., 20:22.
[^36] Works of Ixtlilxochitl, cited in Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 214-215.
[^37] Prescott, Mexico and the Life of the Conqueror, Fernando Cortes (New York, 1898), vol. 2, p. 388.
[^38] Ibid., vol. 1, p. 64.
[^39] A. Hyatt Verrill, America's Ancient Civilizations (New York, 1953), p. 104.
[^40] De Roo, op. cit., pp. 425-426.
[^41] "Preface," Book of Mormon.
