Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Character

A Check for One Hundred Fifty Dollars

Heber J. Grant

I want to reprint a poem that nearly sixty years ago was repeated to me in Idaho, or, rather, it was not repeated as a poem; it was sung as a song by the late Francis M. Lyman.

It so happened that from Tooele I had to travel thirty-six miles to Salt Lake City and then on through Davis County, Weber County, and up to Brigham City, and then two and three-fourths days' journey west out to Oakley, to what was then a branch of the Grantsville Ward of the Tooele Stake of Zion over which I presided. (The first motion I made as an apostle was to present that whole country to the Box Elder Stake of Zion.) Now, when I was on that trip, Brother Lyman sang a song to me, and that very night I sat down and asked him to repeat it to me while I wrote it down, and the next day I learned it:

Let each man learn to know himself; To gain that knowledge let him labor To improve those failings in himself Which he condemns so in his neighbor. How lenient our own faults we view, And conscience' voice adeptly smother; Yet, oh, how harshly we review The selfsame failings in another! And if you meet an erring one Whose deeds are blamable and thoughtless, Consider, ere you cast the stone, If you yourself are pure and faultless. Oh, list to that small voice within, Whose whisperings oft make men confounded, And trumpet not another's sin; You'd blush deep if your own were sounded. And in self-judgment if you find Your deeds to others are superior, To you has Providence been kind, As you should be to those inferior. Example sheds a genial ray Of light which men are apt to borrow; So first improve yourself today And then improve your friends tomorrow.

I did some work for a man once, and he sent me a check for five hundred dollars with a letter apologizing for not sending me a thousand. Subsequently, I did for another individual some work which was ten times harder, involved ten times more labor and a great deal more time; and he sent me a check for one hundred fifty dollars, and told his friends he had rewarded me handsomely.

I wrote him a letter about as follows: "My dear friend: Enclosed find your check. Please take it and go to 'H,'" and then I drew a long line, but never added the '1's' and I never mailed the letter. Subsequently, I showed that check to a dear friend of mine, first explaining the work I had done and asking him how much it was worth. He said: "Ten thousand, three hundred dollars."

I pulled the check out of the drawer and handed it to him. I said: "It is only ten thousand, one hundred fifty dollars short."

He said to me: "Mr. Grant, you are a young man. 'Old men for counsel and young men for war'; I want you to give me your word of honor that you will take my advice."

I said: "I will make no such promise, but if I can take it without violating my conscience, I will try."

He said, "O your conscience will be all right. Deposit that check quickly."

Then he said: "Did that man intend to insult you?"

I said: "No. He told my friends he had rewarded me handsomely."

To this he replied, "A man's a fool who takes an insult that isn't intended. I have prolonged your life; I have rendered you a great service, because you could never look at that check but what you wanted to swear, and I believe it is worse to keep it in than to let it out. I have heard that anger creates a fluid in the body that poisons the blood and shortens the length of life. Now, you have promised to do what I say, if you can in good conscience. When you go home tonight get down on your knees and say: "O Lord, I am a man who can generally express myself so that everybody understands me; I am not usually at a loss for words; I have sufficient vocabulary so that I can generally talk my ideas into the other fellow. But, O Lord, tonight I am utterly and absolutely at a loss to find the words to express my gratitude to you that when you made me you gave me a bigger heart than you gave that fellow who sent me a check for one hundred fifty dollars.'"

I immediately opened the drawer where I kept scores of copies of this poem, which I have distributed from Japan to the Hawaiian Islands, from the midnight sun country down to Italy, and all over the United States—I immediately took this poem out and gave it to this man, and said: "I have not had sense enough to learn but one-half of the words; this part I have overlooked:

And in self-judgment if you find Your deeds to others are superior, To you has Providence been kind As you should be to those inferior."

Those four lines have been of more value to me since that man pointed out to me the force of them. Why, I had been preaching that poem and distributing it and had not learned to apply it to myself. I have since tried to remember this, and commend these lines to all my friends and brethren.

Improvement Era, March 1941, 137.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
