Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

LoveBurton, Alma"A Six-Shooter in His Hip Pocket"

Alma Burton

In the southern part of Utah there lived a poor widow and her son, the latter a wild, impudent, intractable youth, whose transgressions often brought his mother into sore distress. He was known as the terror of the town. He had almost reached the period of manhood without having curbed this insubordination. One evening the bishopric of the ward in which he lived proposed to him that he attend the Brigham Young Academy. In this proposition they had two purposes: one was that they might rid themselves of him, and the other that he might improve himself. They were willing to furnish the money if he would but go.

When the proposition was placed before him he accepted; his mother agreed to it; and in a very short time he was enrolled as a student in the above-mentioned school. One glance was sufficient to convince his associates that he was not to be trifled with. He came to school with his books under his arm and a six-shooter in his hip pocket. It was difficult for him to accustom himself to his new surroundings; he felt like a young bronco, newly saddled.

Before the end of the first week he had a difficulty with his teacher, to whom he manifested such a degree of insubordination that his instructors appealed to President Maeser of the Academy to have him suspended. With bowed head the principal listened without uttering a word. Finally he broke the silence and said, "Try him once more; he is the son of a widow whose entire hope is centered in him. She knows her boy better than we do. She hopes and prays that some day he will see the foolishness of his ways and change them. She has written me several letters in which she has pleaded with me to try and save him. I have promised that I would do my best, and I will keep my promise. Give him one more chance."

The instructors returned to their classrooms in compliance with the master's wishes. Try as they would, all their efforts were in vain, and the young man remained wholly uncontrollable. At the end of another week the instructors returned to the office of the principal and placed two propositions before him. The one was that this young man should be dismissed from the school forthwith; the other, that in the event the principal could not see his way clear to dismiss him, they would hand in their resignations to take effect immediately. "That young man is a terror," said one of the instructors; "we have done our best, but have failed absolutely." "Send him to me," said Brother Maeser.

In a few minutes the young man entered the principal's room. "Did you send for me?" he said in a low but defiant voice.

"Yes, sir," replied the genial principal. "I sent for you because I have to inform you that you must leave this institution tomorrow morning."

"Good," answered the yet unsubdued youth; he then turned about and left the room.

In the middle of the following night, Brother Maeser awoke from his slumber and thought of the wild youth whom no one seemed able to tame, who was to be expelled from the school on the following morning. He also thought of the anxious widow and how she had pleaded with him that he might save her son. He arose from his bed, knelt by the side of it, and laid the matter before the Lord; and this was the purport of his supplication: "Dear Father, there is at this time a young man in our school whom we are unable to control. We have tried to do our best, but, sad to say, we have failed. If there is a way whereby we may reach him, I pray thee in our Redeemer's name to make it known unto us; and thy name shall have the praise, the honor, and the glory."

"I received no satisfaction from my supplication," said Doctor Maeser; "and therefore thought it possible that the Lord himself had given him up."

The next morning, about ten o'clock, as the principal was sitting in his office, there came a knock at the door. . . .

"Well," said the principal, "what can I do for you?" The young man, with downcast eyes, replied: "May I speak with you for a few moments, Professor Maeser?"

"Certainly," was the reply.

The young man's lips quivered; and with trembling voice, he said: "You will not dismiss me, Brother Maeser, will you? Will you not please give me one more chance?"

Brother Maeser sprang to his feet, extended his arms toward this once obstinate youth and exclaimed: "Come to my arms, my son, God bless you! I will not give you up; not one chance, but a thousand chances shall we be glad to give you." The master and the student fell into each other's arms and wept.

This was the turning point in the life of this young man. He studied energetically and worked so industriously that upon various occasions the principal had to caution him against over-exertion.

You ask, "Whatever became of the boy?" The last we heard of him he was a counselor to the bishop who had sent him to Provo to school partly that the ward might be relieved of his presence.

Alma Burton, Karl G. Maeser, Mormon Educator, 47-49.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
