Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Missionary Work

"Why Had I Come?"

Reed H. Bradford

Have you ever had an experience with such meaning to you that it changed the course of your whole life? I had such an experience, and the memory of it is as clear to me now as it was that day twenty-five years ago when it happened.

I was walking along the streets of a beautiful little town in Germany [just before World War II]. It was Maytime and the fragrance of lilacs was everywhere. It seemed so good to be alive.

Oh, I admit there were some things troubling me. Take that first meeting in the office of the mission president in which he asked us all why we had come on a mission. Someone said it was because his parents had always wanted him to come. Another replied that he had always admired the German people and wanted to learn their language and absorb some of their culture. A humble farm boy was of the opinion that it was his duty to come since his bishop and President Heber J. Grant had personally called him.

The thing that kept bothering me was the look on the face of the mission president after each person had finished speaking. For some reason it seemed to me that he was disappointed and, yes, even a little hurt. But I did not know why.

Then there was the tracting problem. My companion, as part of my orientation, had shown me the mission statistics. "We have to average at least three hours a day tracting or we'll be getting a letter from the mission office," he said. I did not want any such letter, but it was not easy to spend those hours, what with most people slamming doors in your face and you unable to speak German very well.

But this morning I shoved such problems into the back of my mind. It was spring and I felt good.

Suddenly, I heard a loud voice coming from somewhere in the near vicinity. At first I could not tell whence it came, but, looking more closely, I saw a huge crowd of people standing in formation. I surmised that they were listening to a special broadcast over the radio. Approaching the crowd, I asked a man what this was all about. "Don't you know," he said, "that this is Labor Day and everyone who works gathers to listen to the Fuehrer's instructions?" I was about to reply that I had not known about this when suddenly the voice from the loudspeaker shouted, "Heil Hitler," and everyone directed his gaze to a swastika flying from a flagpole and gave the Nazi salute.

I realized immediately that I was in an embarrassing position. To salute or not to salute, that was the question. I only had a couple of seconds to make this decision, but for my own reasons, I decided against it.

The events of the next few minutes happened quickly and violently. To begin with, two men asked me why I had failed to raise my hand. In my best German, I explained that I was not a citizen but was representing an organization whose principles and aims were in some respects quite different from those espoused by Adolf Hitler. I was about to say something more when the next thing I knew I was trying to pick myself up off the ground. Someone had struck me and, as I looked up, I saw some of the most hateful human beings I had ever seen, all staring down at me. They were about to renew the attack when someone shouted: "He's no German; he's an American."

For some reason they ceased beating me but dragged me away from the crowd. After finding out where I lived, they took me home and everyone left except one man in plain clothes, who I later discovered was the district leader of the Gestapo, or secret police. "You stupid moron," he shouted, "how dare you insult the greatest man living, the Fuehrer of the German people, one who will one day conquer the world! Why have you come here anyway?"

He told me many other things, but they are unimportant. What was important was that ringing question: Why have you come here anyway? It was the same question our mission president had asked in that first meeting. My soul was in a turmoil and no amount of lilacs or brightness of the sunshine could calm it. Why had I come?

Over and over again I sought the answer and gradually, like a fog lifting from the marshes, things began to clear. I discovered that those reasons we had given the mission president were not good enough. The great reason, the one that should have been central to everything we did, was to bring souls to an understanding of God's way of life. But how was one to be sure that his way was as good or better than some other ways? We had always assumed that his way was better, but how was one to know? Somehow I would have to find out.

I remember reading that verse in John in which he said: "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17). It came to me clearly that if one wanted to do his will, he would have to discover what his will was. I now began to read the scriptures with the same zeal and desire I had read David Copperfield as a child. And as I began to understand them, I tried to make them part of my life. It was no perfect performance, but something important was taking place from within.

For example: I must have listened to the prayer on the sacrament hundreds of times, but now it had a new meaning for me. Certain parts of it even bothered me because I knew I had not been worthy to take upon me the name of his Son. But I realized that in a sense, since I was a member of his church, I did represent him, and I ought to represent him honestly and well.

In a way I suppose you could say I had been born again. So many things were taking on new meanings. I no longer tracted those many hours in order to have my name high on the list in the mission office. I had found a better reason to tract. Gerhardt, a wonderful young friend whose life characterized His principles as well as any I know and who was killed in a tank going through the Maginot line, said it was the "personal commitment" to God, his principles, and his church, that brought this new understanding and the peace that "surpasseth all understanding." He was right. I discovered that His way of life brought not just temporary satisfactions, but the most intensive, extensive, and permanent satisfactions I had ever known.

As I went to say good-bye to our mission president before sailing for America, there came a wonderful radiance into his face as he listened to my story. "Your mission is just beginning," he said. This time I knew what he meant.

Instructor, March 1959, 76-77.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
