Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

A Beautiful Personage Appeared

"Maha"

Elder John W. Taylor, while on a mission to the Southern States, was once traveling in Kentucky. When going through some woods he was met by two men, who were delegates sent by a mass meeting to notify Elder Taylor to leave the state. The reason for this announcement was asked, and the answer was that the doctrines he was teaching were arousing the people and ruining the neighborhood.

"Why," said the elder, "Paul, the ancient apostle, was similarly accused, and the people were angered at his ministry and success."

"Well, now," replied one of the men, "we don't care a d———about Paul the apostle, but you have got to leave the state."

"Gentlemen," was the reply, "I will not leave the state until I am ready, and that time has not yet come. I am an American citizen and claim the right to remain where I please so long as I interfere with no one's business and attend to my own affairs. I am a minister of the gospel and am here to preach in Union Church tomorrow at 2 o'clock and I will be glad to see them at meeting."

With this the two men took their departure, and the next day Elder Taylor appeared at Union Church to fill his appointment, but he found that influence had been used with those in charge so that he was not permitted to occupy the building. Subsequently, however, he met a man who pointed to a frame building in a clearing in the woods with the remark, "There is a building and an acre of ground which I own and will give you to preach the gospel in."

Announcements for meeting were consequently made, and at the appointed time Elder Taylor made his way towards the building, which he had christened "Liberty Church." On emerging from the woods he beheld a crowd of men whom he soon recognized as friends working away at his church, and he hastened forward to inquire the cause of the commotion. He soon learned that someone in the neighborhood was suddenly filled with the desire, as soon as they were informed that a Mormon meeting was to be held in the house, to have all the land surveyed, and either intentionally or otherwise the surveyor had run the dividing line directly through the house. As a result, the party on whose land a part of the house stood had forbidden the holding of meetings on his land.

When the men who came to listen heard of this prohibition, they immediately placed logs and rollers under the frame building and moved it over to the acre of land which had been donated for the use of Elder Taylor. The chimney, however, which had been built up from the ground, was left standing on the other party's property.

The house was crowded and the audience extended out beyond the end where a hole had been left by the removal from the chimney. Elder Taylor spoke with great freedom on the principles of the gospel, and hesitated not to proclaim against the numerous sins which many of his congregation had committed. After he had spoken some time one man arose and said, "What this man has said is true, and as for me and my family, we wish to be baptized if he will administer the ordinance."

Elder Taylor consented to act and then said, "If I have not told the truth I would like anyone in this congregation to tell me so," but no person responded.

The company then repaired to a pond of water that was near by, and the converted man and his family were baptized. As this ordinance and that of the laying on of hands were administered, they were successively explained to those assembled, and thus a profound impression was made on their minds. When almost ready to separate, Brother Taylor said he would prophesy that many more people would shortly be baptized in that pond of water.

At this time Brother Taylor had been in the mission what was thought to be a sufficient length of time, and his release to return home had therefore been sent and he had it in his pocket. After making the above prediction, however, he desired to see it fulfilled, and consequently he and Elder Bigler, who now became his traveling companion, started out to visit through the country.

One night when weary and hungry they came to a house and Elder Taylor stepped up to the door and knocked. The proprietor appeared and was told, "We are ministers of Christ sent out to preach the gospel; we desire something to eat and a place to sleep, and if you will give us these, the angels of God will visit you this night and inform you as to who we are."

They were invited to enter and, after supper, bore their testimony of the gospel to their host and his family. A comfortable bed was provided and they rested well. Early next morning the lady of the house arose and prepared breakfast, eating which the elders started again on their journey. As they were passing out of the gate Elder Taylor remarked to a little girl who had followed them, "It will storm here today," though at that time the sky was perfectly clear and there was not the slightest indication of a change in the weather. In that country a storm means a hurricane or very severe change, and not merely a little rain or snow.

The child ran and told her parents what had been said, when the father immediately began to board up his windows and fasten his doors. It was well he did so, for within an hour a cyclone swept over the place, utterly demolishing his orchard and barely leaving his house, which was only saved through its having been closed up.

When the storm passed he hitched up his team and sought the elders, but did not succeed in finding them. They, however, before many days had elapsed, felt impressed to return to this gentleman's home, and when they did so were joyfully entertained. The brethren were now reminded of their promise to these people concerning the visitation of angels, and the parents and even the children testified that the night of the elders' sojourn in their house was filled with pleasant visitations by angelic messengers.

The lady was so full of joy that she could scarcely contain herself. She said she had but retired when she fell into a peaceful slumber and the vision of her mind was opened up. A beautiful personage appeared and by some unseen power wafted her to the face of a high cliff, where she was located on a projecting ledge of rock about six feet below the top. Here she stood endeavoring to reach the top where her minister stood. He was pretending to try and help her, but was merely extending to her pieces of dry weeds and straw which broke in her hand when she attempted therewith to draw herself to the summit of the rock. She had worked some time at this discouraging labor and was about to give up, when she saw Elders Taylor and Bigler approaching. As they came to the edge of the cliff they extended their hands to her and quickly raised her to the place she desired to stand.

Just at this moment her guide appeared and inquired if she was satisfied, to which she replied, "No."

She was next taken to her home. As she stood there looking into the street she saw approaching a long procession of ministers of every denomination. Every preacher she had ever heard, and these were not a few, was in the concourse. After passing before her, they marched down into a field where they gathered in a great crowd, when there was a humming noise as if all were talking at once. As she watched this motley crowd, all suddenly vanished, and there were left standing alone only Elders Taylor and Bigler.

As her guide again inquired if she was satisfied she answered in the affirmative. She awoke with a contented spirit and felt assured that her guests were servants of the Most High.

This whole family received baptism at the hands of the elders, and many more accepted the gospel. The pond was used for the administration of the ordinance, and thus Elder Taylor's prediction at the water's edge was fulfilled.

Juvenile Instructor, 1 March 1890, 152-54.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
