Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Missionary WorkKimball, J. Golden"You Have Not Come Here to Listen to the Gospel"

J. Golden Kimball

When I was president of the Southern States Mission, after a year's time I concluded that I would try to hold a conference in a city. Up to that time we had always kept out of cities. So I made my arrangements with the president of the conference to hold such a meeting and to secure some place where we could hold it. We had no money. The only place they could secure was the court house. I told the elders: "I will do the preaching, and if they kill me you need not bother any further." The people were very prejudiced.

When the time came I met those elders, a fine body of men, wonderful, courageous men, men of faith—they had to be in the South. We went to the court house—all those present were men; there wasn't a woman among them, and we all knew what that meant. When there are no women there is a great deal of danger. It is dangerous enough when they are present.

At any rate, I made up my mind to deliver my message as fervently and humbly as ever a president of a mission preached. I intended to do all the talking. I went there determined to preach the gospel. I had my Bible, and I am well acquainted with my Bible. I cannot find anything in anybody else's Bible. I have owned this Bible for forty years and it is well marked and every subject traced in my own penmanship. I would not take money for this Bible. I went there believing that the Spirit of God was on me as the president of the mission. I was humble as a child. It was the only time in my life that I have ever been far enough away that I could do as I pleased. Ever since that time I have been close in.

I got up to preach the gospel, faith and repentance, etc. All at once something came over me and I opened my mouth and said to that body of men (the building was crowded; among them were some of the leading men): "Gentlemen, you have not come here to listen to the gospel of Jesus Christ. I know what you have come for. You have come to find out about the Mountain Meadows Massacre and polygamy, and God being my helper I will tell you the truth."

And I did. I talked to them for one hour. When the meeting was out you could hear a pin drop. There was no comment; there was no noise or confusion, and we went to the hotel. We had arranged for lodgings at a cheap hotel.

After a short time a brass band played. Elder Willard Bean was the president of the conference. I sent him out to find what it all meant. I thought it meant trouble. So he inquired and they told him: "We are serenading that big long fellow." That is the only brass band I have ever had dispense music after one of my talks.

What I want to ask you good people is this: Was I moved upon by the right spirit? The next day when we went to the woods to hold our priesthood meeting, which we always held in the woods—we had no other place—I said to those elders: "Don't one of you dare preach that sermon; it will cost you your life." And I have never preached it since.

What I am beating around in the brush to put over is this: Does the Lord God direct his servants? He certainly does. If he doesn't we are a failure and we are no better than others. We do not know just what to say. I don't. I don't know just how to say it, but the Lord being my helper as long as I live I am going to try to be natural and I am going to try to have my mind open with the hope that God will give me his Holy Spirit when I open my mouth and use the talent which the Lord has given me.

Now, brethren and sisters, I know what that feeling is. I have not had it very often, but I know that there is such a thing as "the still small voice." I have heard it.

Conference Report, April 1932, 78-79.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
