Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Conversion

"I Directly Read It through Twice"

Zera Pulsipher

When I was about twenty-one I married a very agreeable companion, lived with her about one year when she died leaving one child which we named Harriett. After the death of my wife (Polly, or Mary, Randell) I had some anxiety about [my wife's] state and condition, consequently in answer to my desires in a few weeks she came to me in vision and appearing natural looked pleasant as she ever did and sat by my side and assisted me in singing a hymn—beginning thus: "That glorious day is drawing nigh when Zion's Light Shall Shine." This she did with a seeming composure. This vision took away all the anxiety of my mind concerning her in as much as she seemed to enjoy herself well. This hymn which she introduced and sang with me applied to the great work of the last dispensation of the fullness of times. This transpired about ten years before Joseph Smith had discovered the first revelation of the work of the last days. My mind became calm as respecting her condition in the spirit world. . . .

I [eventually] removed to Onondaga County in the state of New York. I then lost my only son by the fall of a tree which caused much grief to me in that place.

I had many agreeable friends and good society there. I bought a farm and built a mill. I also built a meetinghouse for the Baptist Church which I was then associated with [as their minister]. In the summer of 1831 I heard a minister say that an ancient record or Golden Bible [had come forth] in Manchester near Palmyra which remark struck me like a shock of electricity [and] at the same time thought it might be something that would give light to my mind upon principles that I had been thinking of for years and many times I had remarked that if the pure church with its gifts and graces was not on the earth, if so I had not found it. But I should be happy enough to find it in my day.

. . . In the fall of 1831 there was a Book of Mormon brought in to town. I succeeded in getting it. I directly read it through twice, gave it a thorough investigation and believed it was true, and the winter following Jerod [Jared] Carter came. . . . As soon as he came into town I, with two Methodist preachers, went to see him. After a reasonable introduction I questioned him upon the principles of the ancient gospel with all its gifts belonging to it. I asked him if he believed it; he answered in the affirmative. I asked him if he had ever laid hands on the sick and they had recovered. Yes, he said, he had in many instances.

He preached the following evening to a crowded congregation, held up the Book of Mormon and declared it to be a revelation from God. I could not gain-say anything he had said. He sat down and gave liberty for remarks; the congregation seemed to be in amaze, not knowing what to think of what they had heard. I arose and said to the congregation that we had been hearing strange things, and if true they were of the utmost importance to us. If not true it was one of the greatest impositions, and as the preacher had said that he had got his knowledge from heaven and was nothing but a man and I the same, that I had just as good a right to obtain that blessing as he; therefore I was determined to have that knowledge for myself, which I considered it my privilege, from that time I made it a matter of fervent prayer.

I think about the seventh day as I was thrashing in my barn with doors shut, all at once there seemed to be a ray of light from heaven, which caused me to stop work for a short time, but soon began it again. Then in a few minutes another light came over my head, which caused me to look up. I thought I saw the angels with the Book of Mormon in their hands in the attitude of showing it to me and saying, "this is the great revelation of the last days in which all things spoken of by the prophets must be fulfilled." The vision was so open and plain that I began to rejoice exceedingly, so that I walked the length of my barn crying "Glory Hal-la-lu-ya to God and the Lamb forever."

For some time it seemed a little difficult to keep my mind in a proper state of reasonable order, I was so filled with the joys of heaven. But when my mind became calm I called the church together, and informed them of what I had seen. I told them of my determination to join the Church of Latter Day Saints, which I did, and a large body of my church went with me. I was ordained to the office of an elder and went to preaching with considerable success at home and abroad. I had the privilege of baptizing Wilford Woodruff on the 31st of December, 1833, at Richland, New York.

Zera Pulsipher, Autobiography.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
