Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

A New Hat for Elder Phillips

Thomas Phillips

I was traveling in the towns and villages in a part of the County of Surrey, England, preaching the gospel as revealed from the heavens through the ministry of holy beings. Under these circumstances, food and raiment were sometimes hard to obtain; consequently, at one time I had a hat that was very much the worse for wear.

In a village called Hersham, in that county, lived a brother by the name of William Hobbs, at whose house I sometimes visited, and received food and lodgings.

One night Brother Hobbs dreamed that a personage came to him and told him that Brother Phillips would be at his house on a certain day, naming the time, which I think was four or five days from the time he dreamed. He was further told that he must get a new hat for Brother Phillips; for the one he wore was very shabby.

This dream was very much impressed on the mind of Brother Hobbs, and troubled him sorely, for it found him without money and some miles from any town where he could buy a hat.

Brother Hobbs was the overseer of a small number of men, whose work was to keep some miles of railroad in repair for the safety of the trains.

When the day came that I was to be at his house in the evening, he went to his work very low-spirited, not having obtained the hat. While at work on the track, a long train of cars came along, and when passing the place where Brother Hobbs and his hands were at work, a hat, suitable for the finest gentleman in the land, flew out of one of the windows.

Brother Hobbs shouted, "That's the hat for Brother Phillips! Thank God!"

When Brother Hobbs came home in the evening, I was there, it being the time specified in the dream.

He walked up to me and said:

"Brother Phillips, I was to give you a hat, and here it is." To our surprise, it fitted me well.

As a matter of course, I was anxious to know who was so thoughtful for an elder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and, in answer to my questions, Brother Hobbs told me the dream.

Then I knew, and still know, that the providences of our Heavenly Father were, and are, working in favor of the servants and Saints of the Most High.

George Q. Cannon, A String of Pearls, 72-73.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
