Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

ConversionToronto, Wallace F."The Greatest Thing in Life"

Wallace F. Toronto

I should like to relate a story . . . which to me is an evidence of the truthfulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and of the protecting power and goodness of God.

A young Ukrainian, Tarnawskyj by name, who had been studying for the ministry in the Greek Catholic Church, was on his way from Warsaw, Poland, to New York City, there to attend a graduate school for the ministry of that church. He came by the way of the city of Prague. As he was going down the street he saw the sign, "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." He noticed that we were holding a meeting at that time. He thought to himself: "I have learned of those people in my studies. I am curious. I think I will go in and see what they have to say."

He entered, dressed in his black robe and white collar, and sat in the back. He was a young man about twenty-eight or thirty years of age. Two of our missionaries stood up and explained some of the principles of the gospel. They bore their testimonies. Since he spoke Ukrainian, which is kindred to Czech, he understood them. After the meeting he came up and asked: "When do you hold the rest of your services?" We enumerated the meetings of the week and he came to all of them, even including the Relief Society. In a few weeks he made this request: "Brother Toronto, I would like to be baptized into this Church."

"Now, Brother Tarnawskyj, you know you can't make your living in this Church. Our missionaries sustain themselves, either from their own savings or through the sustenance which their folks send them."

"Oh, Brother Toronto," he replied, "I know all about that. Your missionaries have been teaching me the gospel." Continuing, he said: "I have found the most priceless thing in all the world. I want the gospel of Jesus Christ. I have been seeking it for years in the universities and the divinity schools of many lands, and I have never found anything that can equal this."

I said: "All right. As soon as we instruct you a little more fully in the gospel we shall be happy to have you as a member of the Church." He was subsequently baptized. Upon accepting baptism a great characteristic of truth took hold of him, that of wanting to tell somebody else about it. Of course, those he thought of first were his loved ones back in Poland. He wrote them a long letter, in which he declared: "I have found the greatest thing in life. I want to tell you something of the gospel of Jesus Christ, that you, too, might enjoy the blessings which flow from it."

I met him a few days later. He wore a long face and was very dejected. "What on earth has happened to you, Brother Tarnawskyj?"

"I just received a letter from my folks in Poland. They tell me here: 'Dear Son and Brother: If you do not immediately renounce this thing you call Mormonism we shall cease to send you one penny of support, which you know is your only means of livelihood; and furthermore, we shall disown you as a son and a brother!'"

"What is your answer, Brother Tarnawskyj? You are at the cross-roads. You have a grave decision to make."

"Oh, Brother Toronto, you know what my answer is: 'Dear loved ones, I cannot renounce the thing I hold dearest in life, the gospel of Jesus Christ. I pray God that you, too, at some future time, through my efforts or the efforts of others, might also come into this church.'"

From that day until this, so far as I know, he has not received one penny or one word from his people. He found himself in Czechoslovakia, a foreigner, unable to secure employment.

During these troublesome times the subtle political forces in Central Europe had operated to break down the Czecho-Slovakian Republic, so that Slovakia gained its freedom, as well as the little province of Ruthenia or Sub-Carpathian Russia, far to the east, hardly larger than the county of Salt Lake. Brother Tarnawskyj finally proposed: "Brother Toronto, many of my countrymen are out there in Ruthenia, a large group of Ukrainians among whom I could work. Since I am an educated man, I think I could get a position as an inspector in the Ministry of Education. Can you help me get there? I want to become a self-sustaining citizen."

"All right. We will help you get to Ruthenia, if you think you can succeed."

Upon his arrival in this new autonomous state, he filed his application for a position in the ministry. It went through the various hands and much red tape through which such things have to pass, and finally reached the Minister himself. Up to this point all went well. When it reached the Minister there was great delay. Finally our brother wrote me a letter and said: "Brother Toronto, I don't know what the trouble down here is. I am qualified for the position, and I have pulled every string I know. And I have prayed. The Lord God knows I am hungry. He knows I need a place to rest my head. I have tried to live the gospel since I joined the Church. From the earnings on little jobs I have secured here and there I have set aside my tithing, and as soon as the mails go through I will send it on to you. Why, oh why does the Lord persecute me like this?" But in conclusion he added (I wish I had the letter here to read to you): "Perhaps it is all for the best."

A card came a few days later: "I am going to take a job out in the little town of Perecyn as a humble school teacher, where I can make enough to at least buy me a few crusts of bread."

He was employed there for three days, when that tiny state of Central Europe, Sub-Carpathian Russia, was drenched in blood by the Hungarian hordes which swept over it. Men, women and children by the hundreds were left dying in the streets. He and nine of his Ukrainian companions were routed out of bed at five o'clock one morning and thrown into prison. After twenty-four hours of intense suffering they were called before a military court consisting of one man in the uniform of a Hungarian officer. He had the sole right to say, "You live," or "You die." The ten men came before him. They were asked two questions: "How long have you been in this country?" and "What is your religious affiliation?"

Our brother led the others. To the first question he replied that he had been there so and so many weeks. "What is your religious affiliation?"

"I am a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Sometimes they call us 'Mormons.'"

"Mormons? Mormons? I have heard of you folks. I have read of you in the newspapers of Budapest. I hear your people have done some good in this world." A tense moment of hesitation and then, "You go free."

His nine companions came up after him. They were asked the identical questions. Being no more guilty than he himself, they were nevertheless condemned to death, and shot down in cold blood before the sun went down that day.

This brother finally got out of the country, and wrote me another letter. "Brother Toronto," he said, "I know the Lord does move in a mysterious way His wonders to perform. The gospel is the most priceless thing I have in the world. I know the Lord has preserved my life, that I may be a beacon light to my fellow men. He has not only preserved my life, in the way I have described to you, but He has also protected me, for had I received the position of inspector in the Ministry of Education I today would have been sitting in the concentration camps of Hungary, subjected to some of the most terrible torture known to humankind. I owe all I have to the gospel of Jesus Christ."

Conference Report, April 1940, 53-56.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
