Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"There Might Be Something to It"

S. Dilworth Young

Phinehas Young, Brigham's brother, was returning from a preaching tour when he stopped for lunch at the house of a family named Tomlinson. While he was sitting in the parlor, waiting, there walked into the room a tall, thin man who was dressed in the homespun of the day. He did not waste time on preliminaries (I tell it in the words of Phinehas):

"'There is a book, sir, I wish you to read.' The thing appeared so novel to me, [said Phinehas] that for a moment I hesitated, saying,—'Pray, sir, what book have you?' 'The Book of Mormon, or, as it is called by some, the Golden Bible.' 'Ah, sir, then it purports to be a revelation?' 'Yes,' said he, 'It is a revelation from God.' I took the book, and by his request looked at the testimony of the witnesses [which in that day, in the first editions, was in the back of the book]. Said he—'If you will read this book with a prayerful heart and ask God to give you a witness you will know of the truth of this work.' I told him I would do so, and then asked him his name. He said his name was Samuel H. Smith. 'Ah,' said I, 'you are one of the witnesses.' 'Yes,' said he, 'I know the book to be a revelation from God, translated by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and that my brother, Joseph Smith, Jun., is a Prophet, Seer and Revelator.'"

That book was read first, after Phinehas, by John Young, the father. In due course Brigham read it. There was talk about it. Brigham opined there might be something to it.

In the summer of 1831 there came into the community five young men from Columbia, Pennsylvania. At Victor, six miles away from Mendon, Phinehas invited them to stay with him, and there they preached about the restoration. All of the Youngs went over to Victor to hear them and, in addition, Heber C. Kimball and his wife, Vilate. What they said is not now known, but the results of their preaching were soon apparent. Brigham, Phinehas, and Heber C. Kimball decided to investigate the branch at Columbia, from whence these young men came, to learn more. It was now January 1832, so they hitched a team to a sleigh and bucked the winter drifts and forded the icy streams for the 125 miles it took to get to Columbia. They stayed a week with the members. . . .

Upon their return to Mendon, Brigham, now convinced that there was indeed "something to it," hitched his horse to a sleigh and with his brother-in-law for company drove to Kingston, Canada, and sought out Joseph, his brother. Joseph immediately left his preaching—for he was a Methodist preacher—and accompanied Brigham back to Mendon. They arrived in late February or early March. Then Joseph, Phinehas, and their father drove to Columbia where they were baptized, but Brigham waited at Mendon. His wife Miriam was very ill. One day, April 14, 1832, he told Eleazer Miller to baptize him. He was ready. And so on a cold, raw day with snow falling, they went to a stream half a mile away, and he was baptized. He was immediately confirmed and ordained an elder. He said, "I felt the sweet influence of the spirit testifying my sins were forgiven."

BYU Speeches, 17 March 1964, 3-4.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
