Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Was Cautious in Religious Matters"

Lorenzo Dow Young

In November, 1829, I removed to a place called Hector Hill. In February, 1831, my father, my brothers Joseph and Brigham, and Heber C. Kimball came to my house. They brought with them the Book of Mormon. They were on their way to visit some Saints in Pennsylvania. Through fear of being deceived, I was quite cautious in religious matters. I read and compared the Book of Mormon with the Bible, and fasted and prayed that I might come to a knowledge of the truth. The Spirit seemed to say, "This is the way; walk ye in it." This was all the testimony I could get at the time; it was not altogether satisfactory.

The following May, Elder Levi Gifford came into the neighborhood and desired to preach. My brother, John, belonged to the Methodist church, and had charge of their meetinghouse which was in the neighborhood. I obtained from him permission for Elder Gifford to preach in it. The appointment was circulated for a meeting the same evening.

This was on Saturday evening, and the circuit preacher of that district was to hold a meeting there on Sunday. Elder Midbury, the circuit preacher, attended the meeting. The house was crowded. As soon as Elder Gifford had concluded his discourse, Elder Midbury arose to his feet and said: "Brethren, sisters and friends: I have been a preacher of the gospel for twenty-two years; I do not know that I have been the means of converting a sinner, or reclaiming a poor backslider; but this I do know, that the doctrine the stranger has preached to us tonight is a deception, that Joe Smith is a false prophet, and that the Book of Mormon is from hell."

After talking awhile in this strain, he concluded. I immediately arose to my feet and asked the privilege of speaking, which was granted. I said that Elder Midbury, in his remarks, entirely ignored the possibility of more revelation, and acknowledged that he had been a preacher of the gospel for twenty-two years, without knowing that he had been the means of converting a sinner, or of reclaiming a poor backslider. But still he claimed to know that the doctrine he had just heard was false, that Joseph Smith was an impostor, and that the Book of Mormon was from hell. "Now, how is it possible," I asked, "for him to know these things unless he has received a revelation?"

When I sat down a strong man, by the name of Thompson, who was well known in the neighborhood as a belligerent character, stepped up to Elder Gifford and demanded the proofs of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

Elder Gifford replied, "I have said all I care about saying tonight."

Then said Mr. Thompson, "We will take the privilege of clothing you with a coat of tar and feathers, and riding you out of town on a rail."

In the meantime, four or five others of like character came to the front.

Acting under the impulse of the moment—true to the instincts of my nature to protect the weak against the strong, I stepped between Elder Gifford and Mr. Thompson. Looking the latter in the eye, I said, "Mr. Thompson, you cannot lay your hand on this stranger to harm a hair of his head, without you do it over my dead body."

He replied by mere threats of violence, which brought my brother John to his feet.

With a voice and manner, that carried with it a power greater than I had ever seen manifested in him before, and, I might say, since, he commanded Mr. Thompson and party to take their seats. He continued, "Gentlemen, if you offer to lay a hand on Mr. Gifford, you shall pass through my hands, after which I think you will not want any more tonight." Mr. Thompson and party quieted down and then took their seats. . . .

In the spring of 1831 there was a two-days' meeting of the Saints, about six miles from where I lived, in the state of Pennsylvania. I attended it, and became fully convinced of the divine origin of the latter-day work.

In the summer of 1831, I settled up my business and started for the latter-day Zion, in the state of Missouri. On my way out of the state of New York, I visited Elder J. P. Green, in the town of Avon.

As I arrived there on Saturday, he said, "Brother Lorenzo, I am very glad you have come. I have an appointment to preach at 10 o'clock, eight miles from here, but I am very unwell and not able to fill it. I want you to do it for me."

I rather ridiculed the idea, saying, "You want me to preach as a Mormon elder, when I have not even joined the Church?"

He still desired me to go, and said, "it will be all right."

E. M. Green, the son of J. P. Green, accompanied me, with a revelation on the organization of the Church, which his father directed him to read to the congregation.

Arriving at the place appointed, I found the house full, and a Baptist preacher in the stand. I introduced myself to the minister; he invited the congregation to sing, and I prayed, and E. M. Green read the revelation. I arose and commenced to speak. The good Spirit was with me, and I had much freedom. I talked about one hour and a quarter. At the close I gave anyone the privilege of speaking who wished to. The Baptist minister arose and bore his testimony, that what they had heard was true Bible doctrine, and could not be questioned.

After meeting, several persons gathered around me and wished to be baptized. Knowing that I had not received authority to administer the ordinance, I put them off, telling them that when Elder Green came to fill the next appointment that had been made for him, he would baptize them. Among those who requested baptism, at that time, were the brothers Joseph and Chandler Holbrook, and Mary Ann Angell, now the relict [widow] of President Brigham Young.

On the following morning I told Elder Green that, inasmuch as I had believed in the gospel for some time, and had preached as a "Mormon" elder, I thought it was time that I was baptized. He administered the ordinance, and ordained me an elder. I then went on my way rejoicing.

Fragments of Experience, 33-36.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
