Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"What Difference Will It Make?"

Marion G. Romney

Four Latter-day Saint boys set out from a Utah city on a cross-country trip. They had saved all their money during the last year of high school for this purpose, and now that graduation was over, they packed their suitcases into the trunk of their car and said good-byes to worrying parents and envious friends. It was a matter of considerable celebration when they crossed the Utah state line and entered into another state. . . .

One of the boys . . . proposed to his friends that they forget all about being Mormons for the duration of their adventure. Asked why by the other three puzzled boys, he said that they could now afford to "let their hair down" and sample some of the excitement enjoyed by other people, not of the Mormon church. "Anyway," he argued, "what difference will it make? Nobody out here in the world knows us or cares anything about our church connections."

The thrill of the new experience weighted their judgment, and the group made an agreement to give it a try. . . .

Nightfall on the first day of the journey found them at a famous tourist attraction spot, and they made arrangements for camping near the resort. After the evening meal they gathered at the large hotel for the night's entertainment. No sooner had they arrived when the ringleader of the boys suggested that they begin here and now sampling the things they had so long been denied by strict parents and teachers. The first thing that caught their eyes was a large neon sign at the far end of the lounge. It read, "Bar—beer, cocktails." Thinking it a moderate nod in the direction of "sinning just a little bit," they agreed to go into the bar and order a glass of beer for each one. There was a nervous air about them as they entered the gaudily lighted bar and surveyed the counters loaded with intriguing bottles of liquor. The boy who had been delegated to give the order lost his voice on the first try and had to swallow hard to get out an understandable, "Four glasses of beer, please."

What the beer lacked in palatability, the atmosphere and thrill more than made up. They grew bolder and began to talk of the next adventure they would undertake. The talk was growing racy when suddenly a well-dressed man entered the bar and walked straight toward their table. The look on the stranger's face and the determined pace at which he walked toward them left the boys completely unnerved.

When the man reached the table at which the boys were sitting, he extended his hand to one of them and said, "I beg your pardon, but aren't you George Redford's son from Utah?"

The boy was speechless and terrified. His fingers froze around the base of the glass of beer and he answered in a wavering voice. "Why, yes, sir, I am."

"I thought I recognized you when you came in the lobby of the hotel," the stranger continued. "I am Henry Paulsen, vice-president of the company your dad works for, and I met you and your mother last winter at a company dinner at the Hotel Utah. I have never forgotten how you explained your Mormon priesthood to one of the other executives of our company who asked you what it meant to be a Mormon boy. I must say I was a little surprised to see you head for the bar, but I suppose that with Mormons as well as non-Mormons, boys will be boys when they're off the roost."

These boys had heard a sermon they would never hear duplicated at the pulpit. They were sick, ashamed, and crestfallen. As they left their half-filled glasses and walked out through the hotel lobby, they had the feeling that everyone was looking at them. The cover of darkness was kind as they made their way to their camp. "You just can't win," said the boy who had proposed their dropping their true identity, trying to ease the tension.

"I'm not so sure," replied the boy to whom the stranger had spoken. "If we have any sense left, we can make this experience into the most winning lesson of our lives."

Conference Report, October 1974, 104-5.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
