Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"Deliverance Is at Hand"

Elizabeth Jackson Kingsford

We continued our toil day after day, pulling our handcarts with our provisions and rations, our little children, etc., through deep sand, rocky roads, or fording streams. It was a dreary journey. Many miles each day were traveled, ere with tired limbs we reached camp, ate and retired for the night to rest, to pursue our monotonous course the following day. After toilsome and fatiguing travel, we reached Laramie on the 8th of October. . . .

Shortly after leaving Ft. Laramie it became necessary to shorten our rations that they might hold out, and that the company be not reduced to starvation. The reduction was repeated several times. First, the pound of flour was reduced to three-fourths of a pound, then to half a pound, and afterwards to still less per day. However, we pushed ahead. The trip was full of adventures, hair breadth escapes, and exposure to attacks from Indians, wolves, and other wild beasts. When we reached the Black Hills, we had a rough experience. The roads were rocky, broken, and difficult to travel. Frequently carts were broken down and much delay caused by the needed repairs.

In crossing the Platte River some of the men carried a number of the women on their backs or in their arms across the stream. . . . We had scarcely crossed the river when we were visited with a tremendous storm of snow, hail, sand, and fierce winds. It was a terrible storm from which both the people and teams suffered. After crossing the river, my husband was unable to walk and consequently provision had to be made for him to ride in a wagon.

As soon as we reached camp, I prepared some refreshments and placed him to rest for the night. From this time my worst experience commenced. The company had now become greatly reduced in strength, the teams had become so weak that the luggage was reduced—to ten pounds per head for adults and five pounds per head for children under eight years. And although the weather was severe, a great deal of bedding and clothing had to be destroyed—burned—as it could not be carried along. This occurrence very much increased the suffering of the company, men, women, and children alike.

On the 20th of October we traveled, or almost wallowed, for about ten miles through the snow. At night, weary and worn out, we camped near the Platte River, where we soon left it for the Sweetwater. We were visited with three days of more snow. The animals and emigrants were almost completely exhausted. We remained in camp several days to gain strength.

About the 25th of October, I think it was—I cannot remember the exact date—we reached camp about sundown. My husband had for several days previous been much worse. He was still sinking, and his condition became more serious. As soon as possible, after reaching camp, I prepared a little of such scant articles of food as we then had. He tried to eat, but failed. He had not the strength to swallow. I put him to bed as quickly as I could. He seemed to rest easy and fell asleep. About 9 o'clock, I retired. Bedding had become very scarce, so I did not disrobe.

I slept until, as it appeared to me, about midnight. It was extremely cold. The weather was bitter. I listened to hear if my husband breathed—he lay so still. I could not hear him. I became alarmed. I put my hand on his body when to my horror I discovered that my worst fears were confirmed. My husband was dead. He was cold and stiff—rigid in the arms of death. It was a bitter freezing night and the elements had sealed up his mortal frame.

I called for help to the other inmates of the tent. They could render me no aid; and there was no alternative but to remain alone by the side of the corpse till morning. The night was enveloped in almost Egyptian darkness. There was nothing with which to produce a light or kindle a fire. Of course I could not sleep. I could only watch, wait, and pray for the dawn. But oh, how those dreary hours drew their tedious length along.

When daylight came, some of the male part of the company prepared the body for burial. And oh, such burial and funeral service. They did not remove his clothing—he had but little. They wrapped him in a blanket and placed him in a pile with thirteen others who had died, and then covered him up in the snow. The ground was frozen so hard that they could not dig a grave. I will not attempt to describe my feeling at finding myself thus left a widow with three children, under such excruciating circumstances. I cannot do it. But I believe the Recording Angel has inscribed it in the archives above, and that my sufferings for the gospel's sake will be sanctified unto me for my good. . . .

A few days after the death of my husband, the male members of the company had become reduced in number by death; and those who remained were so weak and emaciated by sickness that on reaching the camping place at night, there were not sufficient men with strength enough to raise the poles and pitch the tents. The result was that we camped out with nothing but the vault of heaven for a roof and the stars for companions. The snow lay several inches deep upon the ground. The night was bitterly cold. I sat down on a rock with one child in my lap and one on each side of me. In that condition I remained until morning. . . .

It will be readily perceived that under such adverse circumstances I had become despondent. I was six or seven thousand miles from my native land, in a wild rocky mountain country, in a destitute condition, the ground covered with snow, the waters covered with ice, and I with three fatherless children with scarcely anything to protect them from the merciless storms.

When I retired to bed that night, being the 27th of October, I had a stunning revelation. In my dream, my husband stood by me, and said, "Cheer up, Elizabeth, deliverance is at hand." The dream was fulfilled, for the next day (October 28, 1856) Joseph A. Young, Daniel Jones, and Abel Garr galloped unexpectedly into camp, amid tears and cheers and smiles and laughter of the emigrants. These three men were the first of the most advanced relief company sent out from Salt Lake City to meet the belated emigrants.

Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 2: 528-31.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
