Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

TestimonyTullidge, Edward W.A Testimony of the Book of Mormon

Edward W. Tullidge

The following experience of Abigail Leonard, a venerable and respected lady, now in her eighty-second year of life, will also be of interest in this connection. She says:

"In 1829 Eleazer Miller came to my house, for the purpose of holding up to us the light of the gospel, and to teach us the necessity of a change of heart. He did not teach creedism, for he did not believe therein. That night was a sleepless one to me, for all night long I saw before me our Saviour nailed to the cross. I had not yet received remission of my sins, and, in consequence thereof, was much distressed. These feelings continued for several days, till one day, while walking alone in the street, I received the light of the spirit.

"Not long after this, several associated Methodists stopped at our house, and in the morning, while I was preparing breakfast, they were conversing upon the subject of church matters, and the best places for church organization. From the jottings of their conversation, which I caught from time to time, I saw that they cared more for the fleece than the flock. The Bible lay on the table near by, and as I passed I occasionally read a few words until I was impressed with the question: 'What is it that separates two Christians?'

"For two or three weeks this question was constantly on my mind, and I read the Bible and prayed that this question might be answered to me.

"One morning I took my Bible and went to the woods, when I fell upon my knees, and exclaimed: "Now, Lord, I pray for the answer of this question, and I shall never rise till you reveal to me what it is that separates two Christians.' Immediately a vision passed before my eyes, and the different sects passed one after another by me, and a voice called to me, saying: 'These are built up for gain.' Then, beyond, I could see a great light, and a voice from above called out: 'I shall raise up a people, whom I shall delight to own and bless.' I was then fully satisfied, and returned to the house.

"Not long after this a meeting was held at our house, during which every one was invited to speak; and when opportunity presented, I arose and said: 'Today I come out from all names, sects and parties, and take upon myself the name of Christ, resolved to wear it to the end of my days.'

"For several days afterward, many people came from different denominations and endeavored to persuade me to join their respective churches. At length the associated Methodists sent their presiding elder to our house to preach, in the hope that I might be converted. While the elder was discoursing I beheld a vision in which I saw a great multitude of people in the distance, and over their heads hung a thick, dark cloud. Now and then one of the multitude would struggle, and rise up through the gloomy cloud; but the moment his head rose into the light above, the minister would strike him a blow, which would compel him to retire; and I said in my heart, 'They will never serve me so.'

"Not long after this, I heard of the 'Book of Mormon,' and when a few of us were gathered at a neighbor's we asked that we might have manifestations in proof of the truth and divine origin of this book, although we had not yet seen it. Our neighbor, a lady, was quite sick and in much distress. It was asked that she be healed, and immediately her pain ceased, and health was restored. Brother Bowen defiantly asked that he might be slain, and in an instant he was prostrated upon the floor. I requested that I might know of the truth of this book, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and I immediately felt its presence. Then, when the Book of Mormon came, we were ready to receive it and its truths. The brethren gathered at our house to read it, and such days of rejoicing and thanksgiving I never saw before nor since. We were now ready for baptism, and on or about the 20th of August, 1831, were baptized."

Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 160-63.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
