Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Don't Need to Be Afraid of a Praying Indian"

Author Unknown

The first sawmill in Escalante, Utah, was situated in North Creek Canyon, about fourteen miles from town. This mill was built and managed by Henry J. White.

One Sunday it became necessary for Mr. White to leave his young wife, Susannah, alone at the sawmill until the next day. He disliked doing this because Indians were camped close by, and one . . . was known to be the meanest Indian in the country.

About two hours after Mr. White left, this very Indian came to the mill. He rode up to the cabin and said, "Where is your Mormon?" Susannah pretended that she wasn't frightened, and told the Indian that Mr. White was in town. He said he wanted to hunt above the mill, so Susannah told him to go. He rode away, but reappeared in the late afternoon with two deer tied on his horse, and again asked, "Where is your Mormon?" She told him he was still in town. The Indian then asked to stay all night. She told him he could stay and for him to put his horse in the corral and feed it.

The deer were hung in a nearby tree and the horse cared for before the Indian came to the cabin. Susannah had supper ready when he came in, and after eating, they sat by the fire-place. He tried to tell her the town news and passed her a little . . . sack of pine nuts.

While sitting there the Indian asked, "You 'fraid?"

"No, I'm not afraid," replied Susannah. "I can shoot as good as any Indian."

The reply amused the Indian and laughingly he replied, "You no shoot Indian."

When the time came to retire, Susannah gave him some matches and said, "My Mormon always makes the fire in the morning." She then gave him a quilt and some rugs to make himself a bed by the fire.

Susannah, thinking she would have to remain awake all night and watch him, just slipped off her shoes and went to bed. When she looked around, she was amazed to see the Indian kneeling in prayer by the side of his bed.

Susannah had been terribly frightened all evening, but seeing the Indian now she said to herself, "I don't need to be afraid of a praying Indian." Soon after, she went to sleep and slept until next morning, when she was awakened by the Indian, who was building the fire. He insisted on helping milk the cows, but she explained that the cows would be afraid of him; but she told him he could cut her an armful of wood, which he gladly did. He cut a large pile instead of an armful.

After they had eaten breakfast, the Indian left. But before going, he cut two hind quarters off one of the deer and left them hanging in the tree for her.

Leon R. Hartshorn, Remarkable Stories from the Lives of Latter-day Saint Women, 1:243-44.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
