Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"We Will Fast for That Child"

Matthew Cowley

I have got two friends down here from New Zealand—a couple. They had never had any children, and they finally thought they had adopted one, but one day along came the father and said he wanted his child. Maybe you saw it in the newspaper. It was in the headlines covering quite a period of time. He said, "I never put that child in that home to be adopted, just to be cared for." He had two other children. His wife was a drunkard, and she left him and left the children. "Now she is back with me. She has reformed. We want our children back." This couple had one of them. Well, they had had that child so long it was one of the family, and so they had a long drawn-out litigation.

I was there at conference a couple of months ago. This couple was here. They came up after one of the meetings on Sunday. I said, "How is the case coming out? What is happening?"

They said, "Well, the final hearing is on Tuesday."

I said, "All right. Tomorrow morning I have an engagement for breakfast. After that I will fast all day Monday until Tuesday evening. You join me. We will fast for that child, and then whatever happens is right." So they shed a few tears and we fasted, and I never heard any more about it until general conference. The lawyer was at conference.

I said, "How did the case come out?"

He said, "Well, it was the strangest thing. I called the witness to take the witness stand, and I said, 'You tell the judge now what you are doing for this child, what kind of home you have, what its prospects are for the future, the husband's ability to care for it, his job, the money he is making, and everything.' That's what I intended her to say. But I said, 'Tell the court what you are doing for this child.' Do you know what she said? She said, 'We are fasting and praying.' Do you know what the judge did? He had to declare a recess. He didn't say a word. He went back in his chambers and spent a few minutes, and he came out, and he awarded this child to these two, this couple. They have been married in the temple and had it sealed to them."

Address at San Fernando [California] Stake welfare meeting, 24 May 1952.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
