Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"Providence Had Caused Her Door to Be Held Fast"

Kate B. Carter

One night [pioneer] Harriet Carter, who happened to be alone at the ranch except for her small children, was awakened by a terrible commotion out in the nearby corral. Cows were bellowing, calves bawling, and a most awful din broke the stillness of the night in the lonely ranch home. Accepting her responsibility as head of the house in the absence of any men folk, she struck a light, hastily dressed herself, and proceeded to investigate the cause of the trouble and disturbance.

As she hastily grabbed the heavy door, after warning the children to lie quiet until she returned, she found it held fast. Surprised but undismayed, she grabbed for the handle again, only to find that it would not budge an inch to her healthy grasp. Sensing that something was wrong, she quickly surveyed its surroundings to see if any heavy object could be holding it so tightly, but could find nothing whatever that should have prevented her from opening it as usual. A few more strenuous jerks, however, soon convinced her that she was locked tightly in the cabin, with no other openings large enough for her to get through. Stirred on by the uproar outside, she tried to peek through the tiny cracks, but only the blackness of the night met her anxious eye. After repeated attempts to open the fastened door, she finally gave up and went back to bed, after the bellowing and bawling had died down to an occasional snort of fear from one of the animals.

Awakening early, she at once dressed and upon going to the door, found that it yielded readily to her touch and swung silently inward on its hinges. Looking quickly around, she proceeded to the corral. There, to her surprise and horror, she found the fresh remains of a newly slain calf, surrounded by numerous cougar tracks. So the lion had come to her own yard for the kill. Returning thoughtfully to the house, she carefully studied her door and wondered if a kind and merciful Providence had caused her door to be held fast.

Kate B. Carter, Heart Throbs of the West, 3:336.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
