Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

MotherhoodHinckley, Bryant S."There Fell from His Pocket a Letter"

Bryant S. Hinckley

In the early days of the Southern States Mission, men of heroic mold were required to face persecutions and persist in their endeavors to reach the honest in heart. Many instances of heroism could be chronicled, but one of the most interesting was when a mother's letter played a very important part in saving a young elder from being cruelly whipped and possibly from being killed.

Elder Frank Croft was a missionary in the state of Alabama. Because he persisted in his legal rights guaranteed under the Constitution of the United States in preaching righteousness to the people, he was forcefully taken into a secluded spot of the backwoods for the purpose of receiving lashings across his bare back at the hands of armed and vicious men. Having arrived at the place where they had concluded to administer the torture, Elder Croft was commanded to remove his coat, shirt, and garments, and bare his body to his waist. Then he was stood against a nearby tree to which his arms and body were tied to prevent his moving while being lashed across the back until the blood would flow.

Having no alternative, he complied with the demands of the mob, but in so doing, there fell from his pocket a letter he had recently received from his mother who lived near Morgan, Utah. Elder Croft, a short time before, had written his parents and in this letter had seriously condemned mob violence, the Ku Klux Klan, and others for their cowardly treatment of the elders.

The letter that had fallen from his coat was an answer from his mother. In it she counseled, "My beloved son, you must remember the words of the Savior when He said, 'Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven'; also 'Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my name's sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.'

"Also remember the Savior upon the cross suffering for the sins of the world when he uttered these immortal words: 'Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.' Surely, my boy, they who are mistreating you elders know not what they do, or they would not do it. Sometime, somewhere, they will understand and then they will regret their action and they will honor you for the glorious work you are doing. So be patient, my son; love those who mistreat you and say all manner of evil against you, and the Lord will bless you and magnify you in their eyes and your mission will be gloriously successful. Remember also, my son, that day and night, your mother is praying for you always."

Elder Croft, tied to the tree, was so situated that he could see that the leader of the mob had picked up the fallen letter and evidently had decided to read it before giving the word to his men to start the lashing. The elder observed the hardness of his features, the cruelty in his eyes. He then realized that no sympathy could be expected from him, for his every action was characteristic of cruelty and vindictiveness. He closed his eyes in resignation to his fate and, while awaiting the moment when the beating would begin, he thought of home and loved ones and particularly of his beloved mother. Then he silently uttered a prayer in her behalf.

Opening his eyes a moment or two later, and feeling that the leader had had time to finish reading the letter, he was amazed to see that the man had retired to a nearby tree stump and, having seated himself, was apparently reading the letter; but what was more amazing to the elder was the change in the man's countenance. Much of the hardness and cruelty in his face was gone; his eyes were slightly dimmed by moisture. His whole personality appeared to have changed. He would read a line or two or a paragrÂ¼ph and sit and ponder, and deep down in the elder's conscience was the hope—yes, the conviction—that the man's heart had been touched by the loveliness and beauty of his mother's letter.

To Elder Croft, it seemed that an interminable time had elapsed before the mob leader arose and, approaching the helpless elder, said: "Feller, you must have a wonderful mother. You see, I once had one, too." Then, addressing the other members of the mob, he said, "Men, after reading this Mormon's mother's letter, I just can't go ahead with the job. Maybe we had better let him go." Elder Croft was released and went his way, and the loving influence of his mother seemed very near.

Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers, 257-59.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
