Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Ran Out of Ideas"

Heber J. Grant

Do we not often take the credit when we excel instead of giving it to God? We are not yet humble enough, and therefore, when we offer a fine prayer or speech, or whatever it may be, we allow Satan to flatter us, and say, "How beautiful." To the Lord alone is due the praise.

I shall make a confession. When I was made the president of the Tooele Stake of Zion and made my maiden speech I ran out of ideas in seven and one-half minutes by the watch. That night I heard in a very contemptuous voice in the dark, "Well, it is a pity if the General Authorities of the Church had to import a boy from the city to come out here to preside over us they could not have found one with sense enough to talk ten minutes." So you see, he held his stop watch on me; he knew I did not take ten minutes. I knew I did not, because I timed myself—seven and one-half minutes was the limit. The next speech, and the next, and the next were the same. One of them was only five minutes. The next speech was at a little town called Vernon, sometimes called Stringtown, as it spread over twelve miles as I remember it.

As we were going to the meeting I was with the bishop, Brother John C. Sharp, and I did not see anybody going to meeting. The Bishop said, "Oh, there will be somebody there." We were going up a little hill, and when we got to the top of the hill we found a number of wagons and white tops at the meetinghouse—it was a log meetinghouse—but did not see anybody going in.

I said: "There doesn't seem to be anybody going to meeting."

He said, "Oh, I think you'll find somebody there."

When we got inside, the meetinghouse was crowded. We went in at two minutes to two and nobody else came in afterwards. I congratulated the bishop after the meeting on having educated his people to be so prompt.

He said: "Most of them have to hitch up a team to come here, and I have told them they could just as well hitch it up a few minutes earlier and be here at two minutes to two o'clock, so there will be no disturbance."

I had taken a couple of brethren with me that day to do the preaching. I got up expecting to take five or six minutes and talked forty-five minutes with as much ease, if not more, than I have ever enjoyed since. I shed tears of gratitude that night to the Lord for the inspiration of his Spirit.

The next Sunday I went to Grantsville, the largest town in Tooele County, and got up with all the assurance in the world and told the Lord I would like to talk forty-five minutes, and ran out of ideas in five. I not only ran out of ideas in five minutes, but I was perspiring, and [I] walked fully two and one-half, if not three, miles, after that meeting, to the farthest haystack in Grantsville, and kneeled behind that haystack and asked the Lord to forgive me for my egotism in that meeting. And [I] made a pledge to the Lord that never again in my life would I stand before an audience without asking for his Spirit to help me, nor would I take personally the credit for anything I said; and I have kept this pledge.

BYU Quarterly, November 1934, 24-26.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
