Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Two Bright Sovereigns

Annie Emma Dexter Noble

It was my practice before my husband joined the Church to pay my tithing on my monthly allowance that he gave me to keep up the house, but since he did not yet believe in the law of tithing, I did not tell him about this.

One month I ran short and had to ask for some extra money. He looked surprised and rebuked me, saying, "You must learn to cut your coat according to your cloth."

This hurt me terribly and I decided that I would never again ask him for extra money. I worked hard to make ends meet so that I would have enough to pay my tithing. But try as I would, I found it very difficult, and once again several months later I faced the same problem. I did not have enough money to finish out the month.

When I was trying to decide what to do, I suddenly found myself complaining that the Lord expected too much of us when he asked for a tenth. This questioning of his demands only lasted a moment or two and then a feeling of deep remorse came over me for having had such a thought. Immediately I knelt down before the chair that stood by the cupboard and asked the Lord to forgive me for my ingratitude, for I truly felt that I had received from his hands a "pearl of great price," and for me to begrudge a paltry tenth to him was indeed inexcusable. I begged him to forgive me, and with tears streaming down my face I promised him that I would never again question the law of tithing.

After I had asked the Lord's forgiveness I began to wonder what I should do. I was very sad that day, for I still felt that I could not ask my husband for more money. It was Tuesday, and on that evening, we always had a cottage meeting at the home of Brother and Sister Harrison. I was especially happy to go there that night, for their home had always been to me like a haven in a storm at sea. There I was safe from the frowns and disapprovals of all my friends and relatives. As I went upstairs to dress for the meeting, I still felt very sad and troubled. I knelt down and prayed that the Lord would take from me this troubled feeling so that I could enjoy the cottage meeting. Just as I finished my prayer, I heard these words: "Go and look in the little jewel box in the back of your drawer."

I quickly obeyed and hastily took out the jewel box and opened it. There lay side by side two bright sovereigns. Needless to say, I was amazed and so filled with joy that I recall that I had the sensation of walking on air as I went to the meeting. The sovereign at that time was equal to a five-dollar gold piece in American money.

Annie Emma Dexter Noble, as quoted in Supplement to the Seagull, Home Builder Lesson Book, 1951, 50-51.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
