Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Am Her Child"

Melvin S. Tagg

Mrs. Newlun from Portland, a convert to the Church, was in a sealing room [of the Alberta Temple] to be sealed to her dead husband and to have their dead children sealed to them. Friends were to act as proxy for the husband and children.

As President Wood was ready to seal the children to the parents, he said he felt impressed to ask if the information on the sealing sheet was complete. After being assured that the record was right, he again began the ceremony. He said he again felt impressed to ask if she had other children whose names should be on the sheet. She said she had other living adult children who were not members of the Church and hence their names should not be included. The third time the President started the ceremony, whereupon he stopped and said, "I heard a voice quite distinctly saying 'I am her child.'" He again asked the mother if she had another child that was not on the sheet. She answered, with tears running down her face, "Yes, I had another daughter who died when twelve days old and she was overlooked in preparing the information." When the group learned how the President knew of the other child, "all in the room shed tears of joy to know of the apparent nearness of our kindred dead."

A very similar incident to the above was also related by Edward J. Wood. He told of a widow who came to have two living children sealed to her and her dead husband. The two children, ages nine and twelve, were standing just inside the sealing room door to witness the sealing of the parents, when a peculiar light appeared over the two children and President Wood said, "I saw another child standing with the two." He asked the mother about a third child and found there had been such, but by neglect, the information was not recorded. "As I told her how I knew," said President Wood, "the child disappeared from the other two."

Melvin S. Tagg, "The Life of Edward James Wood, Church Patriot," 118-19.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
