Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"This Is the Way, Walk Ye in It"

Annie Emma Dexter Noble

I was born on the 15th of February in the little English village of Friezland, near the city of Nottingham, in the year 1861.

My parents had thirteen children, six girls and seven boys. I was the tenth child.

Abraham and I were married and we had five lovely daughters. In the year 1906 my husband became very ill. The doctor ordered a rest from his work, so we went to Gainsborough to visit some friends. One afternoon while we were there, two gentlemen called and, to my great surprise, I learned that they were "Mormons." Almost as soon as I knew who they were, I felt a great desire to hear something of their beliefs. Question after question I put to them, and they answered each one to my entire satisfaction. The scriptures were opened to me in a manner I had never known before. My husband, not feeling well, took no part in the conversation, and neither did the other members of the household, but they listened attentively.

After two weeks of complete rest, my husband felt very much improved, and he went back to work. It was not long, however, before he had a relapse. Again the doctor prescribed a rest, and a sea voyage was decided upon. We decided to visit some friends in Brooklyn, New York. It was a very sad time for us all. We left our dear children in the care of my husband's two maiden sisters and sailed from Liverpool on January 22, 1907.

When we left England we thought three months change would fully restore my husband's health, but seven months passed and we realized that he was not yet well enough to hold his position. One morning I was alone in my bedroom. I was unusually troubled and I knelt down and poured out my feelings to my Father in heaven. I asked him to make known to me whether or not my husband would recover, and promised him that if he would spare his life, we would devote our lives to his service.

I had no sooner uttered the prayer than a voice spoke these words: "Your husband shall be made completely well and he shall preach the gospel." I stood up, amazed, but full of joy. I knew without a doubt that my husband would be made well and strong again. But the second promise puzzled me greatly. I finally came to the conclusion that he was to enter college and prepare for the Baptist ministry. Such an idea as Mormonism had never seriously entered my mind.

From that time my husband began to get better. A month later we were homeward bound. My heart was full of hope and joy at the prospect of seeing our beloved children, and the precious assurance that God would fulfill his promise made us equal to the many trials that came our way for long months after.

Eighteen months passed, and still there was no sign that the second promise would be fulfilled. One day, as I was preparing dinner, a knock came to our door. I answered it. A young man asked me if I would accept a gospel tract. I quickly turned it over and saw the words Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I told him that I had met some of his people two years before and that I had hoped ever since to hear more of their teachings. Every week after that the elders visited our home, explaining the principles of the gospel. Two years passed away and no elder had mentioned the subject of baptism.

One day the thought came to me that I could not expect to go on forever taking up the valuable time of these young men, and if I believed the truths that they were teaching, I should be baptized. This was a most disturbing thought to me. I was afraid to discuss my feelings with my husband, for he was not particularly interested in the gospel. I became unhappy and ill at ease. I felt more and more that I could not go on with Mormonism; that meant that I must give it up—and oh, how dreadful it would be to give it up! Soon after, when Elder Brown came, he saw at once that something was wrong. He asked me if I were unhappy and I answered feverishly, "Yes, I am wretched. I feel I cannot go on any longer with Mormonism. I must give it up or accept it."

He stood up before me and in a most decided manner told me that the time had come for me to be baptized. I answered bitterly, "But I have already been baptized."

He said, "Have you been baptized by one having authority?" I hung my head and could not answer. Then without another word he put out his hand and said, "Good afternoon, Mrs. Noble," and was quickly gone.

How dreadful I felt and how alone. I went immediately to my room and dropped to my knees and cried out, "Father, I am ignorant and cannot see the way; tell me whether this is the true church or not."

Instantly I heard these words, "This is the way, walk ye in it." That was all, but it was enough. No words of mine can express the convincing power that came into my whole being, and with it came peace. I stood up and said, "Now I know beyond a doubt."

It took me three weeks to get enough courage to ask my husband to allow me to be baptized. One night after my husband had put out the light and we were in bed, I told myself that I could not wait any longer, so I tried to make my voice natural and softly asked, "Abe, would you mind very much if I were baptized into the Mormon Church?"

I felt him start, and then came his answer, "No, I don't think I would. I have seen this coming and I know what kind of woman you are. You have not come to this decision in a hurry and if I could keep you from it, I would not dare. I dare not come between you and God."

Never have I forgotten the deep love that I felt for him at that moment, and I felt sure that God would show to him also that Mormonism was true.

I was baptized by Elder Brown on Saturday, November 5, 1910. My daughter Julia was baptized the Sunday following.

Fifteen months after I joined the Church, my husband and my daughter Dora were baptized. A few days following his baptism, my husband was deeply impressed to go to Utah, although just before his baptism he had expressed his unwillingness to leave his own country. Three months later we were on our way. We immigrated to Utah and settled in Ogden. There the last member of our family of five was baptized. We were happy in our new home and made many friends, and each of us tried to do what was asked of us in the Church.

We had lived in Ogden eight years when my husband and I were called on a mission to England. When the call came my mind went back to that day so long ago when a voice spoke to me and said, "Your husband shall be made well and shall preach the gospel." For more than twenty-five years I had waited for the fulfillment of the second promise, and at last it was fulfilled; my husband was called to preach the gospel. I felt like singing all day long, for truly the Lord had manifest his power unto us. We fulfilled a mission in England among our friends and relatives and we rejoice that we had the opportunity to help in the work of the Lord. Our only desire is to do his gracious will and be faithful to the end.

Annie Emma Dexter Noble, as quoted in Mary Pratt Parrish, Supplement to the Seagull, Home Builder Lesson Book, 1951, 47-52.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
