Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Do Not Feel Like Singing"

B. H. Roberts

The Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, John Taylor, and Willard Richards were imprisoned in the Carthage Jail. Elder Taylor, to cheer the Prophet, sang the following sacred song, which had recently been introduced into Nauvoo.

Once when my scanty meal was spread He entered—not a word he spake! Just perishing for want of bread; I gave him all; he blessed it, brake. In prison I saw him next,—condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemmed, And honored him 'mid shame and scorn. My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked if I for him would die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, "I will." Then in a moment to my view, The stranger started from disguise; The tokens in his hands I knew; The Savior stood before mine eyes. He spake, and my poor name he named— "Of me thou hast not been ashamed; These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

The afternoon was sultry and hot. The four brethren sat listlessly about the room with their coats off, and the windows of the prison were open to receive such air as might be stirring. Late in the afternoon Mr. Stigall, the jailor, came in and suggested that they would be safer in the cells. Joseph told him that they would go in after supper.

Hyrum Smith asked Elder Taylor to sing again "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

Elder Taylor: "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing."

Hyrum: "Oh, never mind; commence singing and you will get the spirit of it."

Soon after finishing the song the second time, as he was sitting at one of the front windows, Elder Taylor saw a number of men, with painted faces, rushing round the corner of the jail towards the stairs. They were halted at the entrance but a moment. "The guards were hustled away from the door, good naturedly resisting until they were carefully disarmed."

The brethren must have seen this mob simultaneously, for they all leaped to the door to secure it, as the lock and latch were of little use. The mob reaching the landing in front of the door fired a shot into the lock. Hyrum and Doctor Richards sprang back, when instantly another ball crashed through the panel of the door and struck Hyrum in the face; at the same instant a ball, evidently from the window facing the public square where the main body of the Carthage Greys were stationed, entered his back, and he fell, calmly exlaiming: "I am a dead man!"

With an expression of deep sympathy in his face, Joseph bent over the prostrate body of the murdered man and exclaimed: "Oh, my poor, dear brother Hyrum!"

While Joseph was firing the pistol, Elder Taylor stood close behind him.

Elder Taylor beat down the muzzles of those murderous guns.

"That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can," said the Prophet, as he stood behind him.

Meantime the crowd on the landing grew more dense and were forced to the door by the pressure of those below crowding their way upstairs. The guns of the assailants were pushed further and further into the room—the firing was more rapid and accompanied yells and horrid oaths. Certain that they would be overpowered in a moment, Elder Taylor sprang for the open window directly in front of the prison door, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys from the public square. As he was in the act of leaping from the window, a ball fired from the doorway struck him about midway of his left thigh. He fell helplessly forward towards the open window, and would have dropped on the outside of the jail, but that another ball from the outside, striking the watch in his vest pocket, threw him back into the room.

As Elder Taylor was thrown back from the window Joseph Smith attempted to leap out, but in doing so was instantly shot and fell to the ground with the martyr-cry upon his lips: "O Lord, my God!"

B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 2:283-86.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
