Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Word of WisdomGrant, Heber J."What Kind of a Heart Did I Have?"

Heber J. Grant

I leave my testimony with you that I believe as firmly as I believe anything in this world that I would not be standing here today talking to you if I had not obeyed the Word of Wisdom. When my appendix was removed it had broken, and blood poisoning, so they said, . . . had set in. There were nine doctors present and eight said I had to die. The chief surgeon in the Catholic hospital turned to President Joseph F. Smith, and said: "Mr. Smith, you need not think of such a possibility or probability as that this man shall live. Why, if he should live it would be a miracle, and this is not the day of miracles." That was the message delivered to me by Joseph F. Smith himself during his last sickness, and he said: "Our doctor friend who said it would be a miracle has passed away. I never saw you looking healthier in my life than you do today, Heber."

I said to the nurse who told me regarding these nine doctors that I did not want to meet any of them, except the one who said and believed that I would pull through. She said: "He is the house doctor; I will call him in."

I asked him why he disagreed with the others, and he smiled, . . . and he said: "Mister Grant, I just took a chance, sir. I have felt the pulse . . . of thousands of patients, being a house doctor, in many many hospitals, but I never felt a pulse just like yours. . . . Why, do you know, . . . in all of the tests that I made during an hour and three quarters that you were under the knife your heart never missed one single, solitary beat, and I made up my mind that that heart would pull you through."

What kind of a heart did I have? I had a heart that had pure blood in it, that was not contaminated by tea, coffee or liquor. That is why the poison in my system was overcome. The doctor who operated upon me had made an agreement with me that he was to tell me if I had to die—and he did—so that I could write a couple of letters. But I did not write them because in the kind providences of the Lord it had been revealed in a manifestation that I did not have to die. Men say we cannot receive communications from the other world, but my wife whose body lies in the grave visited my wife who is alive and told her that my mission was not yet ended; and I had received before that a blessing by the gift of tongues from that identical wife whose body was in the grave. And what was in that blessing? That I should live to lift up my voice in many lands and in many climes proclaiming the restoration to the earth of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I had not lifted up my voice in many lands and many climes at the time I was in the hospital, but subsequently I have lifted up my voice in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Germany, France, Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Canada and Mexico; from Portland, Maine, to Portland, Oregon; from the Canadian border down to Florida; in the Hawaiian Islands and in far-off Japan, proclaiming the restoration to the earth of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the plan of life and salvation: bearing my witness that I know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of mankind, the Savior of the world, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the true and living God.

Conference Report, April 1933, 10-11.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
