Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Word of WisdomTalmage, James R."We'll See What You Americans Are Drinking"

John R. Talmage

In 1891 James E. Talmage traveled to England for scientific meetings and genealogical research. In Liverpool he had the following experience with a customs inspector.]

The customs inspector was a most sarcastic man, and perhaps he was in a bad humor for personal reasons. Whatever the cause, his actions were maddeningly slow and often deliberately offensive. Dr. Talmage, his baggage waiting in the "T" section, had a disagreeably long wait but bore it with fortitude, having carefully filled out the customs declaration form.

When at last the inspector reached the waiting professor, the official snatched the declaration held out to him, glanced rapidly over it, and said accusingly:

"But you have declared nothing dutiable."

"I believe I have nothing dutiable to declare," the traveler replied calmly.

"Come, come, my man, everyone has something to declare!" the inspector said with a show of indignation, as though he had received a personal affront. "Personal effects, jewelry, liquor, tobacco . . they're all dutiable."

Professor Talmage, his patience worn thin, kept his outward composure and replied in a level voice: "I don't carry expensive jewelry and it so happens that I don't smoke and I don't drink liquor. I believe my declaration has been accurately filled out and that I have nothing at all to declare."

The customs inspector snorted disdainfully and proceeded to give the professor's luggage a most thorough examination. He would show this ignorant American, and all the other waiting boat passengers, that every traveller has something dutiable to declare.

Now Dr. Talmage had come prepared to be something more than a mere spectator at the forthcoming meeting of the Royal Microscopical Society. In case he, as a new member and coming from a far country, should be called on for a contribution to the proceedings, he had written a short paper on the Great Salt Lake and the surrounding desert. For illustration, he had brought a sample of the lake water containing the tiny artemis fertilis, or brine shrimp, the only animal form able to live in the lake water, and three horned lizards, commonly called "horned toads," as illustrative of animal life on the desert shore. Though a non-smoker and non-drinker as he had informed the customs inspector, Professor Talmage was acquainted with men who indulged in both practices, and had secured a cigar box and a flat pint whiskey bottle as convenient carriers for his exotic fauna. The customs inspector had barely started his thorough search of the professor's baggage when he encountered the cigar box.

"Ha!" he cried triumphantly, holding the box aloft for all to see. "I thought you said you were carrying no tobacco."

"No, no tobacco," Dr. Talmage replied quietly, and offered no further comment.

"We'll see what you Americans are smoking these days in place of tobacco," the inspector said with a wink to the crowd which had gathered around. He opened the box.

Most Westerners have sometime seen a "horned toad," a perfectly harmless but poisonous-looking little creature, whose appearance is bound to be alarming to anyone seeing it for the first time. One of the lizards promptly jumped from the box in which it had been so long confined onto the inspector's hand.

The official, in near-panic, leaped backward and tripped over a piece of baggage. Professor Talmage retrieved the lizard and returned it to the box while the embarrassed customs official arose red-faced, fuming with anger, and gingerly rubbing assorted sore spots on his anatomy. Most of the spectators, thoroughly annoyed with the inspector's petty officiousness, were openly laughing, adding to the official's mounting rage.

He said no more but grimly set about a further search of Professor Talmage's luggage, determined to find some dutiable object—and then this upstart American would taste the full severity of British law. Articles of clothing were recklessly flung about, but Dr. Talmage kept his studied composure. He perceived a vague possibility which was becoming less vague by the moment. Hopefully he awaited the almost inevitable next act in the little farce.

He did not have long to wait. The inspector encountered, carefully wrapped in layers of clothing for protection against breakage—although in the outraged official's eyes it seemed obviously for purposes of concealment—a pint bottle of the size and shape traditionally used to contain whiskey. Holding it to the light he could see it was filled with liquid. The colored glass of the bottle prevented any exact determination of the nature of the liquid. But the inspector was certain he had what he wanted.

"I thought you said you had no liquor," he said fiercely, holding the bottle up for dramatic effect.

"No liquor," Dr. Talmage said laconically. The vague possibility had now become a virtual certainty, but he took no action to interfere.

"We'll see what you Americans are drinking instead of whiskey," the inspector said scornfully, and he uncapped the bottle and put it to his lips.

Everyone who has ever bathed in the Great Salt Lake has at some time accidentally taken a mouthful of water, and knows the unpleasantness of swallowing even the tiniest amount of the supersaturated brine. The shock of quaffing deeply, even greedily, of the lake water in the belief that it is a choice liquor may well be imagined. The customs inspector gasped, choked, coughed, and spat as he flopped about the customs shed in agony, undoubtedly thinking that he was literally strangling and that the end might come any moment.

Dr. Talmage had alertly taken the bottle from the inspector's hand lest it be broken and its scientifically precious contents lost. He then sat quietly by as the stricken inspector went through his agonized contortions, saying nothing except to assure awed fellow passengers that the bottle contained no poison, but merely the over-salty water from the far-off Great Salt Lake.

The inspector's next act was awaited with hushed interest, as the anticipated explosion of personal temper and official ire might well be of historic proportions. But the customs official was through. He made one last attempt to assert his authority, but it failed miserably. When he tried to glare angrily, his watering eyes only rolled weakly in their sockets and closed right in pain. When he tried to roar authoritatively he could only manage a hoarse croak.

In desperation, the inspector grabbed a piece of chalk and marked each piece of the professor's baggage to show that it had passed inspection. Pausing for a brief moment, he then suddenly turned and moved rapidly about the shed, marking all items of uninspected luggage. After that, he dashed out of the door and disappeared from the view of the ship's passengers, possibly in search of a bottle whose contents could be trusted to match their container.

In later years, Dr. Talmage would say, mock-seriously, that he had no idea how many professional smugglers he may have provided with a free pass through British customs on this occasion.

John R. Talmage, The Talmage Story, 93-96.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
