Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

PerseveranceMcKay, Llewelyn R.A Student's Determination

Llewelyn R. McKay

When father [David O. McKay] was president of Weber Academy, a student came into his office and said, "President McKay, it looks as if I shall have to withdraw from school for awhile, for I am unable to make ends meet financially. I shall return again later, however, because I am determined to get an education. For the time being, I shall have to find full-time work."

That lad was Aaron W. Tracy, and father learned that he was an orphaned boy who lived alone in a small back room. He walked many miles to school and kept himself in food, clothes, and tuition costs by accepting all available, odd jobs.

"My boy," father said, "you are absolutely right in wanting an education, and if you are determined to continue until graduation, let us see if we can't work something out. Now my wife needs someone to help out around the house, and we have a spare room upstairs in our home where you can sleep and thus save room rent. Why don't you move in with us?"

Aaron seemed grateful for the opportunity, and the next day he became one of the family.

"I have never had anyone who helped me out so much," mother has often stated. "On Saturdays, Aaron turned the washing machine for me, and I usually had seven to ten fillings. I often asked Aaron, 'Aren't you getting tired?' and he would always answer in the negative, even though I knew he was quite weary after doing the outside chores."

In the summer Aaron worked on the farm from early until late. Father said of him, "I like that boy; he always does a job right! He is determined to make good; you mark my word, he will reach his goal with such determination."

And he did. The inspiration he received from sitting in father's classes gave him the desire to become a teacher also, so after he was graduated from Weber, he continued on with his education.

I was a member of the student body at Weber Normal College when he became president of that institution, and his leadership and inspiration gained the respect and love of all students.

All of his students are thankful that this young orphan boy had enough determination to continue on to his objective against many odds. We shall always remember him as one of our great teachers!

Llewelyn R. McKay, comp., Home Memories of President David O. McKay, 136.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
