Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Faith

"Let Her Have All That There Is"

John Henry Evans

One day a woman came to see the President [Charles C. Rich]. The wife of one of the Battalion boys, she told him with copious tears that she had nothing for her children to eat. This was before any government money had come into the community through the soldiers. I shall let Mrs. Rich tell the story:

My husband turned to me and said, "Let this Sister have some flour, Sarah." This was a puzzle to me, knowing that we did not have twenty pounds of flour in the house, and none in the place to buy, even if we had the money to buy it with. So I said, "We haven't twenty pounds of flour in the house and none that can be bought." He looked at me and smiled. "Sarah," he said, "let her have all that there is in the house, and trust in the Lord to provide for us."

I did as he bade me, but wondered how our own children were to eat. When the sister was gone, Mr. Rich said, "I know, Sarah, that the Lord will open the way for us to live. So don't feel uneasy." I too began to ask the Lord to open the way for us.

Along toward the evening we saw some covered wagons coming down the hill toward the house. They stopped in front, and the men came in. One of them proved to be Brother Sidwell, who had been with Brother Benson and who had called on us in the East. Brother Sidwell said he wanted to stop with us overnight, and my husband told him he could. He then turned to Mr. Rich and said to him, "The Spirit tells me you are out of money, and tells me to help you." And he handed Mr. Rich fifty dollars. Mr. Rich handed the money to me, saying, "Now you see the Lord has opened the way for us to get flour." He was overcome with gratitude.

With understanding our situation, Brother Sidwell informed us that "we have enough bread in our wagons for tonight and the morning." He told us also they had a wagon load of flour a little way back, which would reach here either tonight or in the morning, so that we might be supplied with breadstuff.

On this we burst into tears, to think the Lord had so blessed us for our kindness to the poor sister and her children.

When the wagon load of flour arrived, Mr. Rich not only laid in a supply for ourselves, but got a lot to give out to others that were sick and poor in the place. The man with the flour also let us have some groceries. He was a wealthy bachelor on his way to Winter Quarters. When, later on, we went to Winter Quarters to begin our journey to the West, he assisted us and others to start to the mountains.

John Henry Evans, Charles Coulson Rich: Pioneer Builder of the West, 125-26.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
