Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"Could It Not Be a Temptation?"

W. W. Cluff

In the year 1866, Elders Joseph F. Smith, Franklin W. Young and myself had been traveling as missionaries on the island of Hawaii laboring about ten months in the Helo and Koohala Conferences, on the north and east side of the island. A conference of all the elders laboring in that mission was called to meet on the island of Lanai. It required five dollars each to pay our fare from our field of labor to the place of conference. In starting from Helo and traveling by land to Upolu, a distance of about one hundred and fifty miles, we would visit about ten branches of the Church. At each of these we held meetings and reminded the Saints that we were on our way to conference, and that we required so much money to pay our passage across the channel to Laiai. Money among the natives was scarce and difficult to get. When we left Waipio, the last and largest branch on the way, we had only received seventy-five cents in money and five or six goat-skins, worth twelve and a half cents each. While it looked very discouraging, we had faith that by doing all we could the Lord would open the way for us to attend the conference with our brethren.

On leaving Wimea, fifty miles from Upolu, where we would embark on the vessel, the road forked, one going north and one going west. About three miles west on the road, a family of Saints lived; with this family we had left some of our books and clothes, and to go that way would take us three miles out of our way. I being considered the best walker, it was decided that I should go that way and the brethren continue on the direct route.

I had not proceeded more than a mile when I found a man's coat lying in the middle of the road; picking it up I found a money purse in one of the pockets, containing some papers and three five dollar gold pieces. Being just the amount we needed and finding them as I did, the first impression was that it was a Godsend. There being no one in sight, I started across the country to intersect the brethren, thinking I would bury the coat with all it contained except the money, in a deep ravine, and cover it over with lava rock. I had not gone fifty yards when another thought suggested itself, and I asked myself the questions:

Do you really think the finding of the coat was a Godsend? Could it not be a temptation? It certainly belonged to some person to whom the papers might be valuable. With these thoughts and reflections, and that the Lord would not bestow a blessing at the expense of another of His children, my conscience smote me, and, still seeing no one in sight, I turned back to the road and proceeded to the house where our things were left. Only the woman was at home; to her I related the finding of the coat, and, taking out the pocket book, showed her the money and papers which proved to be of great value to the owner, a white man who lived about fifty miles east, and of whose hospitality we had a number of times partaken. As a guard against the woman keeping the money, I let her see me take a memorandum of the money and papers, and also told her I would write to the owner. On overtaking the brethren, I told them about finding the coat and the fifteen dollars we needed to pay our passage, and asked them if they did not think it a Godsend; they replied that it really looked like it.

"I thought so, too, at first, but on second thought I feared it might be a temptation, in our straitened circumstances," I replied.

"True, it is not the way the Lord would come to our aid," they said.

In explaining what I did with the coat and contents, they expressed great pleasure and satisfaction, approving heartily my actions. That night we stopped with a white man by the name of Lincoln who had married a native woman who was a member of our Church. We had stopped there a number of times before. Mr. Lincoln had always made us welcome.

The next morning we bade the family good-bye and started on our journey, our host following us out of the house, saying:

"If you are going to your conference, on Lanai, you will want money to pay your fares, here is five dollars for each of you, if you will accept it." We did accept it with heartfelt thanks both to Mr. Lincoln and to our Father in Heaven, believing He had put it into his heart to give us just the amount of money we required. In proceeding on our way, we all felt and acknowledged that this really was a Godsend, as Mr. Lincoln and his family had never before given us money, and during our stay this time not a word had been said about our needing money to pay our passage to Lanai. We recognized that the Lord had really heard and answered our prayers.

Edwin F. Parry, Sketches of Missionary Life, 122-28.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
