Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"He Fasted, and He Prayed"

Matthew Cowley

Two boys in New Zealand graduated from a high school down there. The principal came to me and he said, "President Cowley, these two boys should go on in their education. Use your influence with them." Then he told me this story about one of them.

"This young man came to me one day. He was living in the dormitory. He was what they called the monitor. It wasn't a native high school, but he was a native. He came to me one day, and he said, 'Mr. Hogan, I want to go home for three days.' I said, 'Why, you can't go home, you have a job here. What do you want to go home for?' He said, 'Well, I am preparing to take my matric,' [as they call it down there, matriculation examination for entrance into a university]. He said, 'I want to go home for three days and fast and pray.'

"I was astonished. I excused myself and went to my office and called up one of your members, one of our native members, and I said, 'Listen to me, do you people have in your Church something you call fasting?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'What do you do it for?' 'When we want a blessing, we fast and pray.' I said, 'Well, I have read about it in the Bible, but I have never heard of anybody doing it.' I went back to the young man and said, 'You go home for three days.' He went home, and he fasted, and he prayed, and he was the top man in passing his matric examination."

So he and his cousin went on to the university—one to study dentistry and one to study medicine. They came home after a few weeks. I was surprised to see them at one of our conferences because the university was on a different island. I said, "What are you doing here?" They said, "We are through." I said, "What do you mean?" They said, "We don't get any encouragement from our people. They tell us we are only Maoris. We can't learn anything; they tell us to go out and cut scrub and make some money; so we are not going back."

There immediately flashed in my mind that boy's fasting and praying for three days so that he could matriculate for a university. I knew they were not to leave, so I said, "Well, if that's the way you feel about it, I am going to call you on a mission and advance you in the priesthood." After the meeting I went out and put them into a room and ordained each an elder. I set them apart as missionaries in the New Zealand mission. They said, "Where are we going on this mission?" I said, "You are going down to the university. When you are not studying medicine and dentistry, you are to preach the gospel every opportunity you get." They went back. They certainly preached the gospel, and they made a good job out of it because the first year I was invited by the dean of the medical school to come down there and talk to the graduates. . . . Well, one of them is a doctor now, and the other one is a dentist. Come to think about it, I have never released them from those missions yet.

Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks, 280-81.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
