Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"I Will Pay His Expenses"

Heber J. Grant

It has been said that the tenderest part of the human anatomy, of the male variety of the species, is the pocket; and I think there is little doubt of it, from my experience with mankind. The laws of the gospel of Jesus Christ are most exacting on the pockets of men, and our Church expects more from its members in this regard than any church upon the face of the earth.

I remember reading of an incident where a man away up in northern Scandinavia, in that cold, hard country, where it is difficult to make a living, heard an elder proclaim the gospel of Jesus Christ again restored to the earth—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the true and the living God. He received the witness in his heart to the truthfulness of this message, and he went down into the waters of baptism. He soon received the spirit of gathering, and he gathered from Scandinavia to Utah. After he had been here a little while the bishop called on him and said: "You do not pay any tithing."

"Why, I never heard about tithing."

And the bishop taught him the law of tithing, that one-tenth of all that he made belonged to the Church for the spread of the gospel and the building up of the work at home and abroad.

This man was shocked at the outrageous "tax" of the Church, as he termed it, but he said: "The gospel is true, and I guess I ought to live all the laws." After a great struggle he finally decided to comply with this law, and he honestly paid his tithing.

The bishop later came to him and said: "You do not pay any fast-day donation to take care of the poor," and the man said, "For the love of heaven, isn't ten percent of all you make enough to take care of the poor?"

"No," the bishop said; "but we do not ask you to give a dollar. All we ask is that you fast, that you fail to partake of food for two meals once a month—you are not asked for any money, but simply to give to us the equivalent of what you save. You can consult your doctor, and you will find that this is beneficial to your health to fast for a couple of meals once a month."

Well, he said, he did not know about that, but he finally concluded he ought to do his share for the poor, so he fasted, and in fasting he partook of the Spirit of the Lord that is given to us when we fast and pray to God; and he rejoiced in paying his fast-day donation.

Pretty soon the bishop came to him and said, "We need a new ward meetinghouse."

"Well, let the Church build it—the tithing ought to be enough for that."

The bishop said, "No, the Church will not build it, but the Church will give one dollar for each two dollars that we give. You know we need a new meetinghouse, in which to worship the Lord."

He kicked and kicked hard, to use a slang phrase, but finally concluded that they needed a new meetinghouse, and he wanted to do his share.

Next the bishop came around and said, "We need a Church academy, so our children may not only be educated in the things of the world—the sciences, arts, literature and so on—but in the things of God;" and he finally persuaded him to donate for an academy.

Then he came and said to this man: "We need a stake meetinghouse." He complained again, but finally donated for a stake house.

Then the bishop came around and said: "Here, brother, we are making an extra effort to complete the Salt Lake Temple, and we want a very large and splendid donation from you. You have been very prosperous; the Lord has blessed you since you came to this land."

He hemmed and hawed and complained, but he finally gave the donation, because in the meantime he had learned this glorious principle of vicarious labor for the dead. Some people ridicule that principle; they say it is absurd, it is ridiculous that we, the living, can do work for the dead. People may ridicule this principle, but the very foundation of all Christianity is based upon the vicarious labor and the death of our Lord Jesus Christ for us. So this man finally contributed for the temple. The academy was soon completed, and his boy attended and in due time graduated with honor.

Then the bishop called on him and said: "That boy of yours has graduated; he has made a fine record, and we would like him to go on a mission to his father's native land. It will cost you about $25 a month to send him and take care of him."

So this the man replied: "Bishop, that is the straw that breaks the camel's back. I paid tithing; I paid fast-day donations; I paid for a ward house; I paid for a stake house; I paid for an academy; I paid for the completion of the temple; but if the CÂ¼urch wants my boy, whom I had expected to bring me in at least seventy-five dollars a month now that he has graduated, they will have to pay his expenses or he will not go on a mission."

"Well," the bishop said, "that will be all right, he will not go, because the Church is not paying the expenses. All they will do for him is to bring him home free of charge when his mission is completed. They will do that, they will bring him home again. That will be the limit."

"Well, then," he said, "he will never go."

The bishop said, "All right. Let us dismiss the subject and talk on something else." They talked on for about an hour. The bishop went around and around, and finally he came to the native land of this man, the country from which he had come, as well as his relatives and friends. Then he said: "By the way, whom do you love more than anybody else on the earth, except your own flesh and blood, your own family?"

"Why," he said, "Bishop, more than any other person that draws the breath of life I love the man who came to me, away up in the midnight-sun country of Scandinavia, and brought to me the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the man who came there with the Spirit of the living God, who touched my heart, and melted my very soul, and implanted in my being a knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the true and the living God; I love him beyond my power to tell."

The bishop then said, "Wouldn't you like somebody to love that boy of yours just as you love that elder?"

"Bishop," he said, "you have conquered me fair and square. The boy can go. I will pay his expenses."

Conference Report, October 1919, 24.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
