Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

SacrificeKimball, Sarah M.HumorKimball, Sarah M."What Is the Boy Worth?"

Sarah M. Kimball

My eldest son was born in Nauvoo, November 22, 1841; when the babe was three days old a little incident occurred which I will mention. The walls of the Nauvoo Temple were about three feet above the foundation. The Church was in need of help to assist in raising the temple walls. I belonged to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: my husband did not belong to the Church at that time. I wished to help on the temple, but did not like to ask my husband (who owned considerable property) to help for my sake.

My husband came to my bedside, and as he was admiring our three days' old darling, I said, "What is the boy worth?" He replied, "O, I don't know; he is worth a great deal." I said, "Is he worth a thousand dollars?" The reply was, "Yes, more than that if he lives and does well." I said, "Half of him is mine, is it not?" "Yes, I suppose so." "Then I have something to help on the temple." He said pleasantly, "You have?" "Yes, and I think of turning my share right in as tithing." "Well, I'll see about that."

Soon after the above conversation Mr. Kimball met the Prophet Joseph Smith, president of the Church, and said, "Sarah has got a little the advantage of me this time; she proposes to turn out the boy as Church property."

President Smith seemed pleased with the joke, and said, "I accept all such donations, and from this day the boy shall stand recorded, Church property." Then turning to Willard Richards, his secretary, he said, "Make a record of this, and you are my witness." Joseph Smith then said, "Major [my husband was a major in the Nauvoo Legion], you now have the privilege of paying $500 and retaining possession, or receiving $500 and giving possession." Mr. Kimball asked if city property was good currency, and the President replied that it was. Then said Mr. Kimball, "How will that reserve block north of the temple suit?" President Smith replied, "It is just what we want." The deed was soon made out and transferred to the Church.

President Smith later said to me, "You have consecrated your firstborn son, for this you are blessed of the Lord. I bless you in the name of the Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob. And I seal upon you all the blessings that pertain to the faithful. Your name shall be handed down in honorable remembrance from generation to generation.

"Your son shall live and be a blessing to you in time, and an honor and glory to you throughout the endless eternities to come. He shall be girded about with righteousness and bear the helmet and the breastplate of war. You shall be a blessing to your companion, and the honored mother of a noble posterity. You shall stand as a savior to your father's house, and receive an everlasting salvation, which I seal upon you by the gift of revelation and by virtue and authority of the holy priesthood vested in me, in the name of Jesus Christ."

Sarah M. Kimball, in Augusta Joyce Crocheron, comp., Representative Women of Deseret, 25-26.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
