Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"Doctor, Won't You Pray for Me?"

George Albert Smith

A little boy was upon the operating table, ready to undergo an operation for appendicitis—an orphan boy, about eight years of age. It was a rather unusual case, and by the way a charity case. As the boy lay there he looked up at the surgeons—there were several of them present—and addressing the surgeon in charge he said: "Doctor, before you begin to operate, won't you pray for me?" The surgeon looked at the boy amazed and said, "Why, I can't pray for you." Then the little fellow turned his eyes from one to the other, asking each if they would pray for him. Each in turn declined. Then the little man said: "If you won't pray for me, won't you please wait while I pray for myself?" The little fellow got up on the operating table on his knees, folded his hands, and uttered a prayer. He said to the Lord: "Heavenly Father, I am only a little orphan boy, but I am awful sick, and these doctors are going to operate. Will you please help them that they will do it right? And now, Heavenly Father, if you will make me well I will be a good boy. Thank you for making me well." He then turned over and laid on his back and looked up at the doctors and nurses who were all standing around, but he was the only one in the room who could see because the others had tears in their eyes. He said: "Now I am ready."

A few days after that a man went into the office of the chief surgeon and asked him to tell him the story of the little boy he had operated on a few days before. The surgeon said: "I have operated on a good many little boys."

>Yes, I know, but this was an unusual case—tell me about it."

Then the doctor looked at him for some time and said, "I don't know whether I will tell you or not. I am not sure but what it is too sacred to talk about."

"Please tell me," he replied; "I will treat it as sacred, too." Then the doctor told the story as I have related it, and when he got through the visitor said, "My, that was a remarkable experience, wasn't it?"

The doctor said, "Remarkable? That was the most remarkable experience of my whole life. I have operated on hundreds of men, women, and children, and I have known some of them to pray, but never until I stood in the presence of that little boy, have I heard anyone talk to their Heavenly Father face to face."

George Albert Smith, Sharing the Gospel with Others, 144-45.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
