Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Faithfulness

The Sabbath in a Mining Camp

O. H. Snow

From my earliest childhood days, I had been taught that the Sabbath day was a day of rest. It had been the custom in my mother's childhood home to complete all preparations Saturday for the sacred observance of the Sabbath day. Shoes were shined, clothing made ready, and even much of the cooking essential for the Sunday meal was prepared.

With this background, I had always felt there was a sacredness about Sunday observance that could not be set aside without bringing down the displeasure of the Lord. Because of the early impressions Mother's example and teachings made upon me, I could never bring myself to play baseball or go swimming on the Sabbath with the other boys of my age.

I returned from my mission when I was about twenty-three years of age. Naturally, among the teachings held up to the Saints, as well as those not of our faith, was strict Sabbath observance.

It so happened that my mission ended when Grover Cleveland was President of the United States. The country was passing through one of its worst depressions of the time. Work was hard to find. I came back home in debt. My mother had been a widow since I was ten years of age. It was very necessary that I find some kind of work to assist her. I also desired to get a little something to begin making a home for myself. Father had left Mother with but very little property, and it was not possible for Mother to give further aid after my mission expenses were met.

It was about this time that the new mining camp of DeLamar, Nevada, was opened up. Some of the boys went out to find work, and were able to get contracts to haul wood to a smelter that was being built.

In company with [some friends] I went out to the new camp, and we soon took a contract to deliver five hundred cords of wood. We procured choppers, and began work. When the week ended and Sunday morning rolled around, I arose early, watered and fed my team, and turned them loose on the hillside to graze. . . .

When [our foreman] saw what I had done, he asked what it meant. I said, "It is Sunday." He asked, "Don't you intend to haul wood?" I replied, "No." He then said, "We are going to get our loads." I said, "That's all right, but I'm not." He argued, and the other boys joined in, saying that we were in a mining camp. I told them that I had been out teaching others who lived outside of Mormon communities Sabbath observance along with other gospel truths, and that I could not conscientiously work on Sunday. I felt the Lord meant the Sabbath as much for a mining camp as for any other place.

Our foreman then gave the ultimatum that if I would not work on Sunday, we should have to pile our wood separately. I said that that was all right; that we could measure up what was already in, and I would begin next day to pile my wood in a different place.

The next day I moved camp about a quarter of a mile away, went to town with my load of wood, and found two acquaintances hunting work. I hired them to chop my wood for me, and assist me in loading and cleaning up the timber.

We continued to work for about four months to complete our contract. I lost only two half days during the summer, one for resetting my wagon tires, and the other when I changed camps and found my new wood choppers. I rested each Sunday, spending the time reading good books. I made twelve trips each week, with two exceptions, after I left the other boys, while they made but ten trips, and made more misses than I did by reason of some accidents. My team was fatter; I was much less worn; and, when we settled up, my average monthly earnings were approximately twenty-five dollars a month in excess of those of my partners.

Improvement Era, June 1946, 360.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
