Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

Family

"Close to Those Beyond"

Harold B. Lee

One day a beautiful, flaxen-haired girl—about ten years of age—came with her mother to the home of her grandparents. The Primary song "I Am a Child of God" had just been sent out through the Church. As the mother sat at the piano and accompanied, this little flaxen-haired beauty sang "I am a child of God. . . . Lead me, guide me, walk beside me, help me find the way. Teach me all that I must do to live with Him someday." Sing with Me, no. B-76.)

The grandparents sat with tears in their eyes as this beautiful little child sang that glorious song. Little did they know that in a few short years, suddenly and without warning, that young mother would be snatched away in just a moment. The pleadings of the grandfather over in the Hawaiian Islands and the piteous cries for the mercies of the Almighty to spare her were unavailing. In the hospital, surrounded by doctors with all the medical skill they could summon, she slipped away.

The children, including this little flaxen-haired girl, were called, and around the lonely table in the family room they sat with bowed heads, sobbing their hearts out. The grandfather was summoned to come home, and that night all the family were at the airport to meet him. Then, with arms surrounding that little family, the grandfather said, "I do not know how you can be so brave. Grandfather is crying his heart out, and you stand here with your arms around each other, seemingly with no tears." One of them said, "Grandfather, we have no more tears to shed. We have cried our tears away all day long."

That night this little girl had a dream, one so vivid that, as she slept in bed by her aunt, she awakened and gripped her aunt and said, "I have had a visit from Mother. We were in the family room and she came and I said to her, 'Mother, you are not dead; you are still here.' And Mother said, 'Yes, my darling, I am not gone. You won't be able to see me, but all through your life, Mother will be very close by you. Mother will not always be seen, but you can know that she won't be far away.'"

Address given at Brigham Young University Sixth Stake quarterly conference, 27 April 1969. See also Harold B. Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 13-14.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
