Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"Brother Cowley, Would You Give Me a Blessing?"

Louise Lake

Jane [my daughter], who was then about fifteen years old, became ill and was feeling too miserable to get out of bed. After a couple of days of the illness, the doorbell rang with a familiar ring. When I opened the door, Matthew Cowley stood there. He said, "I haven't seen you folks lately. How are you?"

"Well," said I, "Jane is sick and I have no idea why. Would you like to step inside and see her?" He came in and put his head around the doorway of the bedroom to speak to her. After his cheerful greeting she asked, "Brother Cowley, would you please give me a blessing?"

"You bet," came the answer. After pausing a few seconds and moving back down the hallway to the front door, he said, "I will be back in a little while."

A short time later the doorbell rang again. Upon opening the door I saw two men—Elder Cowley and a Polynesian friend by his side. He had often told us of the simple but powerful faith of those great Pacific Island folks. He had gone to find Elder Wi Peri Amaru to assist in giving the blessing my teenager had requested. I took them into the bedroom.

There were twin beds in the room. Jane was in the bed nearest the wall, and it was therefore necessary for them to cross over the room to her. I sat silently a little way inside of the door. After introducing his fine-looking companion, Elder Cowley dropped to his knees by the bedside. His friend followed. They placed their hands on Jane's head, and Brother Cowley's friend gave a wonderful spiritual blessing.

The tears coursed down my face at that sight and the witness that I sat near the presence of angels. The man spoke fluently in the Maori tongue as he uttered the blessing. It was indeed a spiritual experience to behold this choice apostle of the Lord and his worthy friend as they knelt and petitioned our Heavenly Father in Jane's behalf in our humble home.

I thought, No wonder Brother Cowley says, "No man is greater than when he is on his knees praying!"

Immediately following the blessing, they departed. As he was about to close the door, Brother Cowley (knowing I did not understand the Maori language) said, "Someday I will tell you something about that blessing."

The next day the doctor told me that Jane must go to the hospital because she had pneumonia. She made a speedy recovery there.

After she returned home and was well, one day Brother Cowley said, "Now that's what was told her that day in the blessing—that she would be sicker and it was necessary for her to go to the hospital. But she was also blessed with a quick recovery. I didn't tell you at that time because I didn't want you to worry about it."

Louise Lake, Each Day a Bonus, 86-87.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
