Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

HealingsLee, Harold B.Healing of Body and Soul

Harold B. Lee

There is a power beyond the sight of man that heals not only sick bodies but sick souls.

I met a young man in Tokyo, where we were holding a servicemen's conference. He had his right arm in a sling, and as he was introduced, he put out his left hand to acknowledge the introduction. "I am not a member of the Church," he said, "but I understand you are going to be in Manila in a few weeks. We will be there with the U.S. Seventh Fleet, and I hope to be able to tell you when you get there that I have become a member of the Church."

The weeks went by and I had almost forgotten the incident until, as we held a conference at Clark Field in Manila, I spotted the same man whom I had met in Tokyo. In an interview we had with him later he said, "You noticed when we met in Tokyo that I had my arm in a sling. It was hurting me terribly all through that service, but after we had shaken hands on the stand, suddenly the throbbing pain seemed to stop. I took my arm out of the sling and began to flex it, and there was no more pain. When I went back to the ship, I didn't need any treatment; the infection seemed to have gone. I sensed the fact that I had been in the presence of a power that had taken away the pain from my body, even healed my sick body. I am going back home now to prove that I am worthy of the love of my sweet wife."

A few years later I was with a companion in Norfolk, Virginia, where we were organizing a new stake, and right down in the front seat sat this same man with a beautiful woman by his side, his wife. We sustained him as a member of the elders presidency in that stake. Yes, the Lord can heal sick bodies, but the greatest miracle we see is the healing of sick souls.

Harold B. Lee, Baccalaureate Address, Ricks College, Rexburg, Idaho, 6 May 1970.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
