Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

The Faith of a Uruguayan Woman

Mark E. Petersen

At the close of the morning general session in the new meetinghouse at Montevideo on Sunday, December 12, 1954, I was approached by a middle-aged Italian woman by the name of Sister Beathgen. After shaking hands with me and exchanging some pleasantries, she showed me her right hand and asked if I could see the small scar just about an inch below the first finger in the palm of her hand. I told her that I could see it. Then she told me this story:

More than a year ago she was suffering with bone cancer in that hand. A swelling had developed there which made a lump nearly as big as a golf ball. She went to several of the principal doctors of the city and also to the clinics and hospitals of the city, seeking every type of relief. All of the doctors diagnosed it as cancer of the bone. There was no question about the diagnosis as the doctors agreed with each other. The examinations and charts from hospitals indicated the same thing, so she told me. May I say that all of this was confirmed by the mission president and other missionaries who knew this sister during the past couple of years. They also tell me that this is a woman of good reputation, honest and firm and true.

The doctors told her that there was no cure for this cancerous condition. The only thing would be amputation of the arm. She did not wish to have an operation of that kind. When she heard that President McKay was coming, the thought occurred to her that if she could just shake hands with him, her hand would be healed.

With this in mind she stood in line when President McKay was shaking hands with the people following the meetings he attended there in Montevideo. When it came her turn to shake hands, she merely did so and expressed her pleasure at his coming to the conference. She said nothing about her sore hand and said nothing about her hope that she would be healed by shaking the President's hand. She merely shook hands, expressed a few pleasantries, and went on her way.

She told me there in Montevideo that within three days the cancer was gone from her hand. She said further that there had been no recurrence in the past year. I examined her hand again, and it was perfectly free from any kind of sores but merely had a w1ll-healed scar in the palm as I have described.

I talked about this whole situation with the missionaries and President Shreeve, and they confirm this entire story and say that not only do they know that the diagnosis was true but that they themselves also saw this large lump on her hand and knew of this affliction for a fact. They also knew that immediately after the visit of President McKay, Sister Beathgen showed them her hand which was healed.

Mark E. Petersen, as quoted in David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences, 159-60.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
