Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"You Do What I Saw in My Dream"

Melvin S. Tagg

A native, crawling on his hands and knees to show respect, approached Elders Wood and Dean. Through an interpreter, the native told of a lady on another island who wanted the missionaries to come and heal her sick child. He said the lady had seen these two elders in a dream, and he asked them to follow him quickly. . . . The native Saints warned the elders that harm would come of it, that it was only a trap to ensnare the servants of the Lord.

The elders tried to anticipate the result of a successful healing and an unsuccessful healing. In their dilemma, they went to a secluded spot under a banyan tree and there inquired of the Lord as to whether it would be right to undertake this mission of mercy. [Elder Wood] said that while they were in the attitude of prayer, he heard a voice telling him "it was alright to go to the other island." This was the assurance the elders needed, and they were soon on their way across the three-mile stretch of ocean that separated the two islands. Despite a stormy sea, they reached their destination in safety.

The mother, who had been waiting on the beach for them, greeted them respectfully and motioned for them to follow her to her house. Addressing the elders, the woman remarked, "I am glad that you have come. It is alright. Here is my child." Thereupon, she lifted a white sheet from off the body of the child who was lying on the floor of the hut.

The elders declared the child to be dead, but the mother insisted otherwise and added, "You do what I saw you do last night in my dream, and she will be well." The faith of the elders was at a low ebb, and knowing the natives to be extremely superstitious, they feared the consequences "should they administer to the afflicted one without the desired results." While the elders were thus meditating, the mother submitted this question to them: "Have you the authority to do what I saw you do in my dream? You anointed that child with oil; you laid your hands upon her head." No longer could they hesitate. They were convinced they had the authority, so they administered to the child. After completing the ordinance they covered the child with the cloth and took their departure.

Nothing more was heard of the child or its mother until about two years later when Elder Wood was called to labor on yet another island. Much to his surprise he was greeted on the beach by half-clad natives running back and forth and swinging long knives. He was soon entirely surrounded by them, but before long he was greeted kindly by a woman who called him by name. "I do not know you," he replied as he stepped back from her.

Reminding Mr. Wood that he did know her, she called to her side a young child about nine years old and, addressing the crowd, she said: "This is a living testimony of the great power of the gospel, and the power and authority held by Mr. Wood and his associates. They administered to this child over two years ago. I have never seen them since, but I know they have the power of God with them, and all of you must listen to their message."

Then addressing Mr. Wood, she said that she was the daughter of the high chief of the island and that he could stay at her home and his needs would be supplied. The group then proceeded to her father's house, where Elder Wood spent nearly all night preaching to them with great power. The good woman, daughter of the chief, told him that she had been praying earnestly for Mormon missionaries to be sent to her home, where, she felt, there would be great good accomplished in the spreading of the gospel.

Melvin S. Tagg, "The Life of Edward James Wood, Church Patriot," 22-24.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
