Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

"You've Been Awfully Sick, Haven't You?"

David O. McKay

Brother Hugh J. [Cannon] was in prime condition, I thought, when we boarded the Empress of Japan, a Canadian Pacific Ocean Steamer in the Royal Mail Service, on the evening of December 7, 1920. Kind friends had showered us with good wishes and blessings, had feasted and dined us for weeks previous, and had sent along with us boxes of the choicest cream chocolates to make our journey sweet and delightsome.

No voyage, therefore, was ever entered upon with more appreciation in one's heart for farewells given or more hopeful anticipations for a delightful trip.

It was storming when we went to bed, and the movement of the boat was keenly perceptible even when we went to sleep.

The pitching of the vessel in the night awoke me. The roar of the wind and the dashing, splashing sound of water told me that we were in a gale at sea. Sleep from then until morning was only intermittent. Every nerve and muscle in my body responded to every movement of the boat. As this movement became more pronounced and intense, the contents of my digestive organs joined in unison with nerves and muscles. Twenty-one years ago, one morning on the Atlantic, I had experienced a similar feeling, so I knew I had better dress carefully, and get up on deck.

at that moment Brother Cannon jumped out of bed as bright and pert as a ten-year-old boy. He could steady himself as though he were anchored. With no apparent difficulty, he dressed himself, and even shaved—an operation, which though ordinarily simple enough, seemed to me under the circumstances, almost marvelous. I concluded to take his advice when he said:

"If you aren't feeling well, I suggest that you don't look in this mirror."

He invited me to breakfast, but I couldn't think of anything that this ship could put on a table that was worth eating, so begged to be excused. It was a dismal sounding gong that called us to breakfast anyhow—a fitting accompaniment to the gloom of the weather. However, before attempting to dress, I ate an apple Brother Hugh J. handed me.

Without hurried exertion, I put on my clothes and started for the deck; but the swaying staircase and the madly moving world of water stirred my feelings with a yearning desire for solitude. Yielding, I hurried to my room, where in less time and seemingly with less effort than it takes to tell you, the apple and I parted company forever. I threw myself on the berth, and wondered what there was in common between a Jonathan apple and Jonah that could produce such like effects. Though I arrived at no definite conclusions about the matter, one thing was most certain: My sympathy was wholly with the whale. I understood, too, how Jonah escaped being thrown into the sea. If I could entirely have followed the whale's example, I, too would have swum for land.

Hugh J. returned from breakfast looking as robust and rosy as an athlete, and smacking his lips in appreciation of an excellent meal. What a blessing health is! I was feeling pretty miserable, and I hated myself for getting sick so early in the game. As he looked at me, I fancied I saw spreading over his countenance indications of a laugh he was trying hard to suppress. I said something which enabled him to lift the lid and let off his mirthful steam. Limp and dejected, I looked at him, healthy and happy, and began, right then and there, to doubt the wisdom of the Revolutionary statesmen who declared that "all men are created equal." However, he gave me the comforting assurance that only a few passengers were at breakfast.

Feeling somewhat better, I started again for the deck and was not a little consoled when I passed a poor Chinaman with perspiration standing in beads on his jaundiced-looking face, and sitting holding his knees, looking, as I'm sure he felt, the most forsaken, limpy lump of humanity in existence.

At any rate, I had company in furnishing gratuitous amusement for the "chosen few." This time I reached only the top of the stairs, when that intense yearning to be alone drove me back to my cabin. Good-bye last night's dinner! Good-bye yesterday's Rotary luncheon! And during the next sixty hours, Good-bye everything I had ever eaten since I was a babe on Mother's knee. I am not sure I didn't even cross the threshold into the pre-existent state.

In the tossing and heaving of the ship, as well as of internal conditions, there was no respite. She would mount the crest of a huge wave and then plunge head-on; but before hitting the bottom of the trough, she would take a plunge to "port," then instantly veer to "starboard"; hesitating a moment, she would give a "shimmy"-like shiver and plunge again—turning, veering, "shimmying" in endless repetition, until it seemed that life was made of nothing else.

And all this rough sea was on the placid Pacific! Truly, Balboa was not in a ship but on the sunny side of a California hill when he named these waters the Pacific Ocean. Heaven be merciful to me if we sail a tempestuous sea!

In the afternoon (December 18th) another blizzard swept down from the north. I believe it is the worst yet. The waves on the port side look like the hills on our Huntsville range, and rolling almost as high. The foam, the billows, and the wind-driven spray give the ocean today the coldest, bleakest aspect I have ever beheld. Every once in awhile a tremendous wave strikes the ship with a boom, breaks over the top, and pours down in a torrent on the colored glass skylight in the center of the roof of the library where I am writing. The old boat is strongly built, but she quivers when she gets a real body blow.

One woman talking to another, said, "You've been awfully sick, haven't you?"

"No," replied the other in all seriousness, "I haven't been sick, but I couldn't keep anything on my stomach."

Llewelyn R. McKay, comp., Home Memories of President David O. McKay, 39-41.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
