Jay A. Parry, Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1999)

HumorRoberts, B. H.A Journey through Echo Canyon

B. H. Roberts

It is of general repute that the governor [non-Mormon Easterner Alfred Cumming] was a little imposed upon in his night journey through Echo Canyon. In order to make as impressive an appearance of their forces as possible, as also, doubtless, to keep concealed the location and the nature of their "fortifications" in the canyon, the journey of the governor's party was made in the night. After the militia at the first campfire halt had been drawn up in form and solemnly addressed by his excellency, they were dismissed and hurried down to the second encampment to again solemnly receive the governor in military array, and again hear his speech; again to cheer what he had to say about returning peace; and so again at the third encampment this performance was repeated. Stenhouse, who makes too much of the incident, states that when the governor discovered the trick played upon him, "he was ever afterwards unpleasantly reticent when the affair was mentioned." He also says that Cumming held Brigham responsible for the mortifying joke; but that is not likely, since Brigham Young did not know of the governor's advent into the "Mormon" camps in time to plan it. Stenhouse makes the following attempt at description of the illuminations:

"From one end of the canyon to the other, great fires could be seen at night on the hillsides and on the mountain tops, representing the works and bivouacks of a great army, while the lurid flames of the pinetree fires rendered the darkness still more impressive, and conveyed to the bewildered governor the idea that near at hand there was a mighty host under arms. The military chieftains managed to keep his excellency in a continued strain of feverish expectation. At every important bend of the road the governor and his escort would be suddenly challenged by the pickets, and the countersign demanded. On one occasion there was a call to arms, and a mock effort at hostility, but some of the principal officers arrived just in time to save his excellency's life, and to call off the pugnacious militia, and hinder them from taking him prisoner!"

At the mouth of Echo Canyon Colonel Kane detained the governor by a day's shooting; and further down the Weber, at the camp of Ben Simons, the Cherokee Indian trader and interpreter, another day was spent in shooting. By express, Colonel Kane sent word to President Young that he expected to arrive in Salt Lake City with the governor on Monday, the 12th of April. Undoubtedly the delay en route was meant to kill time in order to give opportunity for the church leaders and the people to adjust themselves to the new situation created by Governor Cumming consenting to come among them without a military escort, to assume the duties of his office.

The snow was still so deep on Big Mountain, over which the road usually traveled passed into Salt Lake Valley, that it was decided to bring the governor through Weber Canyon via Farmington to Salt Lake City. "At the mouth of Weber Canyon the Farmington guards, mounted and in uniform, met him. On his reaching the courthouse (in Farmington) the band played 'The Star-Spangled Banner.' Sunday evening he stopped at Judson Stoddards at Farmington. Monday morning he was visited by the Farmington band in carriages: they played 'Hail Columbia,' 'Yankee Doodle,' 'The Star-Spangled Banner,' and other popular airs. Cumming made a speech, remarking that he was astonished at such attachment for national airs; he believed it could not be feigned."

B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 4:378-80.

1999 Deseret Book Co.
