Joseph Smith: “The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.”

Brigham Young: “Can all the wisdom of the world devise means by which we can be redeemed, and return to the presence of our Father and Elder Brother, and dwell with holy angels and celestial beings? No, it is beyond the power and wisdom of the inhabitants of the earth … to prepare or create a sacrifice that will pay this divine debt. But God provided it, and his Son has paid it.”

John Taylor: “As the Son of Man, He endured all that it was possible for flesh and blood to endure; as the Son of God He triumphed over all, and forever ascended to the right hand of God.”

Wilford Woodruff: “When they led Jesus to the cross, the very moment that spirit departed from that sorrowful tabernacle, it held the keys of the kingdom of God in all of its strength and power and glory the same as he had done while in the body.”

Lorenzo Snow: “The spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, … dispelling forever, so long as reason and memory last, all possibility of doubt or fear in relation to the fact handed down to us historically that the ‘babe of Bethlehem’ is truly the Son of God.”

Joseph F. Smith: “Christ is indeed the Savior of my soul, the Savior of mankind. He has sacrificed his life for us that we might be saved, he has broken the bands of death, … he has declared himself to be the way of salvation, the light and the life of the world, and I believe it with all my heart.”

Heber J. Grant: “Not only did Jesus come as a universal gift, He came as an individual offering with a personal message to each one of us. … And His blood will conditionally save us. Not as nations, communities or groups, but as individuals.”

George Albert Smith: “I have been buoyed up and, as it were, lifted out of myself and given power not my own to teach the glorious truths proclaimed by the Redeemer of the world. I have not seen Him face to face but have … felt His presence in a way not to be mistaken. I know that my Redeemer lives.”

David O. McKay: “Members of the Church of Christ are under obligation to make the sinless Son of Man their ideal. He is the one Perfect Being who ever walked the earth; the sublimest example of nobility; Godlike in nature; perfect in his love.”

Joseph Fielding Smith: “Who should we love above everything else in the world? … The Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Love him more than we do our own lives, or our own fathers and mothers or children; … because without his blessings we would have nothing.”

Harold B. Lee: “By the power of the Holy Ghost and in deep humility I solemnly bear testimony to the world that God lives and that His Son, Jesus Christ, was born in the flesh; that He was crucified and was raised from the dead with a body of flesh and bones, and sits today on the right hand of the Father as our judge and advocate.”

Spencer W. Kimball: “In quiet, restrained, divine dignity he stood when they cast their spittle in his face. He remained composed. They pushed him around. Not an angry word escaped his lips. They slapped his face and beat his body. Yet he stood resolute, unintimidated. …

“He had said ‘Love your enemies.’ Now he showed how much one can love his enemies. He was dying on the cross for those who had nailed him there.”

Ezra Taft Benson: “With all my soul, I love Him.

“I humbly testify that He is the same loving, compassionate Lord today as when He walked the dusty roads of Palestine. He is close to His servants on this earth. He cares about and loves each of us today. Of that you can be assured.”
