Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

How Faith and Salvation Come

Rom 10 11. True ministers of Christ seek to save souls. Nephi expressed it thus: "For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved." (1 Ne. 6:4.)

Rom 10 22. A zeal of God, but not according to knowledge] Of whom speaketh the Apostle? Of the Jews only? Or of the sectarians? Of the Catholics? Of the non-Christians? Of all those who zealously, devoutly, and courageously follow a course of worship which is not the Lord's one and only plan of salvation? Yea, of them all. For salvation comes by obedience to the laws upon which its receipt is predicated and in no other way.

Rom 10 33. Jewish Israel as a whole was ignorant of the saving truths of the gospel, choosing instead to establish and defend the law of Moses which was now fulfilled. Or: Modern Christians as a whole are ignorant of God's true purposes as manifest through Joseph Smith and the restoration, choosing instead to establish and defend those remnants of ancient Christianity which they still possess.

SCRom 10 4Rom 10 54-5. God gave his law to Israel and commanded them to walk in his statutes and judgments, with the promise that by so doing they would be saved. (Lev. 18:1-5.) Now that law has an end in Christ, and salvation is available only for those who believe in him.

SCRom 10 6Rom 10 7Rom 10 86-8. In these verses Paul draws a parallel between his teachings and those of Moses. In summarizing for Israel the statutes and judgments of God, Moses told the people that he had set before them life and death, blessing and cursing, and that if they would keep the commandments they would be saved, otherwise damnation was their lot. As part of his exhortation, to drive home the fact that they had been taught the law to the full, Moses said: "For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it." (Deut. 30:11-14.)

SCRom 10 6Rom 10 7Rom 10 8Now Paul, knowing his hearers have had as much opportunity to learn the new law as Israel had to know the old one, and to drive home the fact that they must now turn to Christ, paraphrases the statements made by Moses. Those in his day, he says, do not need to ascend to heaven to learn of Christ and salvation. Neither do they need to seek Christ over the sea, or in any distant and hidden place. As it was in ancient Israel, the truths of salvation are very near, so near that they are already in their minds and hearts.

Rom 10 99. Based on Moses' language that "the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart" (Deut. 30:14), Paul here makes one of the most glorious proclamations of revealed religion. The word of salvation, the word already in their mouths, is to confess the divine Sonship of Christ; that which they must believe with all their souls is that God has raised him from the dead, thereby showing that he is the Son of God and that salvation is in him.

Rom 10 9And Paul's proclamation accords with all the words of all the prophets of all the ages. "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life." (John 3:36.) Thus it is everlastingly. But the belief involved is that belief which moves mountains, which raises the dead, which works miracles, all in accord with the promise, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall be do also; and greater works than these shall he do." (John 14:12.)

Rom 10 1111. This is Paul's rendition of part of Isaiah 28:16, as shown by his quotation of the whole verse in Romans 9:33, and it is a much improved rendition.

SCRom 10 12Rom 10 1312-13. All men of every nation and lineage who call upon the true God for deliverance shall be saved. Joel so prophesied (Joel 2:32), and Paul reaffirms the doctrine. But to call upon God in the sense meant involves a knowledge of him, the acceptance of the gospel of his Son, and total adherence to its truths—all in harmony with the scripture which saith: "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Ne. 18:20.)

Rom 10 1515. How shall they preach, except they be sent] What a denunciation this is of self-appointed ministers, ministers who become such because of a feeling in their heart that they want to do good, to preach the gospel, to do missionary work among the benighted of the earth! Was it not Paul's Lord who said, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you." (John 15:16.) Truly, "a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (Fifth Article of Faith.) Those who have desires to do good, and do it, shall be rewarded, but it is not within the province of any man to set himself up as a minister of Christ or a light to the world. No man can give himself the power to baptize, or to confer the Holy Ghost, or to preach, or to seal men up unto eternal life in God's kingdom. True legal administrators are "called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.)

Rom 10 15At this point Paul gives a paraphrasing quotation from Isaiah, whose actual words were: "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isa. 52:7.)

Rom 10 15Extolling the work and preaching of "all the holy prophets," Abinadi said: "And these are they who have published peace, who have brought good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto Zion: Thy God reigneth! And O how beautiful upon the mountains were their feet! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that are still publishing peace! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those who shall hereafter publish peace, yea, from this time henceforth and forever! And behold, I say unto you, this is not all. For O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that is the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord, who has redeemed his people; yea, him who has granted salvation unto his people; For were it not for the redemption which he hath made for his people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I say unto you, were it not for this, all mankind must have perished." (Mosiah 15:14-19.)

Rom 10 1717. Joseph Smith said: "Faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation." (Teachings, p. 148.) In other words faith follows preaching when: 1. The true gospel is taught; 2. Those who teach it are legal administrators who have been sent of God; 3. They teach by the power of the Spirit, so their preaching is attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; and 4. Those who hear the message receive the gifts of the Spirit, for the promise is that signs always have and always will accompany belief in the same gospel preached by Jesus and the apostles of old. (Mark 16:15-18.)
