Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

What Is the Fulness of the Gentiles?

Rom 11 2525. The fulness of the Gentiles] Eventually every living soul shall hear the message of salvation. "For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated." (D. & C. 1:2.) But gospel truths go to those of the various nations of the earth on a priority basis. Whole races and nations of men shall first hear the word in the spirit world; others shall have the testimony of Christ borne to them while here in mortality.

Rom 11 25For the nearly two thousand years between Abraham and Christ, the statutes and judgments of God were reserved almost exclusively for the seed of Abraham and for the house of Israel. During the mortal ministry of our Lord, the message was limited to Israel, to the Jews, and it was not then offered to the Gentiles. After Jesus' resurrection, Peter opened the door to the preaching of the gospel of the Gentiles, and Paul became their chief apostolic advocate and teacher. Thus there was a period or time appointed for the Jews to hear the word, and then a period of time for the Gentiles to take precedence. The times of the Gentiles is the period during which the gospel goes to them on a preferential basis, and this will continue until they have had a full opportunity to accept the truth, or in other words until the fulness of the Gentiles. Then the message will go again to the Jews, meaning to the Jews as a nation and as a people.

Rom 11 25Jesus said that the Jews would be "scattered among all nations," which is the now existing situation. "But they shall be gathered again," he continued. "But they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . . And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel; But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men. And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (D. & C. 45:19, 25, 28-30.)

Rom 11 25Gentiles] See Acts 10:21-35. First shall be last] See Acts 13:42-49. Times of the Gentiles] See Commentary I, pp. 654-658.

SCRom 11 26Rom 11 2726-27. Salvation will come again to the Jews as a nation at the Second Coming, the day when the Deliverer comes again, the day when the times of the Gentiles is fulfilled. Then he will take away their sins, and they again shall be his people as in days of old.

SCRom 11 28Rom 11 29Rom 11 30Rom 11 31Rom 11 3228-32. Because the Jews (as a nation) rejected the gospel in Paul's day, it was taken to the Gentiles; because the Gentiles (as a whole) shall reject the gospel in this day, it shall be taken again to the Jews, when the fulness of the Gentiles comes in.

Rom 11 2929. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance] God bestows gifts and graces upon men and calls them to his holy work without reference to any achievements or preparations on their part—as far as this life is concerned. Men are elected, called, foreordained, all on the basis of pre-existent preparation. Thus Joseph Smith was called to stand as one of the mightiest prophets of the ages, called as it were without repentance; that is, he had not received the gospel, he had not established himself as a leader of power and influence; he was called, rather, according to the foreknowledge of God because of the talents and capacities earned in the pre-mortal life.

Rom 11 3333. "Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out." (D. & C. 76:2.)

Rom 11 3636. "By him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created." (D. & C. 76:24.)
