Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians

Ancient Corinth was a city of debauchery, lewdness, and evil. Even by pagan standards the Corinthians were notoriously sensual and immoral. Their very religion itself centered around the worship of Aphrodite (Venus) and included the sacrificing of chastity by virgins. Drunkenness, lasciviousness, and sex sin were proverbial. And as is natural in such a society, the people of the Roman colony of Corinth were given to faction and strife, and to the solving of moral issues through philosophical contention.

In this climate of evil, Paul had raised up a congregation of saints who forsook the world that was Corinth and sought for a better life in the Cause of Christ. But these new and in some cases only semi-converted saints soon reeked with troubles in their own select group. Factions arose in the Church; some sought to solve spiritual problems by reason and philosophical dispute; the gifts of the Spirit and the partaking of the Lord's Supper were twisted and debased; some rejected Paul as an apostle, others denied the resurrection; and immoral and wanton conduct was found among those who had once turned from Satan to Christ.

Paul himself had personal knowledge of the temper and feelings of the people. By the whisperings of the Spirit, he knew what should be said to them to reclaim them to the gospel standard. Hence, he had written them an epistle directing among other things that they refrain from associating with fornicators. (1 Cor. 5:9.) What else this epistle commanded, we can only speculate, but undoubtedly it summarized many basic gospel doctrines and exhorted the Corinthian Saints to serve God and keep his commandments.

Upon receipt of this epistle, the contentious souls in the Corinthian congregation wrote a reply, taking issue with some of the doctrines of the Apostles and asking detailed questions about his teachings. Thereupon, with vigor and true apostolic zeal, Paul wrote a second epistle, canonized and known as First Corinthians, which answered the points raised by his detractors and further amplified the teachings of the original letter.

Unfortunately we do not know what was said in Paul's prior epistle to the Corinthians, nor in their reply to him. All that has come to us is his reply to the reply. We have, thus, only a few comments about certain aspects of the doctrines they were considering. One cannot, for instance, learn the doctrine of eternal marriage by studying First Corinthians, for it is not there recorded. What one does find is an application of the doctrine to a special situation, which application cannot be understood without a prior knowledge of the doctrine itself.

In addition to his personal knowledge and to these other documents unknown to us but available to him, Paul had received detailed oral reports about conditions in Corinth from members of the household of Chloe. (1 Cor. 1:11.) Here again we are without background information which would be most helpful in putting First Corinthians into its proper perspective.

But with it all, the document, as we now have it, is an inspired and inspiring recitation of some of the most glorious aspects of the doctrines of salvation. In it we read profound explanations of spiritual gifts, of the resurrection, and of degrees of glory in the world to come. We learn of baptism for the dead, are reminded that Christ is the God of Israel, and that there are gods many and lords many. We read of charity, unity, moral cleanliness, personal revelation, the sacrament, the spiritual powers of the saints, and much, much more. Truly the Lord's hand has been in the preservation of this storehouse of gospel knowledge, so needed for our edification and guidance.

"Is Christ Divided?"

I. V. 1. Paul an apostle] See Acts 13:50-52; 14:1-7; 1 Cor. 4:1-21. Called of Jesus Christ] Neither apostles nor any church officers call themselves. Either they are called of God or they are not, and if they are not their teachings and performances have no saving virtue and are not binding in heaven.

1 Cor 1 22. The church of God] The Church of Jesus Christ, for he is God, and his is the name the saints take upon themselves in the waters of baptism. (D. & C. 18:21-25.) As with all people and all organizations, the proper name is one of the chief marks of identification. In the case of his Church, the Lord has been very express and specific as to the exact name which should be used. When the Church was first organized in this dispensation, it was known as the Church of Christ (D. & C. 20: 1), which name was later amplified by revelation to be The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (D. & C. 115:4.)

1 Cor 1 2When the Nephite disciples asked: "Lord, . . . tell us the name whereby we shall call this church," the Resurrected Lord, by way of explanation and commandment replied: "Ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name. For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel." (3 Ne. 27:3-8.)

1 Cor 1 2Sanctified in Christ] See 1 Thess. 4:1-8. Called to be saints] Called out of the world and into the Church, called by the election of grace, which includes being foreordained to be members of the Church. See Rom. 8:28-34a; 9:1-33.

SC1 Cor 1 21 Cor 1 31 Cor 1 41 Cor 1 51 Cor 1 61 Cor 1 71 Cor 1 81 Cor 1 92-9. Paul is writing to able, conscientious, faithful saints, not to the world. He is giving counsel to those who have the gift of the Holy Ghost and who already know the doctrines of salvation, not to sectarians, and not to mankind in general. Among them, as almost always is the case, are the weak and dissident members, those who need counsel, direction, and encouragement, but with it all they are God's chosen people—a fact which must be crystal clear if we are to comprehend the counsel about to fall from the Apostle's lips.

1 Cor 1 44. Grace of God] See Rom. 4:1-25. 6. Testimony of Christ] See Rev. 19:9b-10. 3. Day of our Lord Jesus Christ] Second Coming. 9. Fellowship of his Son] See Rom. 15:1-7; 1 John 1:1-7.

1 Cor 1 1010. Unity within the Church and among the saints is the goal of the gospel. There is no place in the Church of God for division, for disagreement on doctrine, for cults and cliques, for liberal views as contrasted with conservative concepts. Among the faithful saints there is only one mind and one judgment and these are the Lord's; those with the full enjoyment of the Spirit learn the Lord's views on all things and conform their minds and hearts to his, becoming one with him. "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine," is his everlasting decree to his saints. (D. & C. 38:27.) See Commentary I, pp. 426-427; 765-767.

1 Cor 1 1111. Contentions] See 2 Tim. 2:14-26.

1 Cor 1 1212. Perfect unity is a goal the Church is still seeking. There are today Word of Wisdom faddists who will not use white flour or refined sugar; there are so-called liberals who think the problems of religion can be solved by dialogues and discussions without reference to revelation; there are others who maintain the Church should follow the world's course of social progress; there are those who try and harmonize the evolutionary concepts of the day with the revealed account of the fall and atonement; and there are others who profess to believe that full salvation is reserved for those who practice plural marriage, and so on. In other words, there are some of one philosophy and some of another, some follow the advocates of this cultish view and some of that

1 Cor 1 12How apt it is that the Lord chose to paraphrase Paul's language concerning divisive groups in the Church, when he spoke of those who shall be thrust down to hell, and who after their sufferings shall come forth to receive a telestial inheritance. "These are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch; But received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant." (D. & C. 76:99-101.)

1 Cor 1 1313. Is Christ divided?] There is and can be only one true Church on earth. (D. & C. 1:30.) To imagine that two organizations teaching different systems of salvation can both be true is a philosophical absurdity that is almost unbelievable. God cannot have a body of flesh and bones and also be a spirit essence without a body. Two conflicting religions can both be false, but only one can be true. Truth is truth; all truth is in harmony with all truth. There are not and cannot be two ways to gain celestial glory. Christ is not divided. The mere existence of the conflicting sects of Christendom is conclusive proof of the great apostasy. The fact that any or all of them, as Paul expressed it, say, "I am of Christ," has almost no bearing whatever on the issue. Even the members of the Church itself who were making this claim, without also receiving the fulness of the law and accepting the whole gospel, were among those severely rebuked by the inspired writer.
