Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

"Stand Fast in the Faith"

SC1 Cor 16 11. Collection for the saints] See 2 Cor. 8:1-24; 9:1-15.

1 Cor 16 22. First day of the week] Christian worship, as ordained and established by the apostles, was on the first day of the week, the Lord's day. See Rev. 1:9-11.

1 Cor 16 33. Your letters] Something akin to "recommends," or "certificates of ordination," or "ministerial certificates"; documents certifying to the membership and worthiness of the church members involved.

1 Cor 16 1313. 'Be valiant in the warfare with the world!'

1 Cor 16 1414. See 1 Cor. 13:1-13.

I. V. 20. A holy salutation] See 2 Cor. 13:5-14.

1 Cor 16 22K. J. 22. Let him be Anathema Maranatha] Let him be accursed until the Lord comes.

The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians

In First Corinthians, Paul reproved the philosophical and worldly saints in Corinth with sharpness. By the power of the Spirit he warned them to believe sound doctrine and live godly lives. Now he is showing forth an increase of love toward these same church members lest they esteem him to be their enemy. At least he is for the first nine chapters, although for the last four he picks up again some of his blunt and harsh mode of exhortation.

Second Corinthians is not a definitive epistle; it does not analyze and summarize gospel doctrines as such. Instead it applies already known doctrines to the circumstances of the Corinthians, much as an inspired sermon applies the gospel to the congregation in which it is preached.

Yet, wise counselor that he was, Paul wove in sufficient doctrinal data to leave modern readers with a great sense of thanksgiving for the epistle. In it we read, among other things, of how God comforteth and careth for his saints; of the law of reconciliation; that there is no second chance for salvation for the saints; of how God's ministers gain approval; of the true principle of glorying in the Lord; of false apostles and the signs of true apostles; and we learn that Paul, like the three Nephites, was caught up into heaven and heard and saw things beyond mortal comprehension.
