Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Do Saints Have a Second Chance for Salvation?

SC2 Cor 6 12 Cor 6 2Whenever the gospel is offered to any person or group, they then have the obligation to believe and obey its doctrines; other—wise, they do not become inheritors of its blessings.

SC2 Cor 6 12 Cor 6 2The doctrine of salvation for the dead, great and glorious as it is, does not mean that those who reject the truth, or who disobey their gospel covenants in this life, shall have a second chance to gain salvation by accepting and living the law in the spirit world. Salvation for the dead is for those who die without a knowledge of the gospel and who would have received it, with all their hearts, had it been presented to them in this mortal life.

SC2 Cor 6 12 Cor 6 2God's plan is "to save them that believe," when the gospel, "by the foolishness of preaching," is offered to them. (1 Cor. 1:21.) Those who do not believe and are not baptized are damned. (3 Ne. 11:33-34.) Such is the eternal decree. Jesus, for instance, in his resurrected ministry among the Nephites told them: "Except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." (3 Ne. 12:20.) To Joseph Smith the Lord said that those who reject the gospel in this life and receive it in the spirit world shall go, not to a celestial, but to a terrestrial kingdom. (D. & C. 76:73-74.) And using some of the same language which Paul here records, Amulek summarized the true doctrine by saying: "Now is the time and the day of your salvation. .. . For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors. . . . Do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:31-33.)

SC2 Cor 6 12 Cor 6 2Salvation for the dead] 1 Pet. 3:18-22; 4:1-6.
