Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Satan Sends Forth False Apostles

SC2 Cor 11 122 Cor 11 132 Cor 11 142 Cor 11 15Satan imitates the truth. God has a Church and so does the devil. There are false Christs, false prophets, false apostles, false spirits, false ministers. "In relation to the kingdom of God," the Prophet Joseph Smith said, speaking of the Church restored in this dispensation, "the devil always sets up his kingdom at the very same time in opposition to God." Also: "False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." (Teachings, p. 365.)

2 Cor 11 1313. False apostles] In the general sense, a true apostle is an especial witness of the Lord's name, one who knows by revelation that Jesus is the Lord. A false apostle is one who pretends to be a teacher and witness of true doctrine without having the requisite personal revelation. In the specific sense, a true apostle is one who has been ordained to that office in the Melchizedek Priesthood and who normally serves as a member of the Council of the Twelve, and who therefore has power and authority to govern the Church. A false apostle is one who professes to have power to govern the affairs of the Church on earth, but does not in fact have the requisite endowment of divine authority.

2 Cor 11 1414. There are true visions and false ones. Angels appear to men and so do devils. Manifestly when a devil appears, he pretends to be an angel and to be delivering a true message from Deity. As Jacob describes it, he "transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light." (2 Ne. 9:9.) Korihor was one person to whom such an appearance was made. After being struck dumb by the power of God, he wrote this confession: "Behold, the devil hath deceived me; for he appeared unto me in the form of an angel, and said unto me: Go and reclaim this people, for they have all gone astray after an unknown God. And he said unto me: There is no God; yea, and he taught me that which I should say. And I have taught his words; and I taught them because they were pleasing unto the carnal mind; and I taught them, even until I had much success, insomuch that I verily believed that they were true; and for this cause I withstood the truth, even until I have brought this great curse upon me." (Alma 30:53; Teachings, pp. 204-205, 214.)

2 Cor 11 1515. His ministers] Satan's ministers. Who are they and how may they be known? Joseph Smith has given us this answer: "If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." (Teachings, p. 269.)

2 Cor 11 15False doctrine] See Gal. 1:1-12.
