Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

'Stand Fast Lest Ye Fall from Grace'

Gal 5 11. Keep the commandments; live the gospel; endure to the end. "Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes." (D. & C. 88:86.) Enduring to the end] See Acts 2:41-47.

SCGal 5 2Gal 5 3Gal 5 42-4. Circumcision, as a religious ordinance, is the token and sign certifying belief in, acceptance of, and conformity to the whole Mosaic system, and therefore for the Christians of that day it constituted a rejection of Christ and his gospel which replaced the law. See Acts 15:1-35.

Gal 5 44. Justified by the law] See Rom. 2:17-29; 3:1-20, 21-31; 4:1-25; 5:1-11.

Gal 5 4Fallen from grace] Those who keep the commandments, striving to live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, find favor in his sight. Their course of conduct is pleasing to him, and they are in a state of grace; that is, because of their personal righteousness Deity pours out his love, mercy, and goodness upon them in bountiful measure. They are guided by the Spirit, have power to work miracles and do good, and frequently taste the good things of the world to come.

Gal 5 4To fall from grace is to turn from such a course of obedience so that the goodness of God departs and the former saint is left to his own power and strength. God is no longer pleased with his conduct and no longer pours out upon him special blessings. Thus the Prophet in discussing whether a person who is once in grace is always in grace, or whether having fallen from grace he can return again to that blessed state, says: "If men have received the good word of God, and tasted of the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, it is impossible to renew them again, seeing they have crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame; so there is a possibility of falling away; you could not be renewed again, and the power of Elijah cannot seal against this sin, for this is a reserve made in the seals and power of the priesthood." (Teachings, p. 339.) On the other hand, if a man is not worthy of so great a condemnation, he can repent and attain again his favored state of grace. For all faithful members of the Church, the revealed counsel is: "There is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God; Therefore let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation; Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also." (D.& C. 20:32-34.) See Heb. 6:4-9; 10:19-39.

Gal 5 4Grace] See Rom. 4:1-25.
