Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Saints Know God and Christ by Revelation

Eph 1 1717. God stands revealed or he remains forever unknown. There is no way to know God but by revelation. He cannot be discovered by science or found in the laboratory. Man may discover his laws and the manifestations he has left of himself. But God himself, our Eternal Father, the holy being who created all things, who governs and upholds the universe, he is known only by revelation and only to those to whom he reveals himself. God] See Acts 17:15-34. Holy Ghost reveals Jesus is the Christ] See 1 Cor. 12:1-3.

Eph 1 17The God of our Lord Jesus Christ] God the Father, our God, the Father of spirits, including Christ's, the same God whom Christ worships and by whose power Christ himself worked out his own salvation and gained the fulness of his Father's kingdom. How apt and reverential, thus, for the risen Lord to say: "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (John 20:17.)

SCEph 1 18Eph 1 19Eph 1 20Eph 1 21Eph 1 22Eph 1 2318-23. There is no language to describe the grace and goodness of God. No tongue can utter the praise and adoration due him who created us and who then, through the sacrifice of his Son, redeemed us from death and opened the door to us for an inheritance of exaltation in his kingdom. Paul struggles with this problem of proper expression. He speaks of the riches of God's glory; of the exceeding greatness of his power; of Christ ascending above all principalities, powers, mights, and dominions, and above every name and thing that exists on earth and in eternity; of his thereby sitting down on the right hand of God himself; and also of Christ's body, the Church, gaining a like eminence with him, and thus also filling all in all.

SCEph 1 18Eph 1 19Eph 1 20Eph 1 21Eph 1 22Eph 1 23But the full significance of all this is beyond mortal comprehension. It can only "be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him; To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves; That through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory. And to God and the Lamb be glory, and honor, and dominion forever and ever. Amen." (D.&C. 76:116-119.)

Eph 1 1818. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened] 'Your spirit eyes being opened.' Natural things are seen by the natural eye, spiritual things by the spiritual eye. Hence, the account of the Lord's appearance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple begins: "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us." (D. & C. 110:1-2.)

Eph 1 2121. The faithful saints "shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths." (D. & C. 132:19.) And above them is Christ, who sitteth at the right hand of the Father!

Eph 1 21Every name that is named] See Philip. 2:9-11; Acts 4:1-12.

Eph 1 2323. The fulness of him that filleth all in all] In the Lectures on Faith, Joseph Smith describes the Father and the Son as "filling all in all" because the Son, having overcome, has "received a fulness of the glory of the Father," and possesses "the same mind with the Father." Then he announces the conclusion to which Paul here only alludes: "And all those who keep his commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fulness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one." (Lectures on Faith, pp. 50-51.)
