Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Apostles Choose Seven to Assist Them

SCActs 6 1Acts 6 2Acts 6 3Acts 6 4Acts 6 5Acts 6 6God's command to his people in every age is: "Organize yourselves." (D. & C. 88:119.) Moses chose seventy men to aid him in judging and regulating Israel. (Num. 11:14-30.) Here the ancient apostles select seven brethren to aid them in administering the affairs of whatever system of United Order was then in operation. The work assigned them fell within the realm of those temporal matters normally handled by the Aaronic Priesthood, thus leaving the apostles free to handle the more difficult matters of their Melchizedek ministry.

SCActs 6 1Acts 6 2Acts 6 3Acts 6 4Acts 6 5Acts 6 6Two of these seven gained scriptural recognition for their subsequent valiant ministries. Stephen's preaching won him a martyr's crown. (Acts 6:8-15; 7:1-60.) And Philip won many souls to the Christian faith in the city of Samaria and elsewhere. (Acts 8:5-40.)

SCActs 6 2Acts 6 3Acts 6 42-4. Church leaders must delegate responsibility or perish under a mountain of administrative detail that no mortal man can bear. Here the apostles in effect choose to magnify their callings as ministers of the word rather than attempt to carry on the day to day regulation of the programs of the Church.

Acts 6 33. The apostles made the appointments; the delegation of authority came from them; but nominations came from the church members. In principle this is the same as a bishop recommending a young man to serve as a missionary with the actual call coming from the President of the Church. Those who receive the inspiration from the Spirit to call people to church service can and should receive recommendation and counsel from those in positions to give it. Since all who are called to service in the Church become the servants and representatives of the Lord, they must be "full of the Holy Ghost," and as a consequence be able to receive the inspiration to do their work in the way the Lord wants it done.

Acts 6 66. Those called to positions of presidency and administration are ordained and set apart by the laying on of hands; the ordinance thus performed endows the church member with the needed power and authority to perform the assigned work. Compare Acts 8:14-17.
