Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Apostles Confer the Gift of the Holy Ghost

SCActs 8 14Acts 8 15Acts 8 1614-16. To gain celestial salvation a man must be born of water and of the Spirit. (John 3:5.) John's baptism in water merely prepared the way for Christ's baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt. 3:11.) Sin and dross are burned out of the human soul as though by fire when a man becomes a new creature of the Holy Ghost, and until this cleansing takes place the candidate is not qualified for an inheritance with spotless beings in celestial glory. "You might as well baptize a bag of sand," the Prophet said, "as a man, if not done in view of the remission of sins and getting of the Holy Ghost. Baptism by water is but half a baptism, and is good for nothing without the other half—that is, the baptism of the Holy Ghost." (Teachings, p. 314.)

Acts 8 1717. See Acts 10:44-48. The gift of the Holy Ghost is conferred upon a worthy recipient by the laying on of hands. A man may receive a flash of revelation from the Holy Ghost without submitting to the ordinance which God has ordained. He may, for instance, learn "by the power of the Holy Ghost" that the Book of Mormon is true. (Moro. 10:4-5.) But he can never walk in the continuing light and revelation sent forth by that member of the Godhead until he receives the special anointing under the hands of a legal administrator whose right it is to speak for God and authoritatively open the door to the receipt of his holy gifts.

Acts 8 17"There are certain key words and signs belonging to the priesthood," Joseph Smith taught, "which must be observed in order to obtain the blessing." He named one of these as "the laying on of hands," and said, "We cannot obtain the blessing by pursuing any other course except the way marked out by the Lord. What if we should attempt to get the gift of the Holy Ghost through any other means except the signs or way which God hath appointed—would we obtain it? Certainly not; all other means would fail." (Teachings, p. 198-199.)

Acts 8 17One of the evidences of the great apostasy is that in the main the churches of Christendom do not so much as claim the power to give a present bestowal of the Holy Ghost, to say nothing of having that divine Being respond to such a conferral.
