Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Jesus Appears to Saul

SCActs 9 1Acts 9 2Acts 9 3Acts 9 4Acts 9 5Acts 9 6Acts 9 7Acts 9 8Acts 9 9Why did Jesus appear to Saul? Clearly the persecuted Nazarene came to call Saul to service in the Church under such circumstances as to rank him (in due course) with the other apostles who had seen the risen Lord.

SCActs 9 1Acts 9 2Acts 9 3Acts 9 4Acts 9 5Acts 9 6Acts 9 7Acts 9 8Acts 9 9But why Saul, why this man who hated the Lord and sought to slay his saints? There can be only one answer—pre-existence; Saul had gained the talents and risen to the spiritual stature in the premortal life which qualified him to stand as an apostolic minister of Him who now chastened him on the Damascus road.

SCActs 9 1Acts 9 2Acts 9 3Acts 9 4Acts 9 5Acts 9 6Acts 9 7Acts 9 8Acts 9 9Paul's call from rebellion to righteousness is comparable in many ways to that of the Nephite, Alma the younger. This American Paul, aided by the four sons of Mosiah, was seeking to destroy the Church of God when an angel with the voice of thunder, and as the earth shook, called him to turn and pursue that course which would lead thousands of earth's pilgrims to a celestial haven. (Mosiah 27.)

Acts 9 11. Threatenings and slaughter] There is neither excuse nor mitigation for religious persecution. Life taken because of misdirected religious zeal is still murder. Joseph Smith was both martyred and murdered. Saul's course of seeking to slay the saints was depraved and devil-devised, which he frankly confessed in his later ministry. (Acts 22:4; 26:10-11.)

Acts 9 1The high priest] "The Romans allowed the Sanhedrin to exercise civil and criminal jurisdiction (except in capital cases) over the whole Jewish community, even outside Palestine." (Dummelow, p. 830.)

Acts 9 22. Letters... to the synagogues] Apparently the Jewish converts to Christianity still assembled in the synagogues and were certainly known to and could be identified by the local rabbis. (Acts 26:11.)

Acts 9 44. Why persecutest thou me?] To persecute the saints is to fight against God. Whether a man's acts be good or ill, the same law applies: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

Acts 9 55. Kick against the pricks] "The metaphor of an ox, only driving the goad deeper by kicking against it, is a classic one, and here forcibly expresses, not only the vanity of all his measures for crushing the gospel, but the deeper wound which every such effort inflicted upon himself." (Jamieson, p. 183.)

Acts 9 66. Jesus had come from the courts of glory to chasten and reprove Saul. Why, then, did not the Lord tell his future minister how to turn from the error of his ways? Why appear to him without delivering the whole message? Simply because the Lord had a servant named Ananias whose commission and work it was to teach and baptize Paul. The presiding officer of heaven and earth would not overstep the bounds of his own laws. He had delegated power to his local officer to handle matters of this sort and to him even the future apostle to the Gentiles must apply for counsel and direction. See Commentary I, pp. 303-305.

Acts 9 99. Alma remained in a trance for two days and two nights, during which time he received a marvelous spiritual manifestation and regeneration, was born again, and heard the voice of the Lord. (Mosiah 27:22-31.) Saul, similarly, during his three sightless days commenced the character transformation which in due course would change the history of Christianity. What anguish of soul he must have felt, what fires of conscience, what godly sorrow for sin, as he humbled himself preparatory to submitting to the direction of Ananias.

I. V. 7. Changes in this verse make it conform with Paul's own account. (Acts 22:9.)
