Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Saul and Barnabas Called to the Ministry

Acts 13 113:1. Prophets and teachers] Not one prophet, but many; not one teacher, but many—with those named being examples. There are always prophets and teachers—a great host of them—in the true Church. Indeed, where the Lord's prophets and teachers are found, there is the Lord's Church; and where such are not found, there the true Church is not. See Commentary I, pp. 251-253; Rev. 19:9-10.

Acts 13 22. The Holy Ghost said] The Lord Jesus Christ said; but the instruction came by the power of the Holy Ghost, that is, the Lord spoke to them by the voice of the Spirit. The Holy Ghost is God's minister to give revelation, to convey his mind and will to men. "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart," the Lord says, "by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation." (D. & C. 8:2-3.) And the receipt of continuous revelation is the proof positive of the identity of the true Church. Where there is revelation from the Holy Ghost—revelation in the full, complete, and literal sense, revelation dealing with all things both temporal and spiritual—there is the true Church; but where such is not found, there the true Church is not.

Acts 13 2The work whereunto I have called them] What work? Apparently they were being set apart as missionaries, for they immediately went forth to preach the gospel and administer its ordinances according to the pattern set by Jesus. But who is to say whether more than this was involved? Obviously they both already held the Melchizedek Priesthood and were elders. Were they now being ordained seventies? Such is an apostolic and a missionary office. From this time on Luke refers to them as apostles. Could this have been their ordination as such, or their setting apart as members of the Council of the Twelve? If so, and such is a distinct possibility, one or more of the other apostles would have been present to confer upon them the keys of the kingdom. But whatever office or position was involved, Saul and Barnabas were now going forth as legal administrators, on the Lord's errand, called by revelation, and authorized to serve and minister by the laying on of the hands of the Lord's anointed—all of which sets the pattern for ministerial service for all true ministers in all ages.

Acts 13 33. Fasted and prayed] See Commentary I, pp. 237-238.

Acts 13 3Laid their hands on them] Saul and Barnabas were called by prophecy and were either ordained or set apart or both by the laying on of hands, all in accord with the Lord's law "that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (Fifth Article of Faith.)

Acts 13 3There are two types of ministerial calls in the Church—those to ordained offices, and those to administrative or set apart positions. Both kinds of calls are made by prophecy, that is by the spirit of inspiration, but one type is of a permanent nature and the other is temporary. Brethren are ordained to offices in the priesthood, which offices they hold ever thereafter, in time and in eternity. Hence the common saying, "Once a bishop, always a bishop." But brethren are set apart to serve as missionaries, on high councils, in positions of presidency, as bishops of designated wards. The setting apart empowers the priesthood holder to serve in the administrative or ecclesiastical position for the period of the assignment.

Acts 13 3Priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. Where men are actually endowed with power from on high, with the priesthood of the Almighty, there is the true Church, and where the priesthood is not, there the true Church is not. See Heb. 7:1-3.
