Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Saul, Now Paul, Curses a Sorcerer

Acts 13 66. Sorcerer] See Acts 8:5-13. A false prophet] What is a false prophet? In this instance Elymas the sorcerer is so designated. In modern times, however, since it is not common among the religions of the world generally to point to certain persons as prophets, it also is not the common practice to point to the false imitators of the truth and designate them as false prophets. Nevertheless since a true prophet by definition is a minister or religious teacher who receives revelation from God, it follows that a false prophet is a person who pretends to be a minister of Christ and a teacher of his truths who does not in fact receive revelation. Thus Joseph Smith said: "When a man goes about prophesying, and commands men to obey his teachings, he must either be a true or false prophet. False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets, and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." (Teachings, p. 365.) Also: "If I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." (Teachings, p. 269.)

SCActs 13 8Acts 13 9Acts 13 10Acts 13 118-11. A somewhat similar experience occurred in the ministry of Alma when he cursed the Anti-Christ Korihor. (Alma 30.) "Cursings are the opposite of blessings, and the greater the opportunity given a people to earn blessings, the more severe will be the cursings heaped upon them, if they do not measure up and gain the proffered rewards. Failure to pay tithing, for instance, brings condemnation upon the covenant people, whereas the people of the world—not being specifically obligated to keep this law—do not suffer the same penalties for nontithepaying. (Mal. 3:7-12.) 'Hearken and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all cursings.' (D.&C. 41:1.)

SCActs 13 8Acts 13 9Acts 13 10Acts 13 11"Those who persecute the saints shall be cursed with the damnation of hell. (D. & C. 121:11-25.) To those on his left hand the Lord shall say: 'Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.' (D. & C. 29:28, 41; Matt. 25:40.)

SCActs 13 8Acts 13 9Acts 13 10Acts 13 11"Cursings as well as blessings may be administered by the power and authority of the priesthood (D. & C. 124:93), but the Lord's earthly agents are sent forth primarily to bless and not to curse, and no curse should ever be decreed except by direct revelation from the Lord commanding such to be done. The true spirit of the gospel is exemplified in the counsel, 'Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you.' (Matt. 5:44.) 'Bless, and curse not.' (Rom. 12:14.)

SCActs 13 8Acts 13 9Acts 13 10Acts 13 11"President Joseph F. Smith explained, when speaking of the priesthood: 'It is the same power and priesthood that was committed to the disciples of Christ while he was upon the earth, that whatsoever they should bind on earth should be bound in heaven, and that whatsoever they should loose on earth should be loosed in heaven, and whosoever they blessed should be blessed, and if they cursed, in the spirit of righteousness and meekness before God, God would confirm that curse; but men are not called upon to curse mankind; that is not our mission; it is our mission to preach righteousness to them. It is our business to love and to bless them, and to redeem them from the fall and from the wickedness of the world. This is our mission and our special calling. God will curse and will exercise his judgment in those matters. "Vengeance is mine," saith the Lord, and "I will repay." (Rom. 12:19.) We are perfectly willing to leave vengeance in the hands of God and let him judge between us and our enemies, and let him reward them according to his own wisdom and mercy.' (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., p. 140.)"(Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 175-176.)

Acts 13 1010. Harsh words these! But why not? Elymas sought to keep the Roman pro-consul, for such was his rank and status, from receiving the gospel and becoming an heir of salvation. Hence he was engaged in Satan's work. What a crime it is in the sight of Heaven to teach false doctrines and thereby keep men from salvation!
