Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Paul Takes Gospel to Gentiles

Acts 13 4242. The Gentiles] See Acts 10:21-35.

Acts 13 4343. Many Jews were converted and accepted the gospel.

Acts 13 4545. Contradicting and blaspheming] These are two sins of which those who actively oppose the truth are always guilty. In the very nature of things, active opposition to the gospel cause consists of contradicting the truth and of blaspheming sacred things, whether the opposition is against Paul and Barnabas or Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. "Blasphemy consists in either or both of the following: 1. Speaking irreverently, evilly, abusively, or scurrilously against God or sacred things; or 2. Speaking profanely or falsely about Deity.

Acts 13 45"Among a great host of impious and sacrilegious speaking that constitute blasphemy are such things as: Taking the name of God in vain; evil-speaking about the Lord's anointed; belittling sacred temple ordinances, or patriarchal blessings, or sacramental administrations; claiming unwarranted divine authority; and promulgating with profane piety a false system of salvation." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 90.)

Acts 13 4646. The divine plan called for offering the gospel to the Jews before it was taken to the Gentiles. True the saving truths are for "all mankind" (Third Article of Faith), but not to all men at once; there is a scheduled range of priorities; one nation is offered gospel light at one time and another on a different occasion; many people have no contact with true ministers in this life and will get their opportunities in the spirit world.

Acts 13 46In the dispensation of the fulness of times the priorities where Jews and Gentiles are concerned have been reversed. In this age the gospel goes first to the Gentiles and at a later time will go to the Jews. Nephi summarized the priority system as it was arranged for both dispensations in these words: "There is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth. And the time cometh that he shall manifest himself unto all nations, both unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles; and after he has manifested himself unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles, then he shall manifest himself unto the Gentiles and also unto the Jews, and the last shall be first, and the first shall be last." (1 Ne. 13:41-42.) See Acts 1:1-8.

Acts 13 46Judge yourselves] In a very real sense men judge themselves. "They are their own judges," Alma said, "whether to do good or do evil." (Alma 41:7.) By rejecting the gospel, thus judging themselves "unworthy of everlasting life," they have fixed the state of their eternal inheritance. None who have opportunity to accept the gospel in this life, for instance, and who do not do so, can ever rise higher in the kingdoms of glory than the terrestrial world. (D. & C. 76:71-80.)

Acts 13 4747. Now Paul calls on Isaiah to show the gospel was destined for Gentile ears. He chooses a passage which speaks both of Christ and his servants taking salvation to those not of Israelitish lineage. (Isa. 49.) As Simeon had prophesied, Christ was "a light to lighten the Gentiles" (Luke 2:32), and the hour had now come to take the gospel to them in power.

Acts 13 4848. Ordained to eternal life] See Rom. 8:28-34a.
