Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 2 ( 1971)

Persecution Attends Spread of Gospel

Acts 13 5013:50. Devout and honourable women] How important and influential is the place of women, whether for or against the truth as the case may be. These women, probably wives of the chief men of the city (and therefore considered to be honorable), though devout, though sincere, though conscientiously believing their course was right, were persecuting Christ, as Paul himself had done aforetime. See Acts 5:33-41.

Acts 13 5151. Shook off the dust of their feet] See Commentary I, pp. 326-327.

Acts 14 214:2. Why is it that unbelievers stir themselves and others up to persecute the saints? Why should one person feel so strongly about what others believe as to seek to imprison and slay them? From a purely rational standpoint there is no sensible explanation. But religion involves feelings and emotions; prejudices become deep seated; passions consume the whole being; and Satan takes control of his persecuting agent. When emotions, passions, and man's innate religious feelings become so distorted and perverted as to place the human soul under Satan's control, these feelings then find expression in persecution.

Acts 14 44. The apostles] Luke, for the first time, so designates Paul and Barnabas. All of the brethren in the Church who knew by personal revelation that Jesus was the Christ, meaning all who had testimonies given by the Holy Ghost of his divine Sonship, were witnesses of the Lord. Such were Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, Nicolas, Ananias, John Mark, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, Judas Barsabas, Silas, Timotheus, Apollos, Sopater, Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius, Tychicus, Trophimus, Agabus, Mnason—all of whom are mentioned in Acts and are variously referred to as prophets, teachers, and disciples, but none of whom are called apostles. Only Barnabas, Paul, Matthias, James the Lord's brother, and the original Twelve are singled out to carry the apostolic appelation. The clear inference thus is that the name is being reserved for those who were ordained to the office of apostle in the Melchizedek Priesthood and therefore that Paul and Barnabas were members of the Council of the Twelve, having filled vacancies in the normal course of events. President Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "Paul was an ordained apostle, and without question he took the place of one of the other brethren in that Council." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 3, p. 153.)
