Truman G. Madsen, Joseph Smith the Prophet ( 1978)

Author's Note on Sources

The book Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith, has long been a convenient source of doctrinal teachings of Joseph Smith contained in History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other early Church publications. For the life and teachings of Joseph Smith newer tools also are now available to the casual reader as well as to the analytic student. Every document written in Joseph Smith's own hand is now collected in The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, edited by Dean C. Jessee. All the Prophet's Nauvoo discourses, in their original form as recorded, have been gathered and interrelated in The Words of Joseph Smith, edited by Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook. Every doctrinal statement of the Prophet contained in the four books named above has been included, along with its immediate text, in Concordance of Doctrinal Statements of Joseph Smith, edited by Truman G. Madsen. Digests of three thousand diaries and journals of early Mormons, many of whom knew Joseph Smith, have been annotated in Davis Bitton's Guide to Mormon Diaries and Autobiographies. The new LDS edition of the Bible presents the most important changes in the Joseph Smith Translation of the scriptures, with useful footnotes and a comprehensive Topical Index.

The sources listed above, as well as many others both published and unpublished, have been used with appreciation by the author in writing this book. Punctuation and spelling have been modernized as necessary in quotations included. Publication or location details on sources cited are included in the bibliography.

Abbreviations

The abbreviations listed below have been used to simplify references in the notes and sources that follow.

BYU Studies Brigham Young University Studies CHC B.H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. HC Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. IE The Improvement Era JD Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. JI The Juvenile Instructor Journal History Journal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints JST Joseph Smith Translation of the Holy Bible, entries contained in the Holy Bible published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979, or The Holy Scriptures, Inspired Version, published by The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints MA Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate MS The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star TPJS Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith TS Times and Seasons WJS Joseph Smith, The Words of Joseph Smith Writings Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith YWJ Young Woman's Journal
