Read about my life to figure out who I am. Discover more about me from the scripture references below.

1.  I am a descendant of Lehi.

2.  At age 11 I went with my father to a highly populated southern city.

3.  My teen years were a time of terrible war and violence.

4.  At age 15 I was visited of the Lord.

5.  I am a disciple of Jesus Christ.

6.  As a teenager I was unusually “large in stature” for my age.

7.  Starting in my 16th year I led my people into many battles and had some success as a military commander.

8.  When I was older I preached the gospel to my people, the Nephites, between wars with the Lamanites but had little success.

9.  After many years I resigned as commander of my people’s military forces.

10. I abridged a book covering almost 1,000 years of my people’s history.

11. Many years after resigning, I voluntarily returned to lead the armies of my people.

12. When I was separated from my son, I wrote him letters.

13. I wrote a strong warning for people in the last days.

14. My prayer to God was that my brethren might come to know Jesus Christ.

15. I was killed in a war with the Lamanites.

For the answer, see W of M 1:8; 3 Ne. 5:13, 20; 3 Ne. 29–30; Morm. 1:6, 8–12, 15–16; Morm. 2; Morm. 3; Morm. 5:1; Morm. 8:3; Moro. 8–9.

As you make goals, think about what you could do to become a better leader at church, at school, or in your community. You could develop your public-speaking skills, become more organized and keep better track of your activities, or improve your personal righteousness so you can be a better example.

Write your goals down where you will see them often, and be sure to do something at least weekly to bring you closer to achieving them.

Young single adults in the British Isles are standing a little taller after their largest-ever young single adult conference, held in Manchester, England. More than 540 young people from England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and elsewhere came together for one special weekend.

The young single adults helped bring others hope through a humanitarian aid project—sorting and boxing donated clothing and painting 250 blackboards for school kits. The group also cleaned a local park in Wythenshawe.

The conference wasn’t all work though. The young adults had a dance, participated in a play, and listened to speakers, including Elder W. Craig Zwick of the Seventy, then First Counselor in the Europe West Area Presidency, who gave some advice on how to stand a little taller. “Here is the key,” he said. “Put on the whole armour of God” (see Eph. 6:11–17).
