Franklin S. Harris, Book of Mormon: Message and Evidences ( 1961)

Appendix I:

Bibliographical Note

The references and authority for statements in the text are cited in the appropriate places with the aid of notes. Abbreviations such as Imp. Era for Improvement Era, Mill. Star for Millennial Star, shortened reference to some of the books listed below and obvious abbreviations for Bible and Book of Mormon books have been made. The following references are intended to give some of the more useful books dealing with the Book of Mormon field, and is by no means a complete bibliography-such would require a listing of more than twice the number of references given throughout the pages of this book.

208Berrett, William E., Milton R. Hunter, Roy A. Welker and H. Alvah Fitzgerald, A Guide to the Study of the Book of Mormon. Department of Education, L.D.S. Church, Salt Lake City, Utah (1938). Out of print. The contribution of the book to religious and social thought.

Berrett, William E., Teachings of the Book of Mormon, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah (1952), Discussion of 44. Book of Mormon themes.

Birrell, Verla, The Book of Mormon Guide Book. Birrell Book Co., P.O. Box 952, Salt Lake City, Utah (1948). A detailed general guide to the book itself.

Book of Mormon Treasury, Selections from the Pages of the Improvement Era, Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, Utah (1959). Thirty-six articles on all phases: history, people, geography, sidelights, Biblical and modern evidences and its message.

Dee, Genet Bingham (ed) A Voice from the Dust, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah (1939). The Book of Mormon edited and arranged as literature with pictures and notes in a form for easy reading.

Ferguson, Thomas Stuart, One Fold and One Shepherd, Books of California, San Francisco, California (1958). Profusely illustrated. Striking new art and symbol comparisons with Old World. Comparison of Book of Mormon with Ixtlilxochitl and the Popul Vuh.

Hunter, Milton R., Archaeology and the Book of Mormon, Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, Utah (1956). Profusely illustrated. Includes extensive coverage of white Indians.

Hunter Milton R., Christ in Ancient America, Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, Utah (1959). Profusely illustrated. Archaeological and traditional evidence for Christ's visit to Ancient America.

209Hunter, Milton and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon, Kolob Book Co., Oakland, California (1950). A detailed parallel comparison of the Book of Mormon with early Middle American traditional accounts and some archaeological discoveries.

Kelemen, Pál, Medieval American Art, Macmillan and Co., New York, 2 vols. (1943). A superb collection of 960 photographs of pre-Columbian art with notes.

Kirkham, Francis W., A New Witness for Christ in America, Author, Salt Lake City, Utah, ed. 2 (1947,), vol. 2, Attempts to Prove the Book of Mormon Man-Made, revised edition, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah (1959). The complete consideration of the coming forth of the book, its translation, printing and explanations of its origin.

Landa's Relaci de las Cosas de Yucatan, (ited with notes by Alfred M. Tozzer. Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard University. Cambridge, Mass. (1941). n invaluable translation of the most important early manuscript, with over a thousand scholarly notes. Analytical indexes and bibliography.

McGavin, E. Cecil, Cumorah's Gold Bible, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah (1940). Mostly on the coming forth of the book.

MacGowan, Kenneth, Early Man in the New World, Macmillan, New York, (1950). A readable account written with an open mind.

Maya and Their Neighbors, The, Appleton-Century Co., New York (1940) Out-of-print. Excellent technical articles by various authorities. Bibliography.

Monson, Leland H., Ancient America Speaks, Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, Utah (1959). The principal characters and some doctrines.

Morley, Sylvanus Griswold and George W. Brainerd, The Ancient Maya, Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif., ed. 3 (1956). One of the most complete and authoritative books on the Maya. Profusely illustrated. Bibliography.

Nibley, Hugh, Lehi in the Deseret and The World of the Jaredites, Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, Utah (1952). A fascinating and well-documented account of Lehi and his times in the Near East and the Jaredite type of culture and customs in the ancient East.

210Radin, Paul, The Story of the American Indian, Liveright Publishing Corp., New York., rev. ed. (1934). A readable account of all areas from the high ancient civilizations of the New World to the recent in the United States.

Reynolds, George, Complete Concordance of the Book of Mormon Author, Salt Lake City, Utah (1900). An indispensable guide for all serious students of the book.

Reynolds, George, A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon, Deseret Sunday School Union, Salt Lake City, Utah, ed. 2 (1910).

Reynolds, George, and Janne M. Sjodahl, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, Utah. Five volumes published so far (1955, 1956, 1958, 1959, 1960).

Ricks, Eldin, Book of Mormon Commentary, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah (1951). The complete text of First Nephi with explanatory notes in volume 1.

Roberts, B. H., New Witnesses for God, Deseret News, Salt Lake City, Utah, vols 2 and 3 (1909). An extensive discussion of many of the internal and external evidences for the book.

Sperry, Sidney B., Book of Mormon Studies, Gospel Doctrine Department Course of Study for the Sunday Schools. Deseret Sunday School Union Board, Salt Lake City, Utah (1947). The structure, contents and teachings of the book.

Sperry, Sidney B., Book of Mormon Testifies, Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, Utah (1952). Simple, systematic treatment, book by book covering structure, contents and teachings.

Sperry, Sidney B., Our Book of Mormon, Stevens and Wallis, Salt Lake City, Utah (1947). Analysis of the book, its literature and some of the doctrines.

Thompson, J. Eric S., Rise and Fall of the Maya Civilization, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma (1954). Standard book by a leading authority.

Vaillant, George C., Aztecs of Mexico, Doubleday Doran and Co., Inc., New York (1944). The standard work on the Aztecs and the Indians of the Valley of Mexico. Bibliography.

Verrill, A. Hyatt, and Ruth Verrill, America's Ancient Civilization, Putnam's, New York (1953). Readable with general coverage.

Washburn, J. N., The Content, Structure and Authorship of the Book of Mormon, Bookcraft, Salt Lake City, Utah (1954).

211West, Roy A., An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, L. D. S. Department of Education, Salt Lake City, Utah (1940), out of print. An excellent brief religious-literary study.

211The University Archaeological Society with headquarters at the Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, with the superb William Gates collection of Middle-American linguistics documents is sponsoring studies on the bearing of archaeology on the scriptural foundations of Mormonism. Of special interest is M. Wells Jakeman, "Stela 5, Izapa, Chiapas, Mexico, Special Publication No. 2 (1958) which gives a detailed treatment of a remarkable portrayal of Lehi's dream. The UAS Newsletter has already had 69 issues. Inquiries should be addressed to Dr. Ross T. Christensen.
