Reading or memorizing “The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles” is one way you can come closer to the Savior this Christmas. You will find it in the Liahona (see Apr. 2000, 2–3) or at the back of your new For the Strength of Youth pamphlet.

The young women of the Whitewater Ward, Jonesboro Georgia Stake, set a goal to memorize “The Living Christ.” The girls felt the Spirit as they learned more about the Savior, and they were able to recite the Apostles’ declaration as a surprise for the other girls at their stake Young Women camp testimony meeting.

They testified, with the Apostles, “that His life, which is central to all human history, neither began in Bethlehem nor concluded on Calvary. He was the Firstborn of the Father, the Only Begotten Son in the flesh, the Redeemer of the world. … He is the light, the life, and the hope of the world. His way is the path that leads to happiness in this life and eternal life in the world to come. God be thanked for the matchless gift of His divine Son” (Liahona, Apr. 2000, 2–3).

Giving of yourself is the true spirit of Christmas. Our perfect leader, Jesus Christ, gave His life, allowing us to qualify for God’s greatest gift—eternal life (see D&C 14:7). This Christmas when you read the story of the Savior’s birth, also read some of the stories from His earthly ministry. His example of selfless giving can guide you as you seek for ways to serve.

Following are a few significant events that happened in Church history during the month of December.

23 December 1805: Joseph Smith Jr. was born in Sharon, Vermont.

5 December 1847: The First Presidency was reorganized in Kanesville, Iowa, with Brigham Young as Church President and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors.

9 December 1895: The first stake in Mexico was created in Colonia Juárez.

9 December 1978: The Church’s first full-time missionaries to Ghana arrived and baptized 89 people.

“Of all the pronouncements in sacred or profane literature, the announcement of the angel to the shepherds keeping watch over their flock by night was highly significant:

“‘And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

“‘For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord’ (Luke 2:10–11).”
President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, “A Pattern of Love,” Liahona, Dec. 1999, 3.
