What is Christmas? President Thomas S. Monson, First Counselor in the First Presidency, said that Christmas is children, remembering, giving, and prophecy fulfilled (see “What Is Christmas?” Liahona, Dec. 1998, 2–6).

Christmas is children. It is joy, excitement, and hope.

Christmas is remembering. It is a time to remember and show the love Jesus asked us to have for everyone.

Christmas is giving. Sometimes we give things. Other times we give service. President Monson said we “give to our Lord and Savior the gift of gratitude by living His teachings” (Liahona, Dec. 1998, 6).

Christmas is prophecy fulfilled. The angel declared, “For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord” (Luke 2:11).

When Jesus Christ was born, a new star appeared. But not everyone understood what it meant. The Wise Men from the East knew what the star meant. They came to worship Jesus. We can be like the Wise Men. We can learn about Jesus Christ and follow Him.

What is Christmas? It is when we celebrate the gift our Heavenly Father gave to each of us: the birth of His Son, Jesus Christ. We can give thanks for this gift by showing through our example that we will always follow Him.

Remove pages 8–9, and mount them on lightweight cardboard. Cut out the numbered stars on page 5. Each day in December, read the scripture listed on the star for that date. Answer the question or do the activity. Then glue the star in the scene. Place the scene where it will remind you to follow Jesus’ example.

1.  On pieces of paper, write phrases from the song “The Church of Jesus Christ” (see 2003 Outline for Sharing Time and the Children’s Sacrament Meeting Presentation). Have children stand around the perimeter of the room, holding the papers. Discuss some of the principles the song teaches—for example, belonging to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints means knowing that the Church was restored by Joseph Smith. Sing a song or hymn about the Restoration. Repeat the process for the other phrases. Ask the other children to stand by one of the papers that represents something they feel strongly about. Sing “The Church of Jesus Christ,” and have the children turn to face each phrase as it is sung. Ask them to sing as if they were bearing their testimonies.

2.  2. Help the children see how being a missionary now can help spread the gospel. Choose a child to be a member missionary, and ask him or her to contact as many people in Primary as possible in half a minute. He or she approaches another child or adult, who stands. The member missionary shakes the other person’s hand and says, “Hello, my name is ________, and I’m a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.” How many people did the member missionary contact? Repeat the activity with this difference: as soon as someone has shaken hands, that person becomes a member missionary and begins shaking hands with others. Now how many people were contacted? Explain that by living gospel principles, we are member missionaries. Read Matt. 7:24–27; Mark 12:41–44; Luke 10:25–27; John 5:39. List some ways of becoming good member missionaries. Divide into groups, and have each group role play something they can do now to be good missionaries. Sing songs or hymns about missionary work.
