By Danelys W. Rodriguéz, Dominican Republic

One Sunday at church I realized that my time with the Young Women program was almost over and I would soon be with the young single adults. I was sad because I knew that things would never be the same. After Sunday School, I tried to cheer up, but I just couldn’t do it. I tried to tell myself that Heavenly Father did not want me to feel sadness but rather joy (see 2 Nephi 2:25).

I was just about to cry on my friend’s shoulder in the hallway when the ward clerk came up to me and said, “Sister Danelys, here’s the mail!” He handed me a white envelope with only my name on it. I was curious to know what it was, so I asked the clerk who had sent it. As he walked away, he told me it was from the patriarch and that it was a copy of my patriarchal blessing. I did cry, but my tears were tears of joy because I knew God had seen my sadness and had provided a way for me to find joy in my sadness. My patriarchal blessing had finally arrived in writing, at the precise moment when I needed it most.

When I got home and read it, I cried again and prayed and thanked God for it and for helping me to remember how fortunate I am to be His daughter and to have the light of the everlasting gospel in my life.

When sad times come, even though I may not understand them at the time, I know that God can help me find happiness. I learned this through the love that God offers me in my life. He offers this love to each one of us, and it is within us to accept this marvelous feeling. We can overcome trials with God’s guidance. We can smile and be happy.

By Kwamena Koomson, Ghana

Helaman 5:12

This scripture helps me understand that it is only by centering our lives on Jesus Christ that we can overcome the adversary. Even when trials come upon us, if we are built upon the rock of Jesus Christ, all things are possible.

This scripture has helped me remain strong during challenging times.

I know that God lives and that He sent His Only Begotten Son to earth to atone for the sins of mankind.
