“Conner, it’s time to get up,” Mom said, gently shaking him.

Conner moved slowly at first. Then he remembered.

“Today’s Sunday!” he shouted as he jumped out of bed. He raced to put on his Sunday clothes and hurried down to breakfast.

What is he doing today that is so special? Mom wondered.

Conner did have something special to do. He had waited all week for Sunday to come.

Last week in his Primary class, Sister Plummer had said, “When I was about 10, I discovered something that helped me be more reverent. If you would like to know my secret, listen for the words always remember in sacrament meeting next week, and then always remember what comes after those words.”

Conner had decided he would listen. He wanted to know Sister Plummer’s secret.

At church, he heard Bishop Sheppard say, “Remember to come to the ward party.” Conner knew that wasn’t Sister Plummer’s “always remember.”

He listened as the congregation began to sing the sacrament hymn. He wondered if Sister Plummer’s special words might be in the hymn. He pointed at each word in the hymnbook and found himself singing along. But he didn’t find the special words.

Conner bowed his head and listened carefully as one of the priests said the sacrament prayer. Toward the end of the prayer, he heard “always remember.” He knew Sister Plummer’s secret! He knew who he was always to remember. But can I “always remember” Jesus? he wondered.

Conner folded his arms and sat reverently. When a deacon stumbled as he passed the sacrament, Conner wanted to poke his little sister and say, “Sara, did you see that?”

But he didn’t because he remembered.

After the sacrament, the first speaker was Sister Swanson. She smiled a lot and was easy to listen to. He had no trouble remembering while she was speaking.

“Good morning, brothers and sisters!” Brother Swanson said. He was a big man with a jolly voice. But the words Brother Swanson spoke were almost as large as he was. Conner didn’t understand everything he said and soon lost interest. His fingers began to fumble around in his pockets. He found a rubber band and started to twist it. Suddenly he remembered. The rubber band went back into his pocket, and he looked up at Brother Swanson and listened for words he knew.

A girl in front of Conner was chewing gum and blew a little bubble. It made a tiny pop. Conner watched as she began blowing another. It grew bigger and bigger and bigger.

Then Conner remembered. When the big bubble popped, he didn’t see the girl’s face covered in pink gum. So he didn’t laugh like some people around him did.

Not long after the bubbles, the Johnsons’ baby rolled under the bench and pulled playfully at Conner’s leg.

Conner wanted to play with her, but he stopped himself just in time. He had remembered.

“Sorry, Conner,” Sister Johnson whispered as she struggled to get the wiggly baby girl back on the bench.

Conner didn’t hear or see them leave the chapel. His big blue eyes were watching Brother Swanson’s eyes fill with tears. His ears were hearing the speaker’s voice soften to a near whisper as he spoke of his love for the Savior. Conner felt warm and tingly inside.

After the meeting, Mom said, “Conner, you were so reverent today. How did you do it?”

Conner smiled. “Every time I thought about something else, I always remembered Someone.”

“Who did you always remember?” Mom asked.

“I always remembered Jesus,” Conner said, “and it felt good!”
