Music has been called the universal language. It crosses boundaries of language and culture and communicates depths of feeling words rarely can. In a worship service, it can invite the spirit of revelation and reflection. Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles once said he is continually impressed with the power of music to comfort and counsel in a way that often exceeds the power of the spoken word.

Among the most memorable experiences of my mission was the singing of “Called to Serve” (Hymns, number 249) with hundreds of other missionaries in the Missionary Training Center. The excitement, enthusiasm, and zeal of the missionaries around me were infectious. Each time we sang, the Spirit of the Lord bore witness to me that the gospel was true. I cannot adequately describe the emotions I had during those times, but I felt closer to heaven.

The same thing happened when I reached my assigned area. I looked forward to our district and zone meetings, where we sang the hymns together. Singing strengthened me and helped give me the spark I needed to continue the work. These and numerous other experiences have helped me realize and appreciate the vital role of music in our worship services.

Prelude music helps set the tone for Church meetings. It is a call to worship. The prelude helps us worship, clearing our minds of worldly thoughts and providing a setting for quiet meditation.

Kathleen Reel, my former organ teacher and an organist and music director for 30 years, said, “The purpose of the prelude is to communicate to the hearts and minds of the worshipers, to prepare them to receive the succeeding elements of the service, to create an atmosphere conducive for worship, and to bring unity of spirit to the congregation.”

Unfortunately, prelude music often serves only as background for the congregation’s greetings and conversations. Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles emphasized the need for reverence in our chapels:

“Foyers are built into our [meetinghouses] to allow for the greeting and chatter that are typical of people who love one another. However, when we step into the chapel, we must!—each of us must—watch ourselves lest we be guilty of intruding when someone is struggling to feel delicate spiritual communications. …

“Irreverent conduct in our chapels is worthy of a reminder, if not reproof. Leaders should teach that reverence invites revelation.”

Carefully selected prelude music can contribute to the sacred atmosphere of the chapel.

Music helps fulfill what Elder Richard L. Evans (1906–71) of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said is the purpose of a good worship service: “to direct the minds … away from lesser things, and to focus … thinking and attention on our Father in Heaven.” Music can serve as a form of prayer, for the Lord said, “The song of the righteous is a prayer unto me” (D&C 25:12).

The preface in our hymnbook, written by the First Presidency, states:

“Inspirational music is an essential part of our church meetings. The hymns invite the Spirit of the Lord, create a feeling of reverence, unify us as members, and provide a way for us to offer praises to the Lord.

“Some of the greatest sermons are preached by the singing of hymns. Hymns move us to repentance and good works, build testimony and faith, comfort the weary, console the mourning, and inspire us to endure to the end.”

Special musical selections can also edify us and demonstrate our praise and gratitude.

Church members with music callings bear a significant responsibility in worship services. When I was a ward music director, I pondered whether the hymns I had chosen for the next meeting were appropriate for the meeting’s theme. I asked myself what I could do to strengthen and inspire ward members through the singing of the hymns.

Elder Packer said, “I believe that those who choose, conduct, present, and accompany the music may influence the spirit of reverence in our meetings more than a speaker does.” Music directors and members who present musical selections in worship services need to make sure that the music’s message is appropriate for true worship of the Savior: the music is not intended as a showpiece for the participants.

In any endeavor, we receive more satisfaction and enjoyment when we are actively involved. Participation is key to enjoying all the blessings of the restored gospel, whether it is serving in a leadership position, teaching, going visiting teaching or home teaching, or worshiping through music.

Elder Packer urged parents, Church leaders, and teachers to “maintain a spirit of reverence in meetings [and] encourage participation in congregational singing.” He promised that if we do so, our spiritual power will increase and the Lord will “pour out his Spirit upon us more abundantly.”

Unfortunately, many people don’t sing—or don’t sing out—because they think they don’t have “singing voices.” However, the purpose of congregational singing is to worship and praise God, not to perform. We should not be afraid to sing out, even if we have a less-than-perfect voice.

Alexander Schreiner, one of the great Tabernacle organists, recalled a story about someone who asked a music director how he could stand to hear old Brother Stanton bellow off-key at Church gatherings. “The wise old leader replied: ‘Brother Stanton is one of our most devout worshippers, and when he bellows he is a supreme musician. … Don’t pay too much attention to the sounds he makes. If you do, you may miss the music.’”

Regardless of our musical ability, the Lord knows the intents of our hearts. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, He said, “My soul delighteth in the song of the heart” (D&C 25:12).

Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles emphasized the importance of sincere singing of the hymns: “We who have ‘felt to sing the song of redeeming love’ (Alma 5:26) need to keep singing that we may draw ever closer to him who has inspired sacred music and commanded that it be used to worship him.”

Sacred music can heal, inspire, teach, and edify. As we strive to make uplifting music a part of our lives and to “make a joyful noise unto the Lord,” we will “come before his presence with singing” (Ps. 100:1–2).

Consider the following questions to help apply this article in family home evening, in a lesson at church, or in your personal life:

- Why is music able to reach us when the spoken word might not?

- What attitude are we conveying toward the Savior and His gospel when we choose not to participate in congregational hymn singing?

- How can we effectively use hymns outside Sunday meetings?
