S. Kent Brown, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Between the Testaments (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 14

Samaritans

Sanballat sat astride his mule. It was a two-day ride from Samaria to Jerusalem. In recent months, he had made the trip several times. This time he was going to visit Jerusalem officials in an attempt to persuade them again to let his people join them in their effort to rebuild the temple. Indeed, the prior temple had been sacred to his ancestors, the people of the northern kingdom of Israel. So far, those who had returned from Babylon had resisted his entreaties, even his threats. They were an arrogant bunch, even though they lived in heaps of rubbish and partly rebuilt homes. It had become clear that they thought of themselves as a purer race of Israelites than his own people. But he hoped that one more effort on his part would bring an unparalleled opportunity to his people to participate in restoring God's house among them. He looked down on the bobbing head of his mount and, with his heels, urged the mule to move faster. Sundown was approaching.

The origin and history of the Samaritans appear to be straightforward. But they are not. Most questions arise on the basis of information preserved in the Old Testament. One key passage, which draws everyone's attention, has to do with the loss of the northern Israelite tribes following the destruction of the capital city Samaria in 722 B.C. by the Assyrian King Sargon II ( 722-705 B.C.) (see 2 Kings 17:22-41).

The Assyrian empire, along with Egypt, had been a major force in the ancient Near East for more than two centuries before its army besieged and then destroyed Samaria. According to Sargon's record, he carried off 27,290 captives and, in accordance with Assyrian policies, relocated them to other places within his kingdom. He replaced these people from "the cities of Samaria" with others from "Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim" (2 Kings 17:24). These people brought their own gods to worship. But when "the Lord sent lions among them, which slew some of them," they appealed to the Assyrian king for help in learning how to placate "the God of the land," namely, Jehovah (17:25-26). Then "one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Beth-el, and taught them how they should fear the Lord" (17:28). Beth-el, of course, had been a sanctuary city for the Israelites of the northern kingdom (1 Kings 12:25-29).

There were two results. First, the people who had replaced the Israelites "in the cities of Samaria" eventually "feared the Lord" that is, they learned how to worship Him properly. On the other hand, they "served their own gods" (2 Kings 17:24, 32-33). Hence, the citizens of the kingdom of Judah to the south came to distrust them as fellow worshipers of Jehovah because they "served their graven images" (17:41). The second result concerned the subsequent ethnic makeup of the populace in the region north of Judah, which was mixed. There is good reason to believe that the Assyrians left many of the northern Israelites in their villages and towns, in contrast to citizens of "the cities of Samaria" whom they deported (17:24; emphasis added). After all, King Sargon claimed to relocate fewer than thirty thousand people. And the total population must have exceeded that figure, even accounting for the casualties resulting from the Assyrian attack. Thus, over time, members of families and clans both the new move-ins and the natives married one another and brought into being generations whom the people of Judah saw as an impure race.

But is this the whole story? We must remember that the people seen in this harsh light were descendants of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, who inhabited the region north of Jerusalem. We observe first that, according to the book of Jeremiah, Israelites from this area were still coming to the broken altar in Jerusalem after Nebuchadnezzar's army had destroyed the city in 587 B.C., 135 years after the fall of Samaria. We read that "there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, . . . with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the Lord" (Jeremiah 41:5). Apparently, these eighty men were exercising a right of worship that they and their forebears had enjoyed in Jerusalem. Moreover, there seems to be no stigma attached to their presence at the altar. On the contrary, they felt that their attendance would be welcomed. Apparently, none among the priestly authorities officiating at the altar in those bleak days refused them opportunity to worship on grounds that they were somehow not true Israelites. Their self-perception that they were fully of the house of Israel seems to lie behind the later offer by people from the north to join in rebuilding the temple (Ezra 4:1-3).

There is a second point that arises from the Book of Mormon. Nowhere in the narrative of 1 and 2 Nephi do we hear that Lehi and Sariah and their family were excluded from the temple because they were of the tribe of Manasseh and were from the north. Naturally, both Lehi and Sariah may have been able to trace their complete ancestries back to purely Israelite progenitors. Even so, it seems clear that genealogical questions had not yet raised their heads in the case of people who hailed from the region where the Assyrian king had settled non-Israelites three or four generations before. Those questions would become crucial only after the return of the Jewish exiles from Babylon.

One of the most compelling evidences that Samaritans of the north enjoyed reputations as Israelites, at least in the eyes of some Jews in the south, is the fact that at least two sons of high priests married daughters of Samaritan governors. In each case, the name of the governor was Sanballat. From all appearances, this name seems to have been passed from father to son for three or four generations within the governor's family. In the first instance, we read that during Nehemiah's second term of office, probably about 430 B.C., he expelled "one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest" who had married Sanballat's daughter (Nehemiah 13:28). Although this marriage may have been political intended to cement relations between the people of Jerusalem and Samaria it is also apparent that the family of the high priest saw nothing objectionable in marrying a son to a Samaritan daughter. The second case comes to us from Josephus. Not long before Alexander the Great came to Palestine in 332 B.C., the high priest's brother, a man named Manasseh, married a daughter of the governor of Samaria. By this point, Ezra's reforms had been in place for almost a century, including the stipulation that Jewish people not marry outsiders. As we might expect, leaders in Jerusalem later hounded Manasseh out of their society. But we should not miss the point that, even in the social and religious climate of the day, the high priest's family ventured to marry one of their sons to a Samaritan girl (Jewish Antiquities 11.7.2; 11.8.2).

In all of this, it seems that the central issue concerns people's perceptions of one another. On the side of those who came back from exile in Babylon, most saw Samaritans as at least semiapostates who had married gentiles. As a result, they disapproved of them. On the other side, the remnants of the tribes of Manasseh and Ephraim saw themselves as Israelites, entitled to the same blessings that God had promised their common forebears, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Somehow, these two peoples never did reconcile their differing perceptions, even though they both embraced the celebrations mandated by the law of Moses and both revered its words.

These perceptions of one another in some cases, misperceptions appear in the name "Samaritans." It occurs once in the Old Testament and is attached to idolatry, making it a term of derision (2 Kings 17:29). From all appearances, the name was given them by outsiders namely, the people of Jerusalem and Judah. For their part, as Josephus reminds us, the Samaritans preferred to be known as "descended from Joseph" (Jewish Antiquities 9.14.3). In fact, the name Samaritans derives from the Hebrew word sha¯mer¦¯m, which means "keepers" that is, keepers of the Law. Thus, in its far-off origins, the name Samaritans may have to do with an honored profession of scribes who watched over and preserved the law of Moses.

As we have seen, the Samaritans' relationship with their distant Jewish relatives defined in large measure who they were. The question Who is an Israelite? stood at the forefront of tensions that surged and ebbed over centuries of time. As noted previously, the Samaritans' first real clue that the returning exiles would not embrace them came in the exiles' rebuff of their offer in 538 or 537 B.C. to help rebuild the altar and temple on the spot where the Samaritans had evidently been worshiping for more than fifty years (Ezra 4:1-3). The second moment of tension came when Nehemiah began work on the walls in 445. Relations grew strained enough that the Samaritans even threatened to take military action against people in Jerusalem, although matters seem never to have come to that pitch (Nehemiah 4:7-8). A third instance doubtless arose when Ezra obliged all in Judah to divorce their foreign spouses, probably in 428 B.C. There must have been Samaritan spouses among those who were forced to depart. And the pain and anger in Samaritan families following this action would have been intense, giving rise to a hardening of already-strained relationships.

Evidence that relationships were strained in the fifth century when Nehemiah and Ezra were active appears in the Elephantine papyri from Upper Egypt. Within the preserved texts are letters both to the leaders of Jerusalem and to those in Samaria asking for help in building a Jewish temple in Upper Egypt. The fact that the Egyptian Jews addressed letters to leaders of both groups hints strongly that the members of the Jewish garrison at Elephantine were aware of sharp differences between the two communities.

But the Jews of Jerusalem were not the only source of challenges for Samaritans. On the positive side, we presume that Samaritans lived rather peaceably and well during the years of the Persian hegemony (538-333 B.C.). The Persians seem to have appointed a regular succession of local governors in Samaria. At times, these governors had responsibility for Judah; at other times, they did not. Then came Alexander, and Samaritan life began to fill with extreme challenges.

When Alexander finally razed the impregnable island city of Tyre in 332 B.C., everyone in neighboring lands took note. As we have observed, Josephus tells us that the Samaritans thereafter supplied troops for Alexander's foray into Egypt. Everything seemed fine. Then, inexplicably, the Samaritans turned against Alexander's newly appointed governor, a man named Andromachus, and killed him. In reprisal, Alexander sent troops against the city of Samaria, destroying it and forcing survivors to flee. He resettled Macedonian colonists from his home area in Samaria, and the city thereafter remained chiefly Greek. Concerning the Samaritan refugees, a cave in the area has yielded the skeletal remains of some two hundred people men, women, and children who died by suffocation when Alexander's soldiers evidently built fires at the entrance of the cave and filled it with smoke. The cave has also yielded legal papyri, called the Samaria papyri, that offer a glimpse into Samaritan life of the fourth century B.C.

Some survivors of Alexander's reprisal traveled southeast to the base of Mount Gerizim, where they refounded the city of Shechem. It was about this time that the Samaritans built their temple on this mountain. Although archaeologists have not identified the remains of this structure, and they therefore presume that the building was modest in size, Josephus relates that it was built to keep the priest Manasseh from divorcing his Samaritan wife, the daughter of Sanballat, whom we mentioned earlier. Josephus also places the building of the temple in the period just before Alexander arrived (Jewish Antiquities 11.8.2). Whatever the case, the Samaritans were quite aware of the high and holy significance of the general locale. For instance, they knew that in this place Abraham had received a revelation from God and, as we have seen, that the conquering Israelites had erected their earliest sanctuary here in the land of Canaan (Genesis 12:6-7; Joshua 8:30-35). It is interesting in this context to note that the Samaritan woman whom Jesus met at Jacob's well wanted to talk about "the [sacred] place" of worship on Mount Gerizim (John 4:20).

According to Judges 9:37, the area of Shechem was known as "the middle of the land" or "the center of the land." Significantly, the Septuagint adds weight to this notion by translating this expression as "navel of the earth." This concept, known in other ancient religious traditions as well, in effect says that a connection exists between heaven and earth in this place, something like what Jacob discovered at Luz or Bethel. As a matter of fact, a person builds altars and makes solemn and sacred covenants in such places (see Genesis 28:10-22; 35:6-7). Hence, there are reasons that the Samaritans would venture to build a sanctuary away from Jerusalem, though they had likely been worshiping at the Jerusalem sanctuary in modest numbers even after the exiles had rebuilt the temple. Evidently, the need for a temple had not arisen beforehand. The fact that the Samaritans chose to build their own temple in the later fourth century indicates that relationships with their Jewish cousins had gone especially sour.

Little is known about Samaritan fortunes during the century of Ptolemaic control over Palestine (301-198 B.C.). We assume that life went on rather normally, as it seemingly did among Jews. But after the conquest of the region by the Seleucid King Antiochus III in 198, matters began taking a downward turn. Samaritans found themselves caught in the same Hellenistic grip as the citizens of Jerusalem. As with the Jews, the Samaritans must have seen many of their traditional ways come under subtle attack from those in their society who favored the ways of the Greeks. Hence, when Antiochus IV (175-163 B.C.) undertook the Hellenizing of the Jews, he also forced Greek culture onto the Samaritans, who, surprisingly, acquiesced more readily than their Jewish cousins. What is unclear is whether the Samaritans accepted Antiochus' demand that they rededicate their temple to Zeus willingly or unwillingly. According to 2 Maccabees 6:2, in 167 B.C., the Samaritans were forced to rededicate their temple, as were the people of Jerusalem. In contrast, according to Josephus, the Samaritans petitioned Antiochus to allow them to name their temple in honor of Zeus (Jewish Antiquities 12.5.5-6). Whatever the case, the Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim thereafter bore the name of Zeus until its destruction by the Jewish leader John Hyrcanus in 128 B.C. The Samaritans did not attempt to reconstruct their temple, although they maintained a worship site on the mountain.

It seems apparent that the attack by the forces of John Hyrcanus in 128 was the final blow that severed relations between Samaritans and Jews. In addition, any good feelings would not have survived Hyrcanus' second attack in 107 B.C. when he devastated the Samaritan countryside. We wonder whether Hyrcanus' anger arose in part because the Samaritans had not returned their temple to the worship of Jehovah as the Jews had done after Judas Maccabee liberated the Jerusalem temple in 164 B.C. In the bitter Samaritan view, "the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans" (John 4:9). Such a state led to Samaritans' refusing hospitality to Jesus and His disciples (Luke 9:52-53). Worse than that, and possibly in reprisal for Hyrcanus' acts, Samaritans later attacked Jewish pilgrims and even desecrated the Jerusalem temple on one occasion (Jewish Antiquities 18.2.2; 20.6.1).

Although relationships worsened with people in Judea, and even in Galilee, Samaritans shared basic values with the people of Qumran, who were the keepers of the Dead Sea Scrolls. It is not clear whether Samaritans cultivated relations with Qumranites, but they held common beliefs. Most suggestive of at least an indirect tie is the discovery in Cave 4 at the Dead Sea of a fragmentary text of Exodus whose readings agree with the Samaritan Pentateuch, the scripture of the Samaritans (4QpaleoExodm). As with all Israelites, both groups observed the Sabbath and practiced circumcision on the eighth day. But both groups adopted certain practices and distinctive views about themselves that converge. For example, both groups called themselves "the sons of light" to underscore their special status before God. Each venerated Moses as the most important of God's past prophets. Both placed a high emphasis on Moses' prophecy in Deuteronomy 18:18 about a future prophet who would lead God's true people. Neither group celebrated the Jewish festivals of Purim and Hanukkah, which were late additions to the Jewish sacred calendar and had not been mandated by the Old Testament. Both groups followed a rather complex calendrical reckoning of holy days that rested on both the sun and moon, whereas the calendar used at the Jerusalem temple rested chiefly on seasonal observations of the moon alone.

In light of all of this, how should we view the Samaritans? In part, their Jewish cousins misunderstood them. In part, they misunderstood the Jews. Throughout the entire intertestamental period, the most bracing question that grew directly out of their relationship with Jews was, Who is an Israelite? As for Samaritans, they saw themselves as fully Israelite, even in the era when many adopted Greek ways and allowed their temple to serve the worship of Zeus. There are hints that Jesus and, later, His followers held Samaritans in high esteem, even though, as mentioned, on at least one occasion Samaritans refused hospitality to Jesus and His disciples simply because they were on their way to Jerusalem (Luke 9:52-53). It is telling that, after the Savior's resurrection, one of the first destinations for His disciples was Samaria (Acts 8:4-17). In fact, in the Savior's charge to the eleven before his ascension, He directed them to go to Samaria (Acts 1:8). Further, in at least two accounts from the Gospels, Jesus held up Samaritans as examples to His hearers. The first consists of Jesus' parable of the Good Samaritan, who, when others refused to aid a helpless and beaten man, "went to him, and bound up his wounds, . . . and took care of him" (Luke 10:30-35). The second arises in the story of Jesus' healing of ten lepers. He was traveling "through the midst of Samaria and Galilee," presumably along the common border area. When He and His disciples "entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers." As Mosaic law required, the ten "stood afar off" while they begged Jesus to "have mercy" on them. He did, and "they were cleansed." As the ten skipped off to show themselves "unto the priests," as the Law demanded, one "turned back" and "fell down on his face at [Jesus'] feet, giving him thanks." The man "was a Samaritan." Not seeking to hide the fact that the man was a Samaritan, for Jesus called him "this stranger," He said to the man in the hearing of His followers, "Thy faith hath made thee whole" (Luke 17:11-19). From these accounts we can draw three conclusions. First, the Samaritan was as concerned as the other lepers to follow the requirements of the Mosaic law. Second, Jesus held Samaritans in the same esteem that He held fellow Jews. Third, the kind of faith that invites the blessings of heaven is not limited to geography or ethnicity. And Samaritans serve as prime examples of these principles in these New Testament stories.

For Further Reading

John Bright, A History of Israel, 3d ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1981), 269-76, 360-457.

Keith Crim et al., eds., The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, suppl. vol. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1976), s.v. "Gerizim, Mount," "Samaria," "Samaria Papyri," "Samaritan Pentateuch," "Samaritans," and "Shechem (City)."

David Noel Freedman et al., eds., The Anchor Bible Dictionary (New York: Doubleday, 1992), s.v. "Gerizim, Mount," "Palestine, Administration of," "Samaria (City)," "Samaritan Pentateuch," "Samaritans," and "Shechem (Place)."

Joachim Jeremias, Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1969), 352-58.

Martin Noth, The History of Israel, 2d ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1960), 253-69.

Stephen E. Robinson, "The Settling of the Gospels," in Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet, eds., Studies in Scripture, Volume Five: The Gospels (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), 10-37.

Emil Schürer, The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ, 3 vols., rev. ed. by Geza Vermes, Fergus Millar, and Matthew Black (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1973-87), 2:15-20, 160-64.

Shemaryahu Talmon, "The Emergence of Jewish Sectarianism in the Early Second Temple Period," in Patrick D. Miller Jr. et al., eds., Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987), 587-616.
