One way we as covenant women can help care for those in need and keep the covenants we have made in the temple and at baptism is to prayerfully fast “with real intent” and to offer a generous fast offering to help those in need. The law of the fast is an ancient commandment established by the Lord to bless you and me—and all of God’s children.

I can personally testify of the powerful healing blessings of the law of the fast in my own life. Living this merciful law has afforded me great comfort and provided a lifeline of heavenly blessings to meet great needs.

In preparing this message, I wondered if my experiences related to the fast would be worth sharing. Then the Spirit stilled my mind and gently whispered to my heart that because of this regular and beautiful sacrifice in my life, the Lord’s Spirit has attended me many times and has given me healing and strength beyond my own. I could almost hear the question, “Where do you think the strength to do the impossible has come from all these years?” In that moment, I realized that the blessings of the law of the fast are woven deeply into all aspects of my life, and living this law has given me an added measure of God’s power to do His will and become as He is. Fasting in the Lord’s way can increase our access to the blessings of God’s power in our lives.

When I was young, my family struggled to make ends meet, and I remember receiving groceries from the bishops’ storehouse. They were made available through the generous fast offerings of other Saints. Their sacrifice contributed to blessing me and my family during a difficult time. I feel blessed to have the opportunity now to fast and contribute to others in need.

It is a privilege and blessing that we can give something, no matter how small, to help others in need. And in the process, we find our own relief in Jesus Christ.

The Savior taught us through His prophet about the powerful purposes and blessings of the fast:

“Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

“Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?”

We have the opportunity to fast regularly, once each month on fast Sunday, and donate a fast offering to help those in need. We can “give an offering that is at least equal to the value of the meals not eaten.” We are also “encouraged to be generous and give more than the value of these meals if [we] can.”

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin (1917–2008) of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught: “Fast offerings are used for one purpose only: to bless the lives of those in need. Every dollar given to the bishop as a fast offering goes to assist the poor. When donations exceed local needs, they are passed along to fulfill the needs elsewhere.”

When we fast, we prayerfully humble ourselves before the Lord and choose to refrain from eating and drinking for two meals or a period of 24 hours. If one’s health does not permit customary fasting, President Russell M. Nelson (1924–2025) counseled us to “decide what would constitute a sacrifice for you, as you remember the supreme sacrifice the Savior made for you.”

Fasting is connected to sacrifice, and sacrifice is symbolic of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, and His Atonement. We have the opportunity to reverently consider His sacrifice as we seek inspiration to know what to fast for and what to fast from. We can also think on the Savior throughout our fast. I’m learning that the Lord intends for us to learn of Him and to draw closer to Him through this prayerful experience.

In the Lord’s Church, we are also encouraged to fast when we are in need of divine assistance.

I remember one summer I was very unsettled and hurt by a disagreement with a family member. Several family members, including the one who troubled me, decided to come together and counsel about it. I earnestly prayed and fasted to know what I should say or do. I needed more wisdom and love than what I had.

When we met that evening, the Lord’s Spirit mercifully softened our hearts. I remember I was taught by the words I spoke; they did not seem to be my own. They were filled with love, clarity, power, and the Spirit. I cried as I felt purely that God loved my family and wanted to heal us. I witnessed the Lord’s power, healing, and revelation come through earnest prayer and fasting. The windows of heaven opened widely that evening.

This experience reminded me of the blessings of the fast that we learn about in Isaiah:

“Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. …

“And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, … and thou shalt be … like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

“And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.”

Jesus Christ is “The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths.” He made a way to heal every sorrow and heartache and overcome every weakness and sin. He can restore, mend, and strengthen as we turn to Him in mighty prayer and fasting.

There are many great needs in the world, so many that it may seem overwhelming. You may wonder, what can I do to make a real difference as a covenant woman? One thing we can do is purposefully live and even love the law of the fast and contribute a generous fast offering for those in need.

As we do, I know the Lord will bring His spiritual and temporal relief to you and me—and to His children in need. And we will grow in our knowledge of His ways and in our love for God and our neighbor. May we seek to make a renewed commitment to live this blessed and powerful commandment.
