I was born in Cambodia, where most people are Buddhists. After the Khmer Rouge regime killed so many people, many of the survivors didn’t understand why, if there was a God, He would let this happen to our people. At 14 years old, I wondered the same thing.

After the regime ended, several religions began taking hold in Cambodia. I was confused because the churches taught so many different things. My family remained Buddhists, but I wanted answers to the questions of my soul: where did we come from, why are we here, and where are we going after this life?

One day as I returned from school, my aunt told me that two young men wearing white shirts and ties had come to her home talking about Jesus Christ. She was surprised because they spoke good Cambodian. I wanted to learn about Christ. I wanted to know who created us. I wondered, “Who is God? Is it Buddha, Jesus Christ, or some other god?”

My aunt and I accepted the missionaries. During the first discussion, we felt the Spirit telling us that what they said was true. They gave us a Book of Mormon and promised that if we read it, pondered it, and asked God with a sincere heart, having faith in Him, He would manifest the truth unto us. It made a lot of sense to me. I accepted the gospel, along with my aunt and her children. About a month later, we were all baptized and confirmed.

I attended seminary for four years and institute for one year and served as a seminary teacher. When I was 19, I felt I should go on a mission. I talked to my parents, and they said perhaps it was a good idea, so I put in my application. A month later I received my call to serve in the Sacramento California Mission, English and Cambodian speaking.

Because I accepted my call, God has given me many blessings. My younger brother wasn’t making the best decisions. I fasted and prayed for him, and a miracle happened before I left for my mission. I baptized him, and he is now active in the Church and attending seminary. My family received many other blessings, and the Lord also poured out blessings upon me during my mission.

Jesus is the Christ. He lives. He loves each of us and knows us by name. He knows our challenges and obstacles, and I know He’ll bless us as we strive to keep His commandments.
