Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

12CONVERSION OF PARLEY P.PRATT

12By Himself

12

12(Parley P. Pratt was converted to the Gospel by reading the Book of Mormon, a copy of which was lent to him by a stranger a few months after the book was published. The following interesting account of his conversion and baptism is taken from a sermon he delivered in Salt Lake City in 1856.—P. N.)

12THERE are some, I presume, in this congregation who personally have been strangers to me and who have not heard my testimony. I have been acquainted in this Church and connected with it, from the first year of its organization in the wilderness of western New York. It was organized on the 6th day of April, 1830, and I was baptized into it about the first of September following.

12When I first became a member of this Church, one small room could have contained all the members there then were in the world, and that too without being crowded, for at that time I presume there were not fifty.

The first thing that attracted my attention towards this work was the Book of Mormon; I happened to see a copy of it. Some man nearly a stranger to it, and not particularly a believer in it, happened to get hold of a copy; he made mention of it to me, and gave me the privilege of coming to his house and reading it. This was at a place about a day's journey from the residence of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his father, and while I was returning to the work of my ministry; for I was then traveling and preaching, being connected with a society of people sometimes called Campbellites or Reformed Baptists.

I had diligently searched the scriptures, and prayed to God to open my mind that I might understand them; and he had poured His Spirit and understanding into my heart, so that I did understand the scriptures in a good degree, the letter of the Gospel, its forms and first principles in their truth, as they are written in the Bible. These things were opened to my mind, but the power, the gifts and the authority of the gospel I knew were lacking, and I did really expect that they would be restored, because I knew that the things that were predicted could never be fulfilled, until that power and that authority were restored. I also had an understanding of the literal fulfillment of the prophecies in the Bible, so that I really did believe in and hope for the literal restoration of Israel, the cutting off of wickedness, the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ and the triumph of His kingdom on the earth. All this I was looking for, and the Spirit seemed to whisper to my mind that I should see it in my day.

Under these circumstances, I was traveling to impart the light which I had to others, and while doing this I found as before stated, the Book of Mormon. I read it carefully and diligently, a great share of it, without knowing that the priesthood had been restored, without ever having heard of anything called "Mormonism," or having any idea of such Church and people.

There were the witnesses and their testimony to the Book, to its translation and to the ministration of angels, and there was the testimony of the translator, but I had not seen them, I had not heard of them, and hence I had no idea of their organization, or of their priesthood. All I knew about the matter was what, as a stranger, I could gather from the book; but as I read I was convinced that it was true, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon me while I read and enlightened my mind, convinced my judgment and riveted the truth upon my understanding, so that I knew that the book was true, just as well as a man knows the daylight from the dark night, or any other things that can be implanted in his understanding. I did not know it by any audible voice from heaven, by any ministration of an angel, by any open vision; but I knew it by the spirit of understanding in my heart, by the light that was in me. I knew it was true, because it was light and had come in fulfillment of the scriptures, and I bore testimony of its truth to the neighbors that came in during the first day that I sat reading it, at the house of an old Baptist deacon named Hamblin.

15This same Spirit led me to inquire after and search out the translator, Joseph Smith; and I traveled on foot during the whole of a very hot day in August, blistering my feet, in order to go where I heard he lived; and at night I arrived in the neighborhood of the little village of Manchester, then in Ontario County, New York. On the way I overtook a man driving some cows, and inquired for Joseph Smith, the finder and translator of the Book of Mormon. He told me that he lived away off, something more than a hundred miles from there, in the State of Pennsylvania. I then inquired for the father of the Prophet, and he pointed to the house, but said that the old gentleman had gone on a journey to some distant place. After a while, in conversation, the man told me that his name was Hyrum Smith, and that he was a brother to the Prophet Joseph. This was the first Latter-day Saint that I had ever seen.

15He invited me to his home, where I saw mother Smith, and Hyrum Smith's wife and Sister Rockwell, the mother of Orin Porter Rockwell. We sat up talking nearly all night, for I had not much spare time, having two appointments out and a long day's journey for a man to walk. I had to return the next morning, and we conversed during most of the night, without being either sleepy or weary.

During that conversation I learned something of the rights of the Church, its organization, the restoration of the priesthood and many important truths. I felt to go back and fill the two appointments given out, and that closed my ministry, as I felt that I had no authority and that I would go back and obey the priesthood which was again on the earth.

I attended to my appointments, and was back again the next morning to Brother Hyrum's. He made me a present of the Book of Mormon, and I felt richer in the possession of that book, or the knowledge contained in it, than I would if I could have had a warrantee deed to all the farms and buildings in that country, and it was one of the finest regions in the world. I walked awhile, and then sat down and read awhile, for it was not my mind to read the book through at once. I would read, and then read on. I was filled with joy and gladness, my spirit was made rich and I was made to realize, almost as vividly as if I had seen it myself, that the Lord Jesus Christ did appear in His own proper person, in His resurrected body, and minister to the people in America in ancient times. He had surely risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, and did come down on the American continent, in the land Bountiful on the northern part of South America, and did minister to the remnants of Joseph called the Nephites, and did show His resurrected body unto them.

They did handle Him, see Him and examine the wounds that were pierced in His hands, His side and His feet; and they bathed them with their tears and kissed them, and thousands of them did bear record of these facts. He did deliver to them His gospel in its fulness and plainness, in the presence of the thousands, and did command them to write it in a book; and He promised that that book should come to light in latter days, in time for the great restoration of all Israel and the fulfillment of the prophecies relating to the great work of the last days.

I was made to realize this, and to bring it home to my faith, my senses and my knowledge, with a warmth, love and assurance that I could scarcely contain, for I had either studied and seen Him in my reflections, or I had heard His voice whispering to me. Do you not think that I rejoiced?

As before stated, I fulfilled my two appointments; crowds heard me and were interested, and solicited me to make more appointments. I told them that I would not, that I had a duty to perform for myself. I bid them farewell, and returned to Hyrum Smith, who took me to a place, about twentyfive miles off, in Seneca County, New York. He there introduced me to the Three Witnesses whose names appear at the beginning of the Book of Mormon, also to the Eight Witnesses. I conversed with Oliver Cowdery, one of the Three Witnesses, and on the next day we repaired to Seneca Lake, where I was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, then the second Apostle in this Church, and a man who had received the ministration of an angel, as you can learn by reading his testimony.

After being baptized, I was confirmed in a little meeting during the same day, was full of the Holy Ghost, and was ordained an Elder. This transpired on the first day of September, 1830, and from that day to this I have endeavored to magnify my calling, and to honor the priesthood which God has given me by testifying, to both small and great, of the things that he has revealed in these last days.
