Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkStevenson, Edward32THE HOME OF MY BOYHOOD

32By EDWARD STEVENSON

32(The following interesting narrative by Edward Stevenson, a former member of the First Council of Seventy, was originally published in the Juvenile Instructor in 1894. It illustrates the successful missionary efforts of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon in the early days of the Church.—P. N.)

32MORMONISM was first preached in Michigan in a little schoolhouse at Pontiac in the year 1833. Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon preached here the following year, and a branch of the Church was organized in the neighborhood.

32Sixty-two years ago the writer went to school on those very grounds; and connected with the schoolhouse are many interesting reminiscences of my youth. Our family in those early times owned two hundred acres of land adjoining the schoolhouse.

In November, 1894, I visited my old home and school grounds. Our home is divided up into prosperous farms, one of them adjoining a beautiful little lake, the sight of which brought back to my mind recollections of fishing, hunting, sailing, and playful times of the long, long ago. My father, although a cooper by trade, built a sail boat, and was experimenting on the little inland sea. All went on quite well until a gale suddenly and unexpectedly came up and overturned the little, frail craft, and came near costing him his life. While all was consternation among those who were safe on shore, my next to eldest brother, Joseph, hastened to his rescue with a tan trough, previously used by a frontier hunter to do some home-made tanning on the old farm, before my father bought him out. Providentially the rescue was successfully made; father, craft and all were safely landed. On my late visit I took a look over the old homestead, and went fishing one evening with spear and torchlight.

As above stated, it was on those school grounds where two Mormon Elders introduced the restored Gospel in the year 1833; and in 1834 Joseph Smith the Prophet preached with such power as had not there ever before been witnessed in this nineteenth century. The brother of the Prophet, Hyrum, also the father of them, Joseph senior, were with him. Let me as a living witness speak of the moving, stirring sensation created in this town and surrounding country of the then Territory of Michigan. The Church was only in its infancy then, and much less evilly spoken of; less opposition was met and fewer lies were in circulation respecting the Saints. Infidelity was scarcely thought or spoken of, and skepticism very rare in that period. Consequently there were more who were willing to listen, reflect upon and digest the new doctrines, and eventually to obey them.

There have been alterations and improvements made regarding the schoolhouse, but these are the exact premises where people thronged in large numbers, more than could be able to find even standing space, in and around the house. Not the least disturbance or resistance was offered until Satan came also; but the good word had taken deep root as seed sown on good ground, which could not be rooted out. I can very well remember many of the words of the boy Prophet as they were uttered in simplicity, but with a power which was irresistible to all present, although at that time I could not understand how it was that so few comparatively obeyed it. Three elder brothers of mine, as well as our neighbors, repeatedly in my hearing spoke highly of the new doctrines—that they were scriptural, so plainly set forth, and that, too, with such force as never before was experienced in this section of country. Here are some of the Prophet's words, as uttered in the schoolhouse. With uplifted hand he said: "I am a witness that there is a God, for I saw Him in open day, while praying in a silent grove, in the spring of 1820." He further testified that God, the Eternal Father, pointing to a separate personage, in the likeness of himself, said: "This is my Beloved Son hear ye Him." O how these words thrilled my entire system, and filled me with joy unspeakable to behold one who, like Paul the apostle of olden time, could with boldness testify that he had been in the presence of Jesus Christ!

The young Prophet further said that in 1823, three years after his first vision, while praying in his father's house [I have been so highly favored of the Lord as to have been in the very house where the servant of God said he was fervently praying], when suddenly the house was filled with light brighter than the noon-day sun, in the midst of which there stood an angel, who said he was sent from the presence of God, as a messenger to him. The angel instructed him regarding a marvelous work that God was about to bring to pass, and that he, Joseph, was the one who was selected to be God's servant and mouthpiece to bring about and establish the great and marvelous work. "Three times," said the young man, "did this angel continue his visits during the same night, each time repeating the same instructions, only extending some little, and quoting several passages of scripture relating to the great work which was to come forth." In closing the last visit the angel invited the boy to meet him on a neighboring hill, two miles away from his father's house, where he would give him still further instructions and permit him to see a book of gold plates containing a history of two nations who had previously inhabited this great land of America. So plainly was this made known that on the next day Joseph said he was able to find the exact place, and met the angel as requested.

36More than two hours were occupied during that evening meeting, and so absorbing and interesting was the discourse that no one seemed to be weary, or to realize so much time had been consumed. A succession of meetings were held, in which the Prophet was joined, and very interestingly, too, by the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. During his visit to this branch the Prophet testified that he was instructed to organize a Church after the pattern of the Church which Jesus organized, with Twelve Apostles, Seventies, Elders, gifts and blessings, with signs following, as found recorded in the sixteenth chapter of Mark, which he read and explained; adding that God had fulfilled the words of John the Revelator, "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come." The angel had done his work; the true Church was set up with, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, with gifts, etc.; "And as a servant of God," said Joseph, "I promise you, inasmuch as you will repent and be baptized for the remission of your sins, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, and speak with tongues, and the signs shall follow you, and by this you may test me as a Prophet sent of God."
