Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

90MISSION TO ENGLAND

90By Brigham Young

90(While the Saints were beginning the settlement of Nauvoo, in the fall of 1839, eight of the quorum of Twelve Apostles, were sent by the Prophet Joseph Smith to preach the Gospel in England. In our entire Church history there are no more thrilling accounts of successful missionary work than those left us by these faithful and devoted brethren.

90The following is from a sermon delivered by President Brigham Young at Salt Lake City in 1856.—P. N.)

90IN company with several of the Twelve I was sent to England in 1839. We started from home without purse or scrip, and most of the Twelve were sick; and those who were not sick when they started were sick on the way to Ohio; Brother Taylor was left to die by the roadside, by old Father Coltrin, though he did not die. I was not able to walk to the river, not so far as across this block, no, not more than half as far; I had to be helped to the river in order to get into a boat to cross it. This was about our situation. I had not even an overcoat; I took a small quilt from the trundle bed, and that served for my overcoat, while I was traveling to the state of New York, where I had a coarse satinette overcoat given to me. Thus we went to England, to a strange land to sojourn among strangers.

91When we reached England we designed to start a paper, but we had not the first penny to do it with. I had enough to buy a hat and pay my passage to Preston, for from the time I left home I had worn an old cap which my wife made out of a pair of old pantaloons; but the most of us were entirely destitute of means to buy even any necessary article.

We went to Preston and held our conference, and decided we would publish a paper; Brother Parley P. Pratt craved the privilege of editing it, and we granted him the privilege. We also decided to print 3,000 hymn books, though we had not the first cent to begin with and were strangers in a strange land. We appointed Brother Woodruff to Herefordshire and I accompanied him on his journey to that place. I wrote to Brother Pratt for information about his plans, and he sent me his prospectus, which stated that when he had a sufficient number of subscribers and money enough on hand to justify his publishing the paper he would proceed with it. How long we might have waited for that, I know not, but I wrote him to publish 2,000 papers and I would foot the bill. I borrowed two hundred and fifty pounds of Sister Jane Benbow, one hundred of Brother Thomas Kington and returned to Manchester, where we printed 3,000 hymn books and 5,000 Books of Mormon, and issued 2,000 Millennial Stars monthly, and in the course of the summer gave away rising of 60,000 tracts. I also paid from five to ten dollars a week for my board and hired a house for Brother Willard Richards and his wife, who came to Manchester, and sustained them; and gave sixty pounds to Brother P. P. Pratt to bring his wife from New York. I also commenced the emigration in that year.

I was there one year and sixteen days, with my brethren, the Twelve, and during that time I bought all my clothing except one pair of pantaloons, which the sisters gave me in Liverpool soon after I arrived there and which I really needed. I told the brethren in one of my discourses that there was no need for their begging, for if they needed anything the sisters could understand that. The sisters took the hint and the pantaloons were forthcoming.

I paid three hundred and eighty dollars to get the work started in London and when I arrived home in Nauvoo, I owed no person one farthing. Brother Kington received his pay from the books that were printed, and Sister Benbow, who started to America the same year, left names enough of her friends to receive two hundred and fifty pounds, which amount was paid them, notwithstanding, I held her agreement that she had given it to the Church.

We left two thousand five hundred dollars' worth of books in the office, paid our passages home, and paid about six hundred dollars to emigrate the poor who were starving to death, besides giving sixty thousand tracts; and that, too, though I had not a sixpence when we landed in Preston, and I do not know that one of the Twelve had.
