Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

93DEVOTION TO DUTY

93By Wilford Woodruff

93(Wilford Woodruff recounts the distressing condition which confronted him as he began his mission to England in the fall of 1839. Only his faith and the blessings of God enabled him to reach England.—P. N.)

93ALTHOUGH feeble, I walked to the banks of the Mississippi River. There President Brigham Young took me in a canoe (having no other conveyance) and paddled me across the river. (From Montrose to Nauvoo.)

93When we landed, I lay down on a side of sole leather by the post office, to rest.

93Brother Joseph, the Prophet of God, came along and looked at me:

93"Well, Brother Woodruff," said he, "you have started upon your mission."

93"Yes," said I, "but I feel and look more like a subject for the dissecting room than a missionary."

93Joseph replied: "What did you say that for? Get up, and go along; all will be right with you!"

93I name these incidents that the reader may know how the quorum of the Twelve Apostles started on their missions to England in 1839.

Elder John Taylor was going with me, and we were the first two of the quorum of the Twelve who started on the mission.

Brother Taylor was about the only man in the quorum that was not sick.

Soon a brother came along with a wagon, and took us in. As we were driving through the place, we came to Parley P. Pratt, who was stripped to the shirt and pants, with his head and feet bare. He was hewing a log, preparing to build a cabin.

He said: "Brother Woodruff, I have no money, but I have an empty purse, which I will give you." He brought it to me, and I thanked him for it.

He went a few rods further, and met Brother Heber C. Kimball, in the same condition, also hewing a log towards building a cabin.

He said: "Parley has given you a purse, I have got a dollar I will give you to put in it."

He gave me both a dollar and a blessing.

We drove sixteen miles across a prairie, and spent the night with a Brother Merrill. The day following we rode ten miles, to a Brother Perkins, and he took us in his wagon to Macomb, and from thence to Brother Don Carlos Smith's.

I rode four hours during the day over a very rough road of stones and stumps, lying on my back in the bottom of the wagon, shaking with the ague, and I suffered much.

We held a meeting in a grove near Don Carlos Smith's, and here Elder Taylor baptized George Miller, who afterwards was ordained a Bishop.

95At the meeting the Saints gave us nine dollars, and George Miller gave us a horse to help us on our journey.

95I rode to Rochester with Father Coltrin, where I had an interview with several families of the Fox Island Saints, whom I had brought up with me from Fox Island, in 1838. I spent several days with them and at Springfield, where Elder Taylor published fifteen hundred copies, in pamphlet form, of a brief sketch of the persecutions and sufferings of the Latter-day Saints, inflicted by the inhabitants of Missouri.

95We sold our horse, and in company with Father Coltrin, Brother Taylor and myself left Springfield, and continued our journey.

95I had the chills and fever nearly every other day, which made riding in a lumber wagon very distressing to me, especially when I shook with the ague.

95On the 24th of August, we rode to Terre Haute, and spent the night with Dr. Modisett. I suffered much with the chills and fever.

Elder John Taylor up to this time had appeared to enjoy excellent health, but the destroyer did not intend to make him an exception to the rest of the Apostles. On the 28th of August he fell to the ground as though he had been knocked down. He fainted away, but soon revived. On the following day, however, the enemy made a powerful attack upon his life. He fainted away several times, and it seemed as though he would die. We stopped several hours with him at a house by the wayside. We then took him into the wagon and drove to Horace S. Eldredge's, and spent the remainder of the day and night doctoring him.

In the morning Brother Taylor was so far recovered that he thought he would be able to ride. So we started on our journey on the morning of the 30th, and we traveled forty miles, to Louisville, and spent the night with the family of Brother James Townsend.

We felt terribly shaken up, being in such a weak state. Brother Townsend was away from home, but we were kindly entertained by Sister Townsend.

In the morning, Elder Taylor, though very weak, felt disposed to continue his journey. We traveled fourteen miles to Germantown. He was quite sick at night, and the bilious fever seemed to be settled upon him. I was also very feeble, myself.

On the day following, September 1st, being Sunday, Brother Taylor concluded to remain there for the day, and hold a meeting.

It was a German settlement. He wished me to speak, and I spoke upon the first principles of the gospel. He followed me, and spoke until he was exhausted.

After we returned to the inn where we were stopping, I was taken with a chill and fever, and had a very bad night. Brother Taylor was also very sick.

The following day, September 2nd, was a painful day to my feelings. It was evident that Brother Taylor had a settled fever upon him, and would not be able to travel.

Father Coltrin was resolved to continue his journey, and, in conversing with Brother Taylor, he thought it better for one sick man to be left than for two, as I was so sick with the chills and fever that I was not able to render him any assistance, nor, indeed, to take care of myself. Under these circumstances, Brother Taylor advised me to continue my journey with Brother Coltrin, and make the best of my way to New York.

After committing Elder Taylor into the hands of the Lord, though painful to me, I gave him the parting hand, and started. I left him in Germantown, Wayne County, Indiana, in the hands of a merciful God and a kind and benevolent family, who promised to do everything in their power to make him comfortable until his recovery.

This they did, though he passed through a severe course of the bilious fever, and was sick nigh unto death. Through the mercy of God, however, he recovered from his sickness, and continued his journey. We next met in the city of New York.

I continued my journey with Father Coltrin, and we reached Cleveland on the 18th of September. We there took steamer for Buffalo, but were three days and a night in a storm before we made the harbor. We landed at midnight, and in doing so we ran into a schooner, and stove it in.

98From Buffalo I traveled to Albany in a canal boat, and had a stroke of the ague daily.

98While on the journey, at Albany, I took a stage in the night, and rode to my father's home in Farmington, on the 21st of September.

98I was glad to meet with my father's family and the other members of the small branch of the Church which existed there upon this occasion, as I found them all strong in the faith of the gospel, and glad to meet with me.

98I was still suffering with the ague daily.

98On the 27th of September, my grandmother (on my mother's side), Anna Thompson, died at Avon. She was eighty-four years of age.

98It was a singular coincidence that she, with her husband, Lot Thompson, also Mercy Thompson and Samuel Thompson, all of one family, died when they were eight-four years of age. I was not able to attend my grandmother's funeral.

98On the 4th of October, 1839, my uncle, Adna Hart, died, aged forty-three years. I had visited him in his sickness, and preached the gospel to him, and he was believing. I had also been associated with him from youth up.

98On his death-bed he sent me a request that I would preach his funeral sermon.

I was having the chills and fever daily at the time, attended with a severe cough, so much so, that my father thought that I would never leave his home alive. But when they brought me the request of my dying uncle, and the day came for his burial, I told my father to get his horse and buggy ready, for I was going to attend the funeral.

He thought I was very reckless in regard to my own life, as I had suffered with the chills and fever some fifteen days, and to attempt to speak in my weak state, and to begin at the same hour that my chill was to come on, seemed to him foolhardy.

My parents were quite alarmed, yet according to my request my father got up his team, and I rode with him and my step-mother five miles, through a cold, chilly wind, and I commenced speaking to a large congregation, at the same hour that my chill had been in the habit of coming on.

I spoke over an hour with great freedom, and my chill left me from that hour, and I had no more attacks for many days.

On the Monday following, October 7th, I felt sufficiently restored to health to continue my journey. I took leave of my father and sister, and left for New York, where I arrived on the morning of the 9th of October.

I spent two months and seven days after my arrival in New York, in travelling and preaching in that city, New Jersey and Long Island, a portion of the time with Parley and Orson Pratt. I had frequent attacks during this time of the chills and fever, but I preached almost daily.

On the 13th of December I attended our conference in New York City, with Parley P. Pratt, and on this day Elder John Taylor arrived in our midst, and it was a happy meeting.

He had passed through a severe siege of sickness after we parted, but through the mercy of God had been preserved, and was able to continue his journey. He also informed us that others of the quorum of the Twelve had suffered a great deal of sickness, and that it was with difficulty that they could travel.

After spending six days in New York, Elder John Taylor, in company with Elder Theodore Turley and myself sailed out of New York Harbor for Liverpool, on board the packet ship Oxford, on the 19th of December, 1839.

We took steerage passage, which cost fifteen dollars each. We had storms and rough weather, but most of the winds were favorable for a quick passage.

While on the ship, a Methodist minister got into a discussion with some Catholics who were in the company, and the arguments of the minister ran rather more into abuse than sound argument.

Elder Taylor told the Methodist minister that he did not think it was becoming in a daughter to find so much fault with the mother as they did, for as the Methodist came out of the Catholics, Elder Taylor thought the mother had as much right to enjoy her religion unmolested as the daughter had. That ended the argument.

Our company consisted of 109 souls, composed of Americans, English, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, and Dutch.

101We arrived in Liverpool dock on the 11th day of January, 1840, having made the voyage from New York in twenty-three days.
