Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

110WHISPERINGS OF THE SPIRIT

110By Wilford Woodruff

110(In this short narrative Wilford Woodruff gives further evidence that he was at all times, guided by "the whisperings of the Spirit."—P. N.)

110In 1848, after my return to Winter Quarters from our pioneer journey, I was appointed by the Presidency of the Church to take my family and go to Boston, to gather up the remnant of the Saints and lead them to the valleys of the mountains.

110While on my way east I put my carriage into the yard of one of the brethren in Indiana, and Brother Orson Hyde set his wagon by the side of mine, and not more than two feet from it.

110Dominicus Carter, of Provo, and my wife and four children were with me. My wife, one child and I went to bed in the carriage, the rest sleeping in the house.

110I had been in bed but a short time, when a voice said to me, 'Get up, and move your carriage.'

110It was not thunder, lightning nor an earthquake, but the still, small voice of the Spirit of God —the Holy Ghost.

110I told my wife I must get up and move my carriage. She asked, 'What for?'

111I told her I did not know, only the Spirit told me to do it.

111I got up and moved my carriage several rods, and set it by the side of the house.

111As I was returning to bed, the same Spirit said to me, 'Go and move your mules from that oak tree,' which was about one hundred yards north of our carriage.

111I moved them to a young hickory grove and tied them up. I then went to bed.

111In thirty minutes a whirlwind caught the tree to which my mules had been fastened, broke it off near the ground and carried it one hundred yards, sweeping away two fences in its course, and laid it prostrate through that yard where my carriage stood, and I found it to be five feet in circumference. It came within a foot of Brother Hyde's wagon, but did not touch it.

111Thus by obeying the revelation of the Spirit of God to me, I saved my life, the lives of my wife and child, as well as my animals.
