Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkSnow, Erastus119EXPERIENCES OF ERASTUS SNOW

119By Erastus Snow—Dictated to his son Franklin R. Snow, in the year 1875.

119(Erastus Snow was one of the great men of the Church during the pioneer days. He was one of the first two men to enter Salt Lake Valley with the original group ofpioneers, and in 1849 he was called "to open the door of the gospel to the Scandinavians." Following is his account of this successful mission.—P. N.)

AT the semi-annual conference in Oct., 1849, I was called on a mission to Denmark, to open the door of the Gospel to the Scandinavians. At the same time Elder John Taylor was assigned to France, Lorenzo Snow to Italy, Franklin D. Richards to England, with several other elders accompanying each of us. We all took our departure from Salt Lake on the 19th of October, 1849. Our little party numbered about thirty elders, one of whom was Mr. Kinkade, of Livingstone and Kinkade, merchants bound for St. Louis, to buy goods. The chief incident of the journey was a charge made upon our party by about two hundred Cheyenne Indians, during our noon halt on the Platte River, about forty miles above Fort Laramie. They were on the lookout for a war party of Sioux Indians and thought best to gobble up our little party for past-time, but we did not quite relish the sport, and having about one hundred and thirty rounds of ammunition with us, in about one minute's time, under the direction of our gallant Captain, Jedediah M. Grant, we formed into a line of battle in front of our wagons with our animals behind them on the river bank. When every man's finger was upon his weapon, awaiting orders to fire, the savage horesmen were brought to a sudden standstill. A parley was commenced which resulted in their giving us the road and they withdrew to their camps, while we made a good afternoon's march. During the night following, a party of Sioux succeeded in making a descent upon their camps and drove off a number of their horses.

We went down on the south side of the Platte and reached the Missouri River at a point where now stands Nebraska City, about the 1st of December, in a blinding snowstorm, which had lasted about fourteen hours. The snow was about three feet deep when we reached the old barracks on the west side of the river, and how joyful we were at finding cabins there to shelter us and our animals. We held a meeting that evening and gave God thanks for our successful journey and safe arrival over the bleak and dreary plains. The Missouri River was full of slush ice and we saw no means of crossing it. We all joined in prayer that night, asking the Lord to cause the ice to speedily congeal and make a bridge for us to cross over. When we awoke next morning the river was gorged a little below us and was filling up with floating ice. The second day we all passed safely over with our horses and wagons, and the day after the ice broke up again and there was no more crossing the river for three weeks after.

Most of the missionaries journeyed together until we reached St. Louis, where we separated, taking different routes through the states, visiting the remnant of the Saints and gathering means for crossing the ocean.

During the week we stayed in St. Louis I had varioloid, or smallpox, in a mild form and was very sick for a few days. I suppose I must have contracted the disease on my overland journey through Missouri. Sister Streeper, my kind-hearted hostess who cared for me like a faithful mother, had a large family of children, including a young babe, which was frequently laid in the bed with me. When the pits began to appear on me and the character of the disease became known, she in her anxiety exclaimed, "Oh my poor babe, and my poor children!" None of them had been vaccinated. For a moment a feeling of grief came over me that I should be the cause of this agony, but immediately the Spirit came upon me and I said to her, "Be of good cheer. Because of what you have done for me, God will shield you and your house, and none of you shall suffer on my account." She believed my word and was comforted, and so far as I know no soul took the disease from me except Sister Felt and her infant child, she having had a few moments conversation with me while the fever was upon me.

I sailed from Boston on the 3rd of April, in a Cunard steamer for Liverpool, where I landed on the 15th, and the following day Lorenzo Snow arrived in a sailing vessel from New York. We visited many of the churches of England, Scotland and Wales during the next two weeks and received many contributions for the support of our mission. On the 14th of June, 1850, I landed in Copenhagen, the capital of Denmark, in company with George P. Dykes and John Forsgreen. The former was an American, the latter a native of Sweden. We were met at the wharf by P. O. Hansen, a native of that city, who had embraced the gospel in America and had left Salt Lake with us but had made his way in advance of us to his native land. After a few days' rest Elder Forsgreen was appointed to proceed to the north of Sweden and visit the land of his nativity. At the time I knew not a word of the Danish language, but I applied myself to study and daily intercourse with the people, and being aided by Brother Hansen, I soon acquired a sufficient knowledge of the language to enable me to commence the work of translating the Book of Mormon and other of our religious works. I employed a good native scholar to assist Brother Hansen in the translating of the Book of Mormon, but did not allow any portion of it to go to press until I had become sufficiently versed in the language to thoroughly review every paragraph and correct the many errors which they had committed for want of understanding the true spirit and the idiom of the language in which it was written.

The first inquirers after the truth that we met with were some members of a Mr. Monster's congregation, called Reformed Baptists, many of whom received our testimony. On the 12th of August I baptized fifteen persons in the Sound, being the first baptisms in that land. On September 15th following, we organized a branch of the Church, consisting of about fifty members, and from that time forth I commenced addressing the public congregations in their own tongue. I continued to spend my time in preparing the Book of Mormon for the press and in holding Sabbath day and evening meetings in Copenhagen and its vicinity. I ordained and sent out elders and priests as the Lord opened the way, and continued to meet in council with elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, teaching them the Gospel and instructing them in their duties that they might become efficient fellow-laborers among their own people.

In May, 1851, the Book of Mormon was issued from the press and a few copies bound, ready for distribution. I had been confined about eight months so closely to my studies that I greatly needed relaxation. I therefore took a respite for about six weeks and visited England, passing through Mecklenburg, Scherin, Hanover, and Belgium. I returned rested and refreshed from my labors and commenced the work of translating the Doctrine and Covenants.

124I published several pamphlets upon the faith, and doctrines of the Church, in the Danish language, and one in the Swedish language. In October following, I commenced the publication of a paper called the "Scandinavian Stjerne." In all my writing, publishing, and translating I was assisted by Brother Peter O. Hansen.

124Elder Forsgreen, after baptizing a few in his native land, was arrested by the Government officials and banished from the country. He came over to Denmark and assisted us in our labors in that land. Elder Dykes went to Holburgh, where he built up a branch of the Church and then went to Germany and assisted in the publication of the Book of Mormon in the German language. He finally became associated with Elder John Taylor.

124I sent out various native elders along the southern coast of Norway and Sweden and also to Iceland, where they made many friends and baptized a few believers.

124On March 4, 1852, I took leave of the Saints in that country to return to my mountain home, it being twenty-one months and six days since I landed in Copenhagen. I left twelve branches and six hundred baptized members of the Church in that land, while twenty native Saints accompanied me homeward, these being the first contributions from that land to our mountain home in Deseret. From this small beginning up to this present time, 1875, over 16,000 Saints have emigrated from Scandinavia to Utah.
