Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Handcart CompaniesGoddard, GeorgeMissionary WorkGoddard, George147THE HANDCART MISSIONARIES

147By George Goddard

147(At the April Conference in 1857 held in Salt Lake City, seventy-four missionaries were called by the First Presidency of the Church to undertake missions to the United States and various countries in Europe. President Brigham Young instructed these missionaries to travel east to the Missouri River, "by the handcart method." From the journal of Elder George Goddard we have obtained a full account of this unique and interesting trip.—P. N.)

THURSDAY, April 23, 1857: At 8 o'clock, a.m. the handcart missionaries assembled on the Temple Block to receive their licenses at the hands of Orson Hyde, after which we were addressed by Orson Hyde, after which we were addressed by Orson Hyde, Lorenzo Snow, Wilford Woodruff and Jeter Clinton. The Presidency then arrived and desired the citizens to return home, and the missionaries to start immediately, 10 o'clock, which was done, headed by the Nauvoo Band, playing some lively tunes, as we marched out of the city by the President's Office and Mansion. There were 26 handcarts and many of the brethren and sisters accompanied us about a mile and a half, we then halted, returned our thanks to the band, gave them three cheers, and proceeded on our journey to the mouth of Emigration Canyon where we stayed for a short time, and then renewed our travel as far as the Cold Springs, where we camped for the night. Up to this time three axle trees had broken and three carts turned a somerset; ours stood it well so far, being pulled by three careful, able-bodied men, viz.: Geo. Goddard, Stephen H. Goddard, and Wm. Branch. We here appointed William H. Branch to be head cook, Stephen H. Goddard, assistant ditto and George Goddard the journal keeper. We then sang several cheerful songs, had prayers and retired to rest.

Friday, April 24. Arose at day break, company all well. After breakfast we organized the company in the following order: Henry Herriman, president; Stephen H. Goddard and Joseph W. Young, his counselors; Wm. H. Branch, captain of fifty; Wm. G. Galley, chaplain; John Y. Greene, captain of the guard; Daniel McIntosh, clerk; George Goddard, chorister; after organizing we had singing and prayers. The company then divided up into tens and selected a captain for every five handcarts before starting. First ten, Miner G. Atwood; 2nd, Eli H. Pierce; 3rd, Joel Terry; 4th, David Brinton; 5th, Thos. Hall. As there was one of the missionaries for England, by the name of Wm. Jenkins, who had his wife with him, which was strongly objected to by all the brethren, it was unanimously voted that no women should travel with the missionaries over the plains; by this means the company's feelings were relieved of an intolerable nuisance. At half past seven o'clock we started on our journey and reached our camp ground at half past ten, about half a mile from Willow Springs. Having a little business to attend to, we remained there four hours, and at half past two resumed our journey, and as we ascended the Big Mountain passed the ox train belonging to Mr. Fernandez, composed mainly of apostates, on their way to the States, and at half past five arrived at Quaking Asp Grove, where we camped for the night (18 miles from home). President Herriman and his counselors gave some excellent instructions to the company and prophesied good concerning us; after singing and prayer, we retired to rest.

Saturday, April 25. The company aroused at 4 o'clock, breakfasted and attended to other duties, and started a few minutes past six; arrived at the top of the Big Mountain at 7, gave three cheers as a final adieu to the valley of Great Salt Lake, and wended our way down through snow, water and mud; for several miles the snow was very deep, especially on the sides of the mountain and the way we had to travel was so rough and sideling, that it required the utmost care to prevent the carts from turning over, and after all the efforts to prevent accidents, two axle trees were broken. These crippled carts, however, we managed to take along to our camping ground at the east foot of the Big Mountain, where we arrived at a quarter to eleven, and after doing all necessary repairs, resumed our travel at two o'clock and to avoid fording two bad crossings of East Canyon Creek, we ascended a bluff of great elevation, and let down each cart on the other side which was nearly perpendicular, by ropes, and after fording East Canyon Creek (which was from two to two and a half feet deep) four times, we camped a little east of Cottonwood Grove, which we reached at 5 p.m., making ten miles travel today, 28 miles from G. S. L. City. The camp was in good health and spirits, except Joseph H. Young, who had a sick headache most of the day, but after being administered to by three of the brethren, found immediate relief.

Sunday, April 26. The camp was called up at 5 o'clock (ice half-inch thick), breakfasted, prayers at 7 and started on our journey at 8; waded through five crossings of East Canyon Creek, then stayed a few minutes to change our clothing, etc., and in a short time we crossed the divide between East Canyon and Weber, and at 3 o'clock we reached the Weber River, which we forded, though the water was very swift and 2 feet deep, and camped on the east bank at a quarter to 4 p.m., making a distance of 12 miles, which we considered to be a good Sabbath day's journey. After supper the camp was called together for singing and prayers; company all well, very cheerful but a little tired after a hard day's work. Forty miles from Great Salt Lake City.

Monday, April 27. Camp called up at 4 o'clock, and after prayers had been offered by each ten, we started at 20 minutes to 5, and after traveling one hour and three quarters, we stopped for breakfast about one mile up the mouth of Echo Canyon. We then resumed our journey at good speed, though the road was dusty, and a gradual ascent most of the way, with several crossings of the creek, and at a quarter past 6 arrived at our camping ground, having traveled 19 miles, being 59 miles from Great Salt Lake City. After going through so much water, mud and dust, we found a good wash necessary to make us look like white folks; everyone in the camp is in good health and spirits.

Tuesday, April 28. Called up at 4 o'clock and started at half past 4, after traveling nearly 5 miles, stopped for breakfast. Resumed our journey, passed Cache Cave, and until afternoon it was uphill work, when we gained the summit and saw considerable snow on the distant mountains, and crossed over several patches from 2 to 5 feet deep. During our day's travel we usually halt for five minutes to rest every hour; we stayed one hour and a half for dinner on Yellow Creek and continued our journey up the canyon, across the Divide and camped on the east side of Bear River at 15 minutes past 5, making 22 miles travel and 80 from Great Salt Lake City; this was a hard day's work, but all felt well and were in good spirits.

Wednesday, April 29. Camp aroused at 4 and found snow on the ground from 1 to 2 inches deep; had breakfast and prayers then started at 25 minutes past 6 and after traveling as far as Sulphur Creek, about 2 miles, we commenced to ascend a hill several miles long and in some places very steep and difficult to ascend. The snow had made it slippery, and the mud adhered to our feet and to the cart wheels to that extent as to increase our labor more than 50 percent; just such kind of work as to test the grip of Mormon missionaries. At 20 minutes to 11 we arrived at the middle Quaking Asp Grove, where we halted for a little refreshment. This we found to be the hardest morning's work since we started, and at noon continued our travel over Rocky Ridge, the height of which is 6,850 feet, as far as Sulphur Springs, making our day's travel 17 miles, being 97 from G. S. L. City; here we camped for the night. In ascending the ridge Bro. Frederick Gardner became so much exhausted we had to have him conveyed in a wagon that was passing by at the time.

Thursday, April 30. Another snow storm visited us during the night (of from 3 to 6 inches deep). The camp was called about the usual time, but owing to the weather, we breakfasted before starting, and after singing and prayers, we commenced our journey at 20 minutes to 7 o'clock, and by 8 o'clock we reached Big Muddy Creek, which we forded, some with their socks and boots on and others pulled them off; either way it was intensely cold and had it not been for two or three fires to run to, where some one had camped the night previous we should have suffered extremely. Shortly after this crossing, we began to ascend somewhat gradually until it became so steep and difficult as to require all the strength and capacity of each man, the hill was very long and to reach its summit, owing to the snow making the road so slippery, the patience and perseverance of the Saints was strongly tested. When within about 6 miles from Bridger, we stayed a short time for refreshment and then proceeded till we forded Black's Fork twice and reached Lewis Robison's at Fort Bridger at 2 o'clock. Here we had a few repairs to do and did not leave till half past 1 the next day. Today we traveled 15 miles; 113 miles from G. S. L. City.

Friday, May 1. Camp arose between 4 and 5 o'clock and after singing and prayers, some of the carts were repaired, others were cleaned out and straightened up, and at half past one we resumed our journey, traveling 12 miles and, after wading Smith's Fork, camped on the east side at a quarter to 6 p.m. This was the most agreeable afternoon's travel we have had, being a smooth, level road, rather on the decline. Camp in good health and all felt well. Now 125 miles from home.

Saturday, May 2. Camp called early as usual and traveled between 5 and 6 miles before breakfast, also waded Black's Fork twice, it being from 80 to 100 feet wide. This was by far the coldest water we had waded through, and seemed to be about as much as mortals could endure. We then proceeded on our journey with tolerable speed along a good road, though in some places rather dusty, till we reached Ham's Fork, which we also forded. Here were the wickiups of Jack Robinson, etc.; he made the company a present of a quantity of tallow, which he wished to be distributed around. This came in good season for many of the brethren were rather chafed on their legs with crossing streams and a northwest wind generally blowing. We camped on the bend below Ham's Fork, having traveled 23 miles, making 148 miles from G. S. L. City.

Sunday, May 3. Camp called up at 4, had breakfast, singing and prayers. Started at 25 minutes to 7 and after several hours fine traveling, we arrived at Green River and waded it by 1 o'clock. The wind blowing a gale down stream, caused a very strong current, but all got over safe and camped across the river, making 17 miles travel and 165 miles from G. S. L. City.

Monday, May 4. Camp up a little before 4, breakfasted and started at 6 o'clock and after traveling four hours, arrived at Big Sandy, 12 miles, where we stayed an hour and a quarter and then resumed our journey for six hours, halting five times for a few minutes, and reached our camp ground at the second crossing of Big Sandy, making this day 29 miles, or 194 from G. S. L. City.

Henry L. Southworth was attacked with rheumatism in his leg, which was very painful; after being anointed and administered to by Pres. Herriman, etc., the pain left him immediately and he is now well. Wm. Harris left his traveling camp with his gun this afternoon to hunt for game and wending his way a little too far off, lost sight of the camp. Night came on and considerable anxiety was manifested by the company; guns and pistols were fired and a large fire made on the bench, but these availed nothing to him as a guide as he had lost his way and was going in an opposite direction to where the camp was. But Bro. David Wilkin started on foot in search of him and occasionally hooted at the top of his voice, and after several miles run, his voice was heard, and replied to and at length he was found and, to the joy of the company, arrived about 10 o'clock.

Tuesday, May 5. Camp arose at half past 4 and after packing up, and each ten attending to prayers, we resumed our travel and reached Little Sandy in 2 hours; here we stayed two hours for breakfast and rest. At a quarter to 10 we again marched along until we arrived at Dry Sandy at a quarter past 4, making 22 miles travel today or 216 from G. S. L. City. We saw many antelope today and James Brooks and John Wakeley with several others went with their guns in search of game.

Wednesday, May 6. Camp up at 4 and after breakfast and prayers we started at 6 o'clock, and arrived at Pacific Springs at 25 minutes past 10, where we nooned, and resumed our journey at 12 over the South Pass, which is 7085 feet above the level of the sea, and arrived at the first crossing of the Sweetwater and camped for the night at 5 p.m., making 24 miles today or 240 miles from G. S. L. City. For several day's past we have seen antelope skipping along the sides of the mountains and a few sage hens, two of which were shot and answered a good purpose as far as they went. Coming over the Pass we went over snow several feet deep and saw considerable quantities on the sides of the Sweetwater, and other places; the camp was in good health and spirits. Last night, after we had camped, the entire company had run out of bread stuffs, with the exception of one or two meals, and it was thought advisable to send three of the brethren forward to overtake Stewart's teams, in which train our flour and crackers had been deposited to lighten our loads; accordingly Stephen H. Goddard, James Brooks and Henry Lee volunteered to go and at 9 p.m. they started and after walking all night, they overtook the wagons at sunrise, where they had camped at the first crossing of Sweetwater. Here they detained the teams till the handcart company came up, and to the joy and satisfaction of all the camp, recruited their supply of flour and crackers. Here also we found a band of Indians camped in their wickiups; they were of the Bannock tribe and many of them waded the river and visited our camp and were very friendly.

Thursday, May 7. After a refreshing night's rest the camp arose early, as usual, and after prayers by each ten rolled out at 5 o'clock and in a short time a rabbit and sage hen came within reach of our marksmen and afforded an agreeable addition for the breakfast table. We followed the Seminoes cut off on the south side of Sweetwater and after traveling 4 miles we stayed an hour and a half for breakfast and again resumed our travels through an undulating prairie. The road was good but rather mountainous. Here, the wind sprang up in the rear and played on our handcart covers, which materially aided us up the steep hills but during our circuitous travel, we soon found the wind to be in our front, and having a head wind to contend with, found it as much to our disadvantage as it had before been a help to us. The gale continued to increase until we could scarcely keep on our feet and the leading cart was overturned, while passing over some sage brush and a sudden blast of wind coming at the same time. No damage was done to the cart, it merely deranged its contents. After accomplishing 20 miles of travel, we camped for the night before bed time. John Y. Greene and others with their horse teams came up on their way to Devil's Gate and reported that Bro. Charles Lord of Cottonwood, in Stewart's train, had been accidentally shot while taking his gun out of the wagon and something catching the trigger caused it to explode, discharging its contents in his head, producing instant death. During the day and evening the sky presented an appearance that betokened a terrible storm and the wind blew so unmercifully as if some extra help was employed at the bellows. It is 260 miles from G. S. L. City.

Friday, May 8. After a bitter cold night the camp was called up about 5 a.m. A swift current of water had frozen and we were glad to pack up our bedding and move off from such an unfriendly region. After a little over two hours travel we stayed for breakfast, prayers, etc., and here Bro. Charles Shumway was taken sick with mountain fever and fortunately John Y. Greene's teams were camping on the spot and took him in and he was administered to by the Captain. We continued our travel through the day until we reached the 5th crossing of the Sweetwater; five hours travel brought us to the junction and two hours later to a bed of saleratus about two miles long and two hours and a half more to our camp ground, making 30 miles travel today, or 290 miles from G. S. L. City.

Saturday, May 9. The camp rose at 4 and rolled out at 10 minutes before 5. Charles Shumway is better. The morning was fine and mild and after traveling 6 miles we came to two crossings of the Sweetwater, which being very deep we preferred taking our carts along the bank for about 100 yards over stones from one to fifty tons weight. This is sometimes called the "narrows" or the Devil's Back Bone. Here we found the benefit of handcarts for they had to be shouldered and literally carried with their contents over part of the way. We then tarried for breakfast, etc., and traveled about a mile and a half where we came again to the Sweetwater and several teams on their way to Devil's Gate passing there at the time, kindly aided us across. We then continued our journey to the bend (8 miles) in two hours and at 1 o'clock camped for dinner. We started again at 2 o'clock and traveled 3 hours and camped for the night on Sweetwater, making nearly 27 miles travel today, or 317 from G. S. L. City. This was a hard day's travel being very sandy, and a good deal of hill; camp was in good health but considerably fatigued.

Sunday, May 10. Rose at 5 and started at a quarter past; all refreshed and in fine spirits for traveling. At half past 6 we stayed for breakfast in a ravine by a muddy stream, after which we traveled on for about two hours and arrived at Devil's Gate between 10 and 11 o'clock. Here we found a number of brethren whose business we did not inquire after. A few minutes after we arrived here the handcart company was called together by Captain Branch, and each captain of tens was instructed to have every cart overhauled and weighed and where there were three men to a cart the weight of food, bedding, etc., must not exceed 175 lbs. and those who needed flour were to replenish their stock here, taking not less than 33 lbs. of bread stuffs to each man. About an hour and a half after we got in Brothers J. C. Clinton and Chauncey Webb arrived, who preceeded the mail a few minutes. We had a lively time shaking hands with old friends, repairing our carts, washing our bodies, clothes, etc. Bro. J. C. Clinton addressed the missionaries for a few minutes, giving them some general instructions. Towards the evening the mail started and with it J. C. Clinton, (who had charge of the mail and on a mission to the States), Chauncey Webb, Levi Stewart, etc. Tom Williams wife came on with the mail intending to go to the States, but Joseph W. Young and others faithfully counseling her, she resolved to return to G. S. L. City by one of the trains that came out there for freight goods.

Monday, May 11. During this morning the camp finished up their cleaning and repairs and at 12 o'clock we bid adieu to all at Devil's Gate and after traveling six hours, arrived at our camp ground at Grease Wood Creek, about one mile below the ford. This day's travel was very laborious owing to its being for several miles over deep sand. We passed by Independence Rock and two saleratus lakes, making 15 miles today, or 342 from G. S. L. City.

Tuesday, May 12. Camp called up at a quarter past 4 and started at a quarter past 5, passing Prospect Hill, Willow Springs, Alkali Swamp and Springs, Rock Avenue, etc., and camped for the night in a steep ravine, having traveled 24 miles, making 366 miles from G. S. L. City.

Wednesday, May 13. Camp called at 4 o'clock; had some rain in the night. We started at half past 4 and passed the Alkali Lake where we breakfasted and stayed two hours. We then crossed over the long hill that comes to the road where it turns south, 7 miles from the river Platte. Here we stayed for dinner after which we traveled over the heaviest sand road that we had met with on our journey, requiring more physical exertion than at any previous place; we camped on a sand bed a few rods above the Upper Platte bridge. We here bought three pounds of sugar from the trading post and had a guard out for the first time. We traveled 23 miles today, making 389 miles from G. S. L. City.

Thursday, May 14. Camp called at 4 a.m. The axle tree of Daniel Mackintosh's cart was repaired and after breakfast, the company crossed the bridge over the Platte on payment of 30 cents per cart. We continued our journey during the day along a splendid road, intending to reach Deer Creek, but as it rained and there was appearance of storm we camped within 5 miles of it, making 18 miles or 407 from G. S. L. City. Bro. Carter was administered to by Pres. Herriman, and Isaac Hill who had been sick for two or three days, being better, joined his companions in pulling his cart.

Friday, May 15. Up at 4 and started at half past 4. In two hours we reached Deer Creek, which we waded and stayed for breakfast; here we saw the Indian Agent's carriage and nearly 20 Indian lodges belonging to the Sioux; several of them waded the creek to trade off a few pair of moccasins. A few rods off we saw the graves of two Indian children, made by 4 or 6 upright poles, 7 or 10 feet high, with some fastened on the top, a little inclining. On these, the dead bodies were laid, wrapped in a red blanket. They are put in this way to prevent the wolves from eating them. We then traveled on for three hours and ten minutes, which brought us to the Fourche Boise River, 30 feet wide and 2 feet deep, which we forded and camped on the east side of it, in a grove. Indications of a heavy storm induced us to stay here, through the day, making only 15 miles travel or 422 miles from G. S. L. City. After prayer by each ten, Isaac Hill, Pres. Herriman, Daniel Mackintosh and Joseph W. Young addressed the camp on the duties and privileges of Elders in Israel.

Saturday, May 16. Camp called up at 4 and rolled out at half past 4. We traveled about an hour and a half and breakfasted after singing and prayer. Isaac Hill and Wm. Carter were administered to by Pres. Herriman and several brethren; one was afflicted with piles and the other with debility. We traveled on till after one o'clock over a rough, dirty road, owing to the snow or rain that had fallen during the night. The axle tree of Pres. Herriman's cart broke and was repaired after which we traveled to the branch of the La Bonte River, making 23 miles today or 445 from G. S. L. City.

Sunday, May 17. Rose at 4, started at half past. Isaac Hill is still very feeble; Wm. Carter is much better and the balance of the company in good health and spirits. After wading the branch of La Bonte River we traveled a little over four miles and breakfasted; after singing and prayers we continued our march a few miles further and forded the La Bonte River, 30 feet wide and 2 feet deep. We then ascended a high bluff on which was a succession of hills and hollows but chiefly hills, and some of these very steep. We made 24 miles today and camped on the Platte, making 469 miles from G. S. L. City. The axle tree of David Wilkin's cart broke this afternoon so his load was divided up on other carts as he intends to make repairs at Laramie. The weather was fine, road rather muddy, especially in the morning.

Monday, May 18. Camp called at half past 4 and we breakfasted, owing to Capt. Wm. H. Branch being sick with fever, and at 5 minutes past 8 we started, Bro. Wm. Branch being sick and scarcely able to keep up with the teams. He was administered to by Capt. Herriman and others and was considerably better during the day. We traveled till 12 o'clock and arrived at the station of Porter Rockwell and Company, who kindly presented us with an antelope. Here we stayed through the day and camped for the night much refreshed in spirits by the hearty welcome of our brethren. After supper the camp was all called together, had singing and prayer, sung the "Resurrection Day." Phil Margetts sang his Hand Cart Song and David Wilkin gave a short and interesting address. Traveled only 10 miles today, or 479 miles from G. S. L. City.

Tuesday, May 19. Camp was up between 4 and 5 o'clock. Breakfasted and Bro. John R. Murdock of the mail party coming in, we tarried till the mail arrived, nearly 9 o'clock, and with it George A. Smith, Dr. Bernhisel, Truman O. Angel, W. Henefer, Doc and Charley Woodward, etc. After they had refreshed themselves, Geo. A. Smith addressed the missionaries in his usual happy style, giving us an account of the public feeling that now exists against us as a people, but greatly encouraged us by prophesying good concerning the mission we were now entering upon. Truman O. Angel expressed his feelings in a few words which were full of blessing and said how much stronger his attachment was toward us than his own relations. Geo. A. made a few additional remarks and blessed us in the name of the Lord, dismissing us by prayer. We then separated and after many a shake of the hand and "God bless you" we resumed our journey with our spirits exhilarated by the good counsel and instructions we had received, and the pleasure of meeting warm hearted friends in such a lonely place. We traveled two hours and stopped for dinner, after which we ascended the Black Hills on a good road. On the summit there were thunderings and lightning all around us but we escaped unhurt and camped at a small stream, having traveled 14 miles; 493 miles from G. S. L. City.

Wednesday, May 20. Camp called between 4 and 5. It being a wet morning we breakfasted and started at 7 o'clock, still pursuing our journey over the Black Hills, so called from their being so thickly studded with fur and cedar trees. After 4 hours travel, we stopped an hour and a half for refreshment on the Platte, and after another four hours travel we reached Laramie, and camped near the fording place, having traveled 16 miles, or 509 from G. S. L. City.

Thursday, May 21. Arose between 5 and 6. Breakfasted and after prayers, Capt. Branch with a portion of the camp, went to the Fort for a supply of provisions from the government stores, which were obtained on reasonable terms and to the entire satisfaction of the whole camp. We left here at one o'clock and were ferried over the Platte on the government boat at a cost of 50 cents per cart, and after a little over three hours travel camped at 6 o'clock, after traveling 9 miles, or 518 from G. S. L. City.

Friday, May 22. All up at half past 4 in good health and started at 5 o'clock. After traveling about 5 miles we breakfasted and after singing and prayers we resumed our journey for several hours and after staying for refreshments for three hours continued for two hours longer and camped for the night having gone about 25 miles today or 543 miles from G. S. L. City. Daniel MacIntosh was administered to for headache by Pres. Herriman and is feeling better. For the first time John Wakeley and David Wilkin brought in an antelope for the benefit of the company.

Sturady, May 23. Camp called up as usual and after prayers started at 5 o'clock. After two hours travel we stopped for breakfast and after a steady day's pull over a good road, passed Scott's Bluffs on the right and occasionally regaling ourselves during the day with a dish of tea and something to eat, we continued our journey until 9 o'clock p.m., making 26 miles, or 571 from G. S. L. City. David Huntsman also favored us with an antelope this day at noon, making the second.

Sunday, May 24. Camp called at 4 and started at 20 minutes, past; traveled two hours and breakfasted. After singing and prayers we traveled along a good road, passing Chimney Rock, and stayed one hour for refreshment. After 7 hours and 20 minutes more travel we camped for the night, having made 28 miles or 599 miles from G. S. L. City.

Monday, May 25. It was cold, windy morning. Camp was up at a quarter past 4 and off by twenty minutes to five. Two hours we breakfasted, etc., and soon passed the Ancient Bluff Ruins, continued till noon, stopped an hour and a half and resumed our journey until we had traveled 28 miles, or 627 miles from G. S. L. City.

Tuesday, May 26. The camp was in good health, up at a quarter past 4 and started at 20 minutes to 5, traveled one hour and breakfasted. After singing and prayer we started again at half past 7 and traveled over a fine road, passing by Castle Bluffs and crossing Castle Creek, which is a fine stream of water about a foot and a half deep. Beyond this we went opposite Ash Hollow, making 28 miles today or 655 from G. S. L. City.

Wednesday, May 27. From Ash Hollow we started at half past 4 and traveled through the day, exclusive of stoppages for rest and refreshments, nine hours and fifty minutes, making 28 miles, or 678 from G. S. L. City, fording nine creeks, crossing over sandy bluffs, and passing Cedar Bluffs; this was a hard day's work, owing to the sand and a good deal of low, swampy land.

Thursday, May 28. Camp was in good health and spirits. We started at half past 4, and about one hour after we came to a large band of Sioux Indians with between 40 and 60 lodges. They were very friendly and we traded with them for buffalo meat and moccasins; we left a good influence among them and gave them a letter of recommendation to future travelers for their friendly disposition to trade, etc. We continued our day's travel for nine hours and a quarter over sand and swamp, making 25 miles, or 703 from G. S. L. City. For two days past my left shin bone has been sore and inflamed, making it painful to travel. This we found a hard day's work and the camp generally was very footsore and tired.

Friday, May 29. We rose refreshed and were on our way by twenty minutes to 5, traveled over sandy bluffs for nine hours during the day, making 27 miles, or 730 from G. S. L. City. Between 3 and 4 o'clock we saw several men in the distance, coming towards us on horseback, and our line of handcarts presenting such a formidable aspect caused them to stand still and remain there till three of our brethren reached them and allayed their fearful apprehensions. They were the captains of three companies of emigrants bound for California, with about 15 wagons and between one and two thousand head of cattle. About half an hour later we saw another man in the distance, and when he beheld us he hastened back to his train, ordered every man to load up his weapons of defense and line up in battle array. In his eyes we looked terrible as an army with banners. But when he found that we were a band of peaceable men, the feelings of this Missouri captain can be far better imagined than expressed; his joy was extreme and well it might be, for had we been otherwise disposed, his case would have been hopeless indeed.

Saturday, May 30. We started in good spirits and fair speed at twenty-five minutes past 4, traveled about an hour and a half, breakfasted and resumed our travel at a quarter to 8 and a little before 9 an axle tree broke and delayed us an hour to put a new one in. At 25 minutes past 10 we recommenced our journey along a beautiful road with a lively breeze at our backs; we camped on the bank of the Platte, making 25 miles today, or 755 from G. S. L. City. We passed another small emigrant train today; blistered feet and toes and sore shin bones continue more or less, though the general health of the camp is good.

Sunday, May 31. The morning being cold, windy and rainy, we breakfasted before starting; we moved on at 5 minutes after 7, traveled 4 hours and 45 minutes and stopped for dinner in a deep ravine. We met three emigrant trains and part of our company obtained some flour, meal and bacon. After resuming our journey at 20 minutes to 3 we continued till we had accomplished 25 miles or 780 from Great Salt Lake City. This was the first time we had to camp without water and it being so very cold and windy we were glad to retire to rest with rather a meagre supper.

Monday, June 1. Called at a quarter to 4 and started at 5 minutes past 4; at 10 minutes past 5 we saw three buffalo, the first and only ones we had seen up to this time. Ebenezer Richardson went after them with his gun and shot but missed his aim. He continued his search in the mountains and saw seven others; of these he killed two. We then emptied five carts of their contents into the others to be hauled to our next stopping place, and spared about a dozen men with empty carts to assist in cutting up and bringing the meat to our camp; this was done to the joy and relief of the whole company, supplying every cart with about 30 lbs of meat. We traveled 8 hours and 20 minutes today, making 25 miles or 805 from G. S. L. City.

Tuesday, June 2. At a quarter to 4, two horsemen were seen riding fast towards our camp; the guard made it known and many of the brethren arose. They were two from Stewart's train that had passed us. They had heard from an emigrant behind us that we were lacking provisions and they had sent Charles Shumway and Bro. Wimmer to see if we would stop about a day and a half for them and they would assist us. But it was thought best for us to push on and wait for no one, we therefore breakfasted, sang and prayed and moved on at twenty-five minutes to 7. This was the last chance we had on the plains of sending letters back to our friends and many of the brethren embraced it. We traveled 4 hours and 10 minutes and stopped for dinner, having passed 8 California trains and the road on the south side of the Platte appeared to be lined with wagons and cattle. After dinner we moved on again for about 3 hours and stopped for supper, after which we traveled two hours, making 27 miles today or 832 from G. S. L. City.

Wednesday, June 3. We were up and off at 5 minutes past 4; traveled two hours and 25 minutes and breakfasted on Wood River at 6 o'clock. We moved on at 10 minutes past 9 and journeyed 5 hours, then stopped for dinner and rest 2 hours on Prairie Creek between Grand Island and the Loup Fork. There is more lameness in the legs and sore feet among the camp than there has been heretofore. We resumed our travel for two hours and camped for the night making 30 miles today or 862 from G. S. L. City.

Thursday, June 4. Camp arose much refreshed, breakfasted, had public singing and prayer and started at half past 6; rolled on till 20 minutes to 11 and stopped an hour and a half for refreshments; we then made up our day's travel to 9 hours and 10 minutes, making 26 miles, or 888 from G. S. L. City. For two days past Capt. Wm. H. Branch has been so lame in his leg that he could not remain in harness and it was with the utmost difficulty he could walk alone, and keep up with the company; this was the situation of several others at the same time, and with these exceptions, the general health of the camp is good. We camped where there were 2 or 3 dug holes with sufficient water for the company.

Friday, June 5. The camp was up and off at 4 o'clock, full of ambition to make a good day's travel. Two or three with crippled legs walked ahead. We traveled 4 hours with no prospect for water and a few of the brethren feeling a little discouraged and weary, struck off to the left about a mile, where there was wood and water. The president, deeming it wisdom to pursue our journey along the main road, promised the balance of the brethren that if they would trust in God and go ahead, they should neither become weary nor thirsty; in 35 minutes we came to a good stream of water, unexpected and entirely unlooked for by all the camp, but the word of the Lord through his servant Herriman, was verily fulfilled, and we were refreshed, after which we prosecuted our journey for about 7 hours before we reached Loup Fork, making at least 35 miles along the best road we had met with on the entire route. (923 miles from G. S. L. City.)

Saturday, June 6. Camp called at half past 4, had breakfast and sent Stephen H. Goddard, Robert Gardner, John Gleason and John Berry to examine the depth of Loup Fork River and find out a fording place for us. A short time after the camp moved on, intending to keep them in sight, but were met by two brethren from the Beaver settlement, that Bro. Martindale had charge of. They told us to keep on the main road, which we did and met two California trains, one of which was composed of a Campbellite preacher and about 60 members. He was very friendly and good-natured and spoke highly of the courteous and respectful conduct of the brethren at Beaver, where he forded; he said he was determined to go through Salt Lake City and that if he found there was more light and truth than he had, he was resolved to embrace it. A few minutes after, we met an ox team that Bro. Martindale had sent to meet us with some bread to supply our immediate wants. Our company formed a circle on the ground, the bread was cut up in pieces and distributed around. The bread was a sweet morsel to us; there was not a pound of flour left in the camp. This aid was effected by Bros. Joseph W. Young and Harvey Pierce going ahead of us the day before to find the Beaver settlement and get all the help they could for us. When we reached the ford we emptied our carts into two of their wagons and waded the river with our empty carts, piloted by one of the brethren from the settlement. When we arrived at the other side we were warmly greeted by Bro. Martindale and 30 or 40 other brethren and sisters who set to work in their several tents, etc., to prepare us some refreshments. After regaling ourselves of this generous entertainment, a meeting was called of the settlers, chiefly composed of English and American families and after singing "Glorious Things of Thee are Spoken," prayer was offered by Pres. Herriman and we sang "Now Let Us Rejoice in the Day of Salvation" and Pres. Herriman, David Wilkin, Bro. Galley and Joseph W. Young addressed the Saints. Soon afterwards we bade adieu to our warm-hearted friends and traveled over two hours till we reached Looking-glass Creek, where we camped, making 17 miles today. There was a horse team starting for Florence soon after we arrived at the camping ground and it was deemed wisdom to let our invalids go in it, viz., Wm. H. Branch and Wm. Felshaw, and David Clough, Albern Allen and Milan were left at the settlement to be taken in by another team. Ebenezer Richardson and James Brooks went from here in the horse team, leaving their company and carts for the sake of gaining a little speed; they were two as able bodied men as any in the crowd and in this step acted contrary to the counsel of Pres. Herriman and the feelings of the whole company.

Sunday, June 7. Camp called at 4, breakfasted, sang and prayed and started at 20 minutes past 6, traveled three hours and 25 minutes and camped on a bend of Loup Fork. Here we began to see locations laid out for large settlements, some three or four log cabins were partly built, in one of which were three men who told us they were about to erect a large store and hotel. The name of the place was Cleveland and a little further on we counted 20 cabins at a place called Columbus. The soil in this region is rich and good, wood and water plenty; they were about to erect a large steam mill. We then traveled on three hours and 45 minutes, making 7 hours and 10 minutes or 20 miles, and camped by a clean, respectable house with a white canvas projection of about six feet.

Monday, June 8. We started this morning at 4 o'clock with considerable ambition, though many were crippled with blisters, etc., and went at good speed for over three hours before we stayed for breakfast on Shell Creek, after which we journeyed four hours and then stopped for dinner. We resumed our labor until our handcarts had rolled nine hours and 45 minutes during the day, making a long day's march. Passing a train today we were told that Parley P. Pratt was taken prisoner in Missouri for having a plurality of wives. During the day we passed over much good land and saw many log cabins and splendid farms, several cities and towns laid out which bid fair to become thriving and populous settlements. We stopped near the lone house of a widow with a large family, by the name of Hagen whose husband was overtaken by a snowstorm last winter. He had started 22 miles from home with his ox team and on his return was frozen to death. His body was found within two miles of his own house a few days before we arrived.

Tuesday, June 9. Camp started at 4 o'clock, traveled two hours and got breakfast near where the Liberty Pole once stood. We then went on to the Elk Horn ferry, where we refreshed ourselves nearly three hours and then moved on for 4 hours and 40 minutes, and camped on the Papillion, having walked 11 hours and 45 minutes.

Wednesday, June 10. Camp was called up at 4 o'clock a.m., singing and prayers and started at 20 minutes to 7 o'clock, and by 10 minutes to 10 o'clock we arrived on our camp ground in Florence, having been exactly 45 days since we left G. S. L. City and accomplished a journey of 1032 miles. Here we met among the Saints a kind and benevolent spirit and scattered in their midst to partake of their generous entertainment, and in the evening our organization as a company was dissolved. It was also suggested that our handcarts, bedding, etc., be disposed of by auction, which was done by myself, gratis, but there being so few emigrants in the city at the time, they sold very low. But the means raised enabled us to wend our way to St. Louis per steamer "Moses Greenwood" on Saturday, June 13, at 5 p.m. During my stay in Florence I was welcomed at the houses of Bros. Corbitt, Kenney, Davenport and Mace. Bro. Pyper, at the store, was also very liberal to the missionaries.

Nothing worthy of remark occurred on the boat and we arrived in St. Louis about 9 o'clock a.m. June 18th, and went to the office of Bro. Horace S. Eldredge.
