Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkStuart, David M.176FIRST MISSIONARIES TO OREGON

176By David M. Stuart

176(Until we found this interesting and important missionary experience in one of the early numbers of "The Juvenile Instructor," we were not aware that our missionaries had labored in Oregon and Washington Territories as early as 1857. We have not been able to find any information regarding Elder John Hughes, who, it appears, organized a branch of the Church in Clark County, Washington in 1855, eight years after the pioneers entered Salt Lake Valley.—P. N.)

176AT a conference of Elders in the Philharmonic Hall, San Francisco, California, President George Q. Cannon presiding, Elders Silas G. Higgins, Lorenzo F. Harmon and John H. Winslow, were appointed to go with me on a mission to Oregon and Washington territories. We started on the 5th of May, 1857, from San Francisco on board the steamship Columbia, and arrived at St. Helens, on the Columbia River the 9th of May, 1857, after a very pleasant trip. This was the first town in Oregon from the mouth of the Columbia River and we decided to commence our labors here.

On landing we retired to the woods where we prayed the Lord to open our way and bless us on our mission. We put up at the only hotel in town kept by a Mr. Bodwell, whose wife felt very bitter towards the "Mormons." After learning we were "Mormon" preachers she told me that a Mr. Hughes, an Elder of our Church had remained at her house a couple of years ago, and had left some "Mormon" books to pay his board bill; that he traveled without "purse or scrip," that he tried to preach but the people would not hear him and threatened to mob him out of the country. I told the landlady we always paid our way wherever we put up, and did not wish to be insulted by any of her insinuations. Mr. Bodwell came to the rescue, fearing a rupture, and stated that no insult was meant, and that we should be respected in his house, no matter what our profession was, so long as we paid our way. As for himself he was a freethinker, and believed every man ought to have the privilege of worshiping God according to the dictates of his own conscience. We were treated very kindly after this by all in the hotel. We had no money, however, with which to pay our board and after what had occurred we dared not tell the proprietor; we accordingly went into the woods and laid the matter before the Lord in prayer and implored His assistance in our extremity. We retired from the spot with an assurance that God would help us so long as we sought to do our duty.

While eating supper the landlord asked if we were going to preach in St. Helens. I told him we were on the morrow as it was Sunday. He proposed to introduce me to the trustees of the schoolhouse after supper, and when he had done so, I got the use of the building for our meeting. The brethren ran around and notified the people, and we had a crowded house. Marked attention was paid to our remarks and at the close of the meeting I told the congregation we traveled without purse or scrip, like the apostles of old, but being strangers in the place we had put up at the hotel and hoped that all the liberalhearted people present would assist us in paying our hotel bill. Sufficient was donated for our wants. All felt well and we were thankful to our Father in Heaven who had answered our prayer in such a striking manner.

From St. Helens we crossed the Columbia River; the river at this point is about a mile wide and is the dividing line between Oregon and Washington territories. We found the Saints in Clark County, Washington territory, who had been baptized and organized into a branch by Elder John Hughes in 1855, all glad to see us. The president of the branch told me that they had not met for over a year on account of the opposition, Indian war, etc. We warmed them up with the words of life which inspired them to meet opposition with the truth, called upon all to renew their covenants and partake of the spirit of the reformation in Zion and be blessed. Several came forward and were rebaptized, among whom was Sister Louisa A. John, whose husband was not in the Church. We held a conference on the 20th of May, 1857, reorganized the Lewis River branch, placed Daniel W. Gardener to preside, met with the Saints every evening at their houses, and although we had much opposition, when the Spirit of the Lord was upon us the opposition seemed to melt away like clouds before the rising sun. The work now commenced in Washington territory. It was considered best for Elders Harmon and Winslow to continue their labors here, and for Elder Higgins and myself to take a mission through Oregon.

We left Lewis River branch on the 13th of June, 1857, and preached in St. Helens on the 14th to a small congregation. We next got to preach in the courthouse at Hillsborough, Washington Co. The hall was filled to overflowing. We had good attention until the close of the meeting, when the Reverend Mr. Barton arose and wished to read a letter from Judge Drummond which had been published in the papers. I happened to have Brother Feramorz Little's letters published in the New York Herald of April 15th, 1857, denying Drummond's charges which silenced the reverend disturber of the meeting at the time, but he became angry and raised a mob, headed by the marshal, who led us out of the city limits and would not let us sleep in town. It was a very dark night and the mob left us in the woods with an injunction not to return at the peril of our lives.

As we were all alone Brother Higgins said, "Brother David where are we going now?"

180I answered, "God knows and he has not told me yet; let us retire in prayer and ask him."

180We knelt down by the road side and engaged in fervent prayer. After prayer we were about to proceed on our way through the woods when we heard footsteps behind us and a man kindly asked, "Where are you going to stop for the night?"

180I said, "I do not know."

180"Well," said he, "I was with that mob that ran you out of town but I did not approve of it. I am nothing but a professed gambler. Those men were professors of religion, headed by their minister. Mean as I am I could not approve of their proceedings. You have many friends in this place who want to hear you preach, and they are determined you shall if you will do so next Sunday. Here is five dollars" he continued, "take it, and go to Mr. Simmond's place about a mile from here, he has gone ahead and will prepare for you to stop with him. His wife may be opposed but never mind, good night!" and away he went back to Hillsborough, and left us praising God.

We plodded on to the place the Lord had provided. At a turn of the road we saw a light and presently met Mr. Simmonds who took us into his house, his wife said she had no way of providing for us, but our host took us upstairs where we had a bed and slept soundly all night. The next morning we were invited in to breakfast. The woman would not recognize us, but Mr. Simmonds asked us to bless the food. In doing so I asked God to bless Mr. Simmonds and his wife, their little ones and their home. The spirit of the Lord fell upon me in great power, and strange to say the woman broke down in tears and told us that she had been impressed by what she hadheard that we were bad men and she had sat up all night fearing to go to sleep knowing we were in the house. After breakfast we went into the country and visited from house to house allaying prejudice until the next Sunday when we returned to Hillsborough and preached in the courthouse according to promise. This was on the 29th of June, 1857.

Many were present at our meeting fully armed to mob while others were prepared to defend us. We held the congregation by the power of God for He was with us by His spirit knowing that we had determined to fill our mission or die in trying. Fearing, however, that we might cause trouble and perhaps bloodshed in the city, we left and went to Portland, Oregon, where we were mobbed and egged in one of the principal halls in that city. After the excitement subsided, we got to speak to the people for two hours, and I can say in truth that I never enjoyed more of the spirit of the Lord. After meeting we were taken to a hotel and cared for by a number of honorable, law-abiding citizens who dared to do right. We never got a public hall in Portland again, although we tried our best to do so.

182We next went to Oregon city where we were promised the use of the courthouse for services, but when the hour appointed for meeting came the key could not be found, the sheriff had absconded with it. Quite a crowd had gathered at the door of the courthouse and clamored for admittance and made threats to break the door open; I told the people I would rather speak in some other place if it could be found, whereupon a gentleman present said he would give me the use of the "Music Hall." We adjourned to that place and had a full house and good order. At the close of the meeting a minister challenged me to a discussion on the question "What is God, a material or an immaterial being?" He wanted a week to prepare his subject for discussion and I assented to his proposals.

182A Mr. Hardin took us to his home where we were kindly treated, himself and wife were old "Mormons." He introduced us to a great many of the leading citizens. We remained in that city until we had built up a large branch of the Church, with Joseph Tracy to preside over it.

182The courthouse, to which I have referred as being closed upon us, was burned down shortly after the occurrence. It was a very fine building and valued at a hundred thousand dollars. The fire was believed to be incendiary.

Quite a number embraced the gospel here and the Saints rejoiced in the truth, although we had great opposition from false brethren and Christian ministers who incited the populace against us to commit personal violence because with scriptures and reason they could not meet us in public debate or in private conversation; those who dared to meet us in public discussion were signally defeated, for God was with and blessed us with wisdom to overthrow their sophistry every time. In every place, too, we found some friends to feed and defend us from mob violence which became more bitter than ever when it was reported that Johnston's Army was marching against Utah.

In Salem, the capital of Oregon territory, we were mobbed and egged in the courthouse and yet we got to speak there a number of times and found friends among the more intelligent of the community, to whom I appealed for protection as a law-abiding citizen of the United States.

They said "Mr. Stuart we know you have violated no law in our midst; we believe you sincere; we know the Bible sustains the doctrines you preach, but if we tolerate your social system, the one wife system will be demoralized and society overthrown."

I replied, "Gentlemen, in the days of Christ and His apostles the ax was laid at the root of the tree not only religiously but socially and politically; so it is now; if 'Mormonism' is true, then every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, not by man but by the Almighty. We are willing to stand the test. This is a free country and if your religious institutions cannot stand against the influence of 'Mormonism' they are false and must needs fall, for 'Mormonism' will stand, being founded on truth, it will prevail over error until Christ shall come and usher in the universal reign of righteousness."

Our enemies, however, were unsatisfied. They went so far as to frame a law and had it presented in the legislature to prevent us preaching in Oregon, but like all other laws formed to retard the work of God, it proved abortive.

We preached all the way up the Willamit valley for a hundred and fifty miles, and were mobbed in every place.

While we were battling away in Oregon for the gospel's sake, our brethren in Washington territory were having a hot time. An organized mob headed by priests and apostates ran the Elders out of the country at the point of the bayonet, and ordered the Saints to renounce "Mormonism" or leave the country.

The following resolutions were published in the Oregon papers on the 8th of August, 1857:

"Editor Oregonian:

The following resolutions were adopted at a meeting of the citizens of Lewis River, held on Sunday, August 2nd, which we desire published in your paper that our position may be correctly known to our fellow-countrymen.

#"Wm. Kinder, #"J. Kinder,

#"John Simmons, #"Wm. Irven,

#"Wm. Miller, #"C. H. Fairchild,

#"R. T. Lockwood, #"W. Webb,

and others.

"Resolved, that Salt Lake Mormonism is treason; that it authorizes murder, robbery and the breaking open of the United States mails; that every inducement is made to proselyte the less intelligent of our fellow-citizens to its creed.

"Resolved, that the confiscation of individual property to Church purposes as practiced by the leaders of this gigantic conspiracy is a vital denial of the essence of the Declaration of American Independence, and looks to the subversion of the basis of civil polity.

"Resolved, that Brigham Young and his coadjutors in professing to receive revelation from God, are guilty of the basest blasphemy and the most criminal deception.

"Resolved, that we too highly prize the blessings of liberty and too strongly adhere to the laws of our country to be willing that they should be wrested from us who have been reared in the land of the free and the home of the brave by Mormon usurpers and conspirators.

"Resolved, that we are opposed to men preaching among us who endorse the outlawry, the tyranny, the blood cruelty of the Mormon leaders, and we therefore civilly invite the Mormon preachers now among us to leave our country, or renounce their connection with the Mormon Church. And that we suggest to those two or three families among us who have been harboring, thereby giving aid and comfort to the enemy, that a sense of propriety requires them to desist this unpatriotic business.

"Resolved, that while we are unwilling to employ coercive measure, or use personal violence in executing our determination we shall fully accomplish our object, trying the virtue of severer means when milder fail.

"Resolved, that the oath administered to the members in the 'endowment' is treason steeped in blood, and that taken by members entering into the Church but little better."

After reading these threats in the paper my spirit was grieved within me an I feared for the safety of my brethren in Washington territory. I therefore decided to go and help them in the unequal strife. I left Elder Higgins to take charge of the Saints on the coast fork of the Willamit river and on the morning of October 5th, 1857, I started in company with the president of the Coast Fork Branch, Harrison Keyes and Caleb F. Calvin, who were going to Portland to sell their grain. We camped near Salem on the 9th of October.

187In the night I had a dream that I preached in the Salem courthouse, and baptized a man. This dream was so impressed upon me that I determined to stop over, and told the brethren so with whom I traveled in the morning. They tried every way to prevent me from doing this, reminding me that a mob had threatened to kill me if I ever returned to Salem.

187I told them that when the Lord called, it was our duty to obey and that I firmly believed my dream was from God.

187We parted, they continuing their journey to Portland, while I went to Salem and called on Mr. May, the proprietor of the principal hotel in the city. He had always been friendly to me and on this occasion received me kindly but wondered that I should return to Salem knowing that on my last visit a mob had threatened my life if I ever returned. While we stood conversing the marshal of the city entered the hotel; I asked him for the use of the courthouse, telling him that I intended preaching there in the evening.

187"Yes," said he, "you shall have it and I shall see that you have an orderly meeting this time."

It was Sunday. The news spread like wild fire all over town and at the hour appointed the house was crowded to overflowing. The marshal was on hand and escorted me to the stand; he told the congregation that he wanted all to keep order and if there was any person present who did not want to hear me speak he wished him to retire from the building for he was determined that the meeting should not be disturbed.

I opened the meeting by reading the hymn, "Oh Say What Is Truth!" then prayed in a most fervent manner, for I felt near to the Lord. I spoke on the first principles of the gospel for an hour and a half, there being perfect silence in the hall. At the close of the meeting the spell was broken and a thousand and one questions were asked, not about what I had preached, but, such as, "What will the Mormons do when the army marches into Salt Lake?" I told them that the Mormons had done nothing to cause them to fear an army; that when the army marched into Salt Lake they would give the "Mormons" a severe letting alone because by that time they will have learned that the "Mormons" are innocent of the charges made against them and there will be nobody to fight.

It was nearly midnight before the crowd left the hall, but when they did so I found relief, for my mind had been on a continual strain holding the people in check. Next morning the marshal told me I had better leave the town for he feared an outbreak, as the mob were threatening to tar and feather me. I took his advice and left the town on foot for Oregon city by a road through the woods that was but little traveled. When I found myself alone I began to doubt my dream as it had not been fulfilled. I was leaving Salem and had not baptized anybody. While I was thus thinking a wagon came up behind me. I hailed the man who drove the team and asked him to let me ride. He told me to jump up into the wagon. I did so, and he at once recognized me as the "Mormon" preacher. He told me he was at the meeting and believed the doctrines I taught to be true. I preached to him until we arrived at his camp on Pudding River where he was making shingles. He asked me to stop with him over night as he wished to hear more about "Mormonism." We sat up nearly all night conversing together. When I was about to leave the next morning, he told me that he was convinced of the truth, that he believed me to be a servant of God, and wished to be baptized before I left, "For," said he, "I may never see you again, and if I lose this opportunity I may be lost forever." I told him that he must repent of his sins, take upon himself the name of a Latter-day Saint and determine to serve God in bad as well as in good report. He said that he had determined to do so, by the help of the Lord. We therefore went down to the river near his camp and I baptized and confirmed him a member of the Church. We partook of the sacrament all alone in the silent woods, there being none present to witness the holy ordinances I was performing but God, angels and ourselves. I wrote for him a certificate of his baptism, recorded the same in my journal and left him praising God. I have never heard from him or seen him since. His name was Wm. P. Jacobs.

I continued my journey to Oregon city where I baptized seven persons, who were added to the Pleasant Hill Branch, and remained with the Saints over two weeks confirming them in the faith of the gospel and testifying to them of the truth of the work.

I continued my journey down the river, preaching and teaching by the way at every opportunity, until I reached St. Helens, where I crossed the Columbia River and found the Saints on Lewis River afraid to meet me in public or admit me to their houses. They had all backed out but Sister Louisa A. John, who was neither afraid nor ashamed to invite me to her house, although her husband was in sympathy with the mob. I remained there two weeks trying to break the yoke of bondage from the necks of the Saints, but all to no purpose. There was no one to leave with the Saints on Lewis River, Elders Harmon and Winslow having been driven from the country by an armed mob, and where they were I knew not. So I left the Saints on Lewis River alone. At parting I blessed Sister Louisa A. John, and predicted, that if she remained faithful, she would yet be gathered to the home of the Saints.

On my return to Oregon city I found Elders Harmon and Winslow. I also received a letter from President G. Q. Cannon releasing us from the mission to return home. Our joy was full and my heart overflowed with thankfulness to God that we were now honorably released to return home to Utah, but how to go and take the Saints with us was the problem to be solved. It was finally agreed that Elders Harmon and Winslow should remain with the Saints at Oregon city and that Elder Higgins and myself stop with the Saints on the Coast Fork of the Willamit valley until Spring, warding off the enemy and assisting the Saints to emigrate. From this time until we started, on the 6th of March, 1858, we were employed in getting an outfit and protecting ourselves and the Saints from mob violence for we were continually beset by wicked men and devils, who sought our lives and declared openly that they would drive us from the country if we did not leave. Elder Keyes, the president of the Willamit Branch, had a rifle ball shot through his ax helve, while chopping in the woods alone, by some fiend in ambush. This circumstance gave the Saints a hint to hurry up. In the meantime the Lord held our enemies and preserved our lives in a wonderful manner while in Oregon, and on our way to Utah, beset, as we were, by enemies on every hand. We were betrayed by false brethren, lost in the mountains among the Modoc Indians, had our horses stolen, the company was taken by Indians and Elder Higgins was shot nigh unto death, but was healed by the power of God. Eventually through all our perils we landed safely among our friends in Ogden, Utah, on the 26th of October, 1858. We felt amply repaid for all we had passed through when we arrived home and were welcomed and blessed by President Brigham Young and the Apostles.

Twenty-five years have passed away since then. I have traveled far and wide through the United States and in foreign lands with the words of life and salvation to a fallen world, and in my humble way, with the help of God, have brought many honest souls to a knowledge of the truth; but my experience on the mission to Oregon is the most interesting one I ever had. I was greatly surprised at meeting Sister Louisa A. John in Ogden city, on the 18th of August, 1882, after a lapse of so many years. She had traveled alone from her old home. Her children one by one passed away in death, and last of all, her husband died, and left her free to come to the home of the Saints. She could find no one of all her father's house to come with her, and the Saints of Washington territory had lost the spirit of the work, so she had to come alone to do a work for herself and her dead in the house of the Lord.

On meeting her, she said, "Brother Stuart, here I am according to your word that I should yet come to Zion, if faithful. I have no friend but you among the Saints; help me to do my work, tell me how to commence."

I told her it was the law for all who gather to Zion, to be rebaptized and to pay a tithing of all they possessed in order to obtain the blessings of the house of the Lord. She did as required and received her blessings accordingly.

She visited a short time here and then returned to her old home where she is now settling up her business with a view of returning to Utah to spend the remainder of her days in the service of the Lord.
