Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Protection, DivineCannon, George Q.193THE WATERS OF LOUP FORK

193By George Q. Cannon

193(In September, 1858, George Q. Cannon, then 31 years of age, was called by President Brigham Young, "to preside over the Eastern Mission." He left Salt Lake City "on one days notice" to accept this important assignment. While on his journey across the plains he had the experience related in the following story of wading through the waters of Loup Fork.—P. N.)

193AFTER receiving my instructions the company started the same day, in the month of September, for the States. It consisted of Horace S. Eldredge, wife and daughter, Father Redfield and wife, Bishop F. Kesler, Joseph W. Young, Horton D. Haight and the writer. The journey across the plains was not marked by any particular event until we reached the Loup Fork of the Platte River. But our evenings and nights as we stood guard were made radiant and interesting by the beautiful and resplendent comet which adorned the heavens at that time.

In those days traveling on the Plains at best was but slow and tedious. There was no railroad then over which we could be whisked at the rate of twentyfive or thirty miles an hour; no palace car in which to lounge luxuriously on the cushioned seats in the day time and in which to lie down to be rocked to sleep by the gentle motion at night; no colored porter to wait upon and anticipate the wants of the passenger, with the expectation of getting a half dollar or a dollar when a change of cars had to be made; no finely equipped dining car where excellent meals could be served three times a day as the train moved rapidly forward to its destination. These are the conveniences and luxuries of modern travel. But on that trip, though we had good teams, we thought we had made a fine day's journey when we traveled thirty miles. When we rested in mid-day we had to turn our mules out to graze on such feed as they could pick up; and at night they were left loose, but were watched, each man taking his turn at standing guard to prevent the animals from being run off or the camp from being attacked by Indians. Upon deciding to camp, the first duty was to unharness the mules, then the man in each mess to whom had fallen the labor of cooking made his preparations for the meal, while the others gathered fuel and brought water and kindled the fire. On that trip Bishop F. Kesler, Brother Horton D. Haight and myself formed on mess. Brother Haight drove the team and Bishop Kesler, being an excellent cook, did the cooking. It fell to my lot to collect the fuel and bring the water and be of general help.

By the time we reached the Loup Fork the autumn had well advanced and the weather was cold. There was no ferry, and a ford had, therefore, to be found. We knew it would not do to use a horse for that purpose, as the bed of the stream was full of quicksand. Genoa, a place settled by the Latter-day Saints, was on the opposite bank, but too far distant for us to communicate with without crossing. There was no alternative, then; somebody had to wade the river and try to find a ford for the teams and wagons. So Joseph W. Young and myself divested ourselves of our coats, vests and boots and started in, he taking a direction somewhat down the river and I going in an upward direction. It was cold, toilsome wading, for the quicksand was heavy. We waded around for some time, but though we found bars on which the water was shallow, we could not find a crossing which we thought safe. Finally, I determined to cross to the other bank and see if some communication could not be had with the town. As I was carrying this conclusion into effect I saw a man standing on the bank, whom I thought I knew. It was Brother Joel H. Johnson, who was residing temporarily at Genoa. At the point where he stood the bank was somewhat steep and high and the stream swept past it with some volume and swiftness; but I was so glad to see him that I thought nothing of that, and soon swam across and told him the names of the company and what we wanted. He started immediately for the settlement and I had scarcely done more than cross the river and reached camp and told my story when we saw two men with several yoke of oxen coming to the river. It was Brother Nathan Davis, who now lives at Vernal, Uintah County, and another brother. Brother Davis was familiar with the river, and by taking a winding course from one bar to another he brought the oxen over to our side. The cattle were hitched on to Brother H. S. Eldredge's wagon and he and his folks were taken safely across. I had again waded across with this wagon, feeling anxious to see it safely over; and by the time we reached the opposite side the sun had gone down, and the shades of evening were closing around us. I was the only one of the company on that side of the river who belonged to the wagons on the other side, and I was pressed to go up to the settlement and stay till morning. It was urged that I must be tired, and chilled and hungry, and I ought not to attempt to cross again. To all of which I replied, if I do not return our companions on the other side will be uneasy about me and may feel alarmed for my safety. So we separated—they to go to Genoa, I to recross the river to the camp on the other side.

In that country the setting of the sun was followed quickly by darkness. The lengthened twilight which we in the mountains have after the sun goes down, is not witnessed there. I perceived it was getting rapidly dark, and I desired to cross as quickly as I could, and avail myself of the little remaining light. I did not, therefore, follow the route on which the wagon had traveled; but I plunged in to swim across the deep part and then to wade and swim as I might find necessary to go straight across.

My wading in the quicksand, my lengthy exposure in scanty apparel to the cold in the water, and my swimming in my clothes had fatigued and chilled me more than I was aware of. I soon became conscious of this. I was tired, my clothes hung heavily upon me and impeded my progress; to add to my danger darkness had closed around me, and it was deep darkness, at least I felt so that night in the river alone and far from human help, with the water boiling around me. A condition that in daylight might scarcely have been noticed, became, under those circumstances, a terror.

As I write, the sombre scene rises before me. I see the thick darkness which hides everything from view, I hear the rush of the stream as I battle desperately with it, and I feel the sinking of the heart at the thought of being lost in that strange place, with no one of my family or friends to ever know my fate. It is in such peril that thoughts flash with lightning rapidity through the brain. The reflections and scenes of a lifetime are crowded into a few minutes. I thought of all my past life, the promises that had been made to me, the sweet hopes I had entertained for the future, the important mission that had been given me; and was this to be the close of my career? What a message to send to my fellow-servants and my family—that I had disappeared, no one knew how or where; but presumably by drowning in the Loup Fork of the Platte River.

And with these thoughts I prayed. I called upon the Lord to help me, for I was lost in the darkness in the river. In daylight it might have seemed but a short distance to swim. I always had confidence in my swimming powers. But it was dark now; I was benumbed and tired, and I was without human companionship, and the distance appeared long. But I exerted all my powers and kept on swimming and praying. Can I make anyone understand the unspeakable joy I felt when I struck the bar and found myself in shallow water? I sank on my knees exhausted in the sand, inexpressibly thankful for my deliverance from death. The rest of the distance I was very careful to make in shallow water. I wandered around considerably, but whenever I found myself going where it was deep I retreated and tried some other spot.

I have crossed the Loup Fork in the cars many times since then. I never see the stream without recalling the memories of this and another escape which a number of us had in crossing that river. It is not a very large stream to look at now, but that night I thought it awfully wide.

When I reached the other bank to my surprise and disappointment the wagons had gone, and I found myself in a bad position to pass the cold night. The embers at our camp were still smoldering, and I consoled myself with the reflection that I could sit by a good fire all night, for timber was abundant. My companions evidently had supposed that I had too much sense to attempt to recross the river, and as I learned afterwards had borrowed no trouble about my safety. After waiting some time the moon rose. By its light I succeeded in tracking the wagons, which had been moved back into the timber to be more sheltered.
