Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkChristensen, C. C. A.200GOING ON A MISSION UNDER DIFFICULTIES

200By C. C. A. Christensen

200(This delightful account by Elder Christensen, which relates the difficulties he experienced in going on his mission in the "ox team and mule days" of the pioneer period, stands out in sharp contrast with the ease and luxury which our missionaries of today enjoy in traveling over the same route. But do we not miss the romance and thrill of life experienced by those early missionries?—P. N.)

200QUITE unexpectedly I received a letter in the month of April, 1865, which read about like this:

200Elder C. C. A. Christensen,

200Dear Brother:

200You have been recommended and called to take a mission to Scandinavia; please therefore be in Salt Lake City on — day of April, to be set apart and to start in company with other Elders who have been called at this conference.

200Brigham Young.

In those days there were no railroads in Utah, nor were there any telegraphs or phones; and the mails needed generally three or four days in fair weather to reach my home in Sanpete County. The time stated in the above mentioned letter, gave me about one week, in which to get ready to leave home, get an outfit wherewith to go from Sanpete, one hundred and twenty-five miles, and then one thousand miles across the country to the Missouri River; and, in those days, no one thought of excuses, but a call was a go. Another brother from the same city in Sanpete County was called at the same time, and we were therefore to join forces in creating an outfit of some kind. Both of us were poor men, with considerable live issue in the form of children, but no dead issue in the shape of money, and few people had any cash in those days in that part of Utah. By selling my cows and nearly all the wheat I had, I obtained a yoke of cattle. The other brother, by great effort, obtained another yoke, and jointly we got an old wagon, which some of our friends loaded with wheat, and thus we made our first start. We finally reached Salt Lake City, but came one day too late. The other missionaries had been set apart and received their blessings the day before we came in, under the hands of President Brigham Young; and from him they had received much timely and priceless instruction, which we poor late comers entirely missed or partly got second-handed from the other brethren. Our outfit, (two yoke of cattle and an old wagon), was condemned as unfit (instead of being an outfit), and we were advised to get a good mule team, as all the other missionaries were provided with either horses or mules. After this we were given three weeks, in which to turn our oxen into mules. We succeeded however, in making the change by swapping them off for the long-eared animals, and we got an old, heavy spring-wagon for our lumber wagon, and then started home again, after having received our blessings under the hands of some of the apostles in the Historian's Office.

Bishop Hunter—bless the good old man's memory—said, "You must go home and get more wheat"—"plenty in Sanpete!" and so we went. So far our own Bishop had not done a thing for us. Again our personal friends loaded our wagon with wheat, and we started from home a second time, expecting now to find smooth sailing. My companion being an old sea-captain, why should we not think so?

Night overtook us a few miles below the grain fields of Fountain Green, and we camped there for the night, as we knew the farmers had no hay at that time, as it was then about the middle of May. Grass was green, but yet rather short, but we could not make it any longer, so we turned our mules out to feed on the grass.

Next morning, however, we found ourselves minus the mules. Straining our eyes in all directions from the top of our wagon did not help us in getting them, and as the farmers came out to work in the field, we inquired in vain for them. No one had seen them. I finally was furnished a horse by a sympathetic brother, and hunted for the mules, but could not find them. At last one man suggested to me, to go to a certain man, a blacksmith, who lived in Fountain Green, as he was said to have a gift, that might be of advantage to us in this our dilemma. It was already late in the afternoon, and we were anxious to reach Salt Lake in time to join the missionary company before they started out, and so I went to the blacksmith and stated our case. "Well," said he, "I really feel for you, but the brethren have lately come down so heavily on astrology, that I don't meddle with it any more. I never charged anybody a cent for what little help I have been to them, and I respect the Priesthood sufficiently to let it alone."

We plead with him, being missionaries, and having been called to be in the city at a certain time, and we thought that our case would be considered an exception to the rule, and finally he consented to do what he could. He first asked me, from what direction we had come and he stood reflecting a few moments, then he said, "If you get on a horse and ride quick you will likely find your animals by the stream you crossed." I was soon on my way home and coming to the ford of the Sanpitch River, sure enough, the mules came out, but, instead of consenting to be captured and taken back to the wagon, they struck right off for town.

The next morning I started the third time from my beloved home and family.

When we got out of Sanpete Valley, we learned that the bridge across Provo River had been washed away, and we had therefore to take the longer road around the west side of Utah Lake, but succeeded in reaching Salt Lake City without any more difficulties, except being one day too late again, as the other missionaries had gone as far as the mouth of Emigration canyon and were camped there, expecting to start out the following day.

I had now traveled about four hundred miles, in starting on my journey from Sanpete County to Salt Lake City, and had spent nearly three weeks on the road, and three times had I bidden good-by to my friends and family at home.

As neither myself nor my companion were used to driving a horse or mule team, we were quite ignorant about how to properly look after and care for our animals, and they were therefore more or less neglected, and besides this, they had perhaps never before been worked together, as each of them had been bought from a different party. Nevertheless they soon became acquainted and had worked pretty well so far. My partner, Brother L., had bought his animal, a sorrel mule, from the late Elder John Van Cott, and I had bought mine, a white mule, from a Mr. Jenkins, both at that time living in Salt Lake City.

Having disposed of our second load of wheat, we were stopping outside a baker's shop to lay in a supply of crackers and other provisions, when one of the provost marshals from Fort Douglas stopped and, after some close examination of our team, unceremoniously unhitched our sorrel mule, claiming it as government property, as it had the well known U. S. brand plainly on the thigh, which we had never before noticed. There we stood in the street with only one animal to our wagon, and were thus left absolutely helpless, as far as going any farther was concerned, except over into the Tithing-yard which we did, by the assistance of a friendly farmer who happened to come along.

We immediately went out to find Bother Van Cott, from whom my partner had bought the mule, but again, (as bad luck would have it), he had gone to Goshen a few days previously and we were told that he would not be back for a week or ten days. The town or settlement of Goshen was then very much out of the way of the general travel, and it had only weekly mail connections with Salt Lake City, so that we had no hope whatever of getting to see him or reclaiming the mule by his assistance.

The next day we tried our best to get immediate help in some way, by offering the lost mule in security or the money from Brother Van Cott, as we were sure that the deal was fair enough on his part, but we could find no one that would take their chances on such security. Thus another day was lost.

The next day, a man from the south, who was to go on a mission to England, but who had also arrived in Salt Lake City too late to join the company, asked us if we were willing to take him along, if he could furnish us an animal, and of course we consented, as this seemed to offer us the only chance to get away.

This brother was a tall, elderly man, and a carpenter by trade, and he was as ignorant about teaming as either of us, if not more so, for we had already had some experience since we had left our homes.

My partner, the sea captain, was also a large man, and this additional weight of our new passenger with his luggage, added really too much to our load of troubles, as we were then fully two days behind the missionary company, and had to cross the high mountains east of us, and on muddy roads in some parts of the canyons, which was too much, even for a good, strong team under such circumstances. Our team, in its new composition, was far from being a good one, as our new companion had only furnished us with a small pony, that had never been in harness before. Thus the mule had to do all the principal pulling on these toilsome, steep mountain roads, and the pony would generally hold back or buck when his help was most needed. In consequences of this, our team was already in a jaded condition when we finally overtook the missionary company in Echo canyon, two days after we had left Salt Lake City.

Reflecting on the mishap of thus losing our mule in Salt Lake City, I can now see the kind hand of Providence interfering for our benefit, as the animal might have been taken from us out on the plains and thus left us in a much more critical condition in a hostile Indian country.

That same spring the Indians in Sanpete had commenced their depredations of robbery and murder, and it was, therefore, necessary to take every possible precaution for the protection of life under the circumstances that we were going to place ourselves in, and thus we were armed with guns and pistols, although we were sent out as "Messengers of Peace." We found the company organized under direction of Bishop William B. Preston, a most able and wide awake and experienced man for such a position, and in that company were several quite prominent citizens of Salt Lake City, among whom I will here only name Elder C. W. Penrose, later counselor to President Angus M. Cannon, of the Salt Lake Stake, but at this time we were all alike subject to the necessary discipline and took turns in watching and herding the animals by day and by night, besides attending to the regular duties of camp-life, as the Indians were on the warpath all along the line of our road of travel.

Our team soon showed signs of giving out, especially my mule, as the collar had rubbed its neck into a very bad condition, and our outfit very often became a source of scorn and derision to some of the younger members of the company, who designated it generally as "the shebang," which, to me at least, caused some very unpleasant feelings.

As stated before, all the brethren were taking turns in herding the animals by night and day, as the shifts came around, and thus it happened on a very dark night, that I was called out to guard the animals while we encamped among the hills near the Sweetwater River. I asked to be placed where I could have my own white mule in sight, (being nearsighted and not very keen of hearing) for fear that I might not be able to watch my side of the herd. Our company numbered about fifty men and I think more than that number of horses and mules. My request was readily granted and I kept a faithful watch over what I supposed to be my white mule and the rest of the animals, but, when daylight appeared, I found that I had only been watching a large white rock on the hill-side, and that the herd was nowhere to be seen, as they had been roaming away while grazing, and the other brethren that were on guard had followed along with them. Quite naturally, I was charged with having been asleep, as I had not at that time made known my infirmities, with regard to vision and hearing, and that rather added to my unpleasant situation and gave me a black mark in the estimation of my fellowtravelers, and as I was then given my turn in herding only in the daytime, it came to look very much like a disgrace to me, as the true cause of my apparent neglect was not yet generally known.

After a while, however, some of my friends among the Scandinavian brethren, made known to our captain the true state of affairs, and that I actually owned more than a two-third interest in our unfortunate "outfit," and as they had known me intimately from my youth they could testify to my plea for the unsatisfactory watch on the above-mentioned night, and I soon found that our captain showed a more pleasant side towards me. This soon was increased to extreme kindness by a circumstance that happened a few days later.

209My kind Manti brethren were assisting us along, by lending us their spare horse nearly every day, because the wound on the mule's neck would not heal while we were traveling through the dusty, alkali country along the Sweetwater River. Therefore my partners and I would take turns in leading or riding the mule whenever we had the use of the borrowed horse. But this was not a pleasant task for the one who had the mule to take care of, as she would most likely lay down in the water whenever crossing a stream, or take to rolling when she found a soft, sandy place, no matter whether she had a man on her back or not, and we would therefore rather walk than ride on her.

209One day, when we arrived at a small, stone fort, erected at a place known as the Three Crossings of the Sweetwater, we found the entrance to the fort barricaded and the soldiers within greatly alarmed on account of the Indians, who, they said, were in great force concealed in the immediate neighborhood. The soldiers told us further that their horses had been taken from them the day before, and that we ourselves would land in Paradise before the next morning.

Some of the brethren, however, gave them to understand that our mission was not to that locality yet, and that we had set out trusting in God for protection and a safe arrival at our appointed fields of labor, and that we would proceed on our journey. In the evening we camped on the banks of the same stream, many miles lower down, taking special care to have our camp and animals well guarded.

It may be easily understood by a little reflection, that, as we were so few in number and formed a long string of teams as we traveled, while many of us were walking, that we would have been a comparatively easy prey to the Indians, if the Lord had not been our Protector. But we did not even see one Indian, although it seemed, by the uneasy actions of our animals, that they were aware of their presence.

That day, as we were traveling along in our usual way, a large government cavalry horse joined our company, being attracted by seeing so many of its kind along the road, and it followed us into our camp and joined our herd when they were turned out at night. It was undoubtedly one of the horses which the Indians had taken from the soldiers in the fort at the Three Crossings, and which they had either missed or else let go, as it had a bad swelling on the lower jaw.

A few days later, when Brother L. (my partner) was leading the mule, and was leisurely following our company some distance behind, the mule unexpectedly gave a jerk and thereby gaining her freedom, she started back on the road at a lively gait, leaving him to his own reflections on this new addition to our difficulties. He was, however, seemingly not much concerned about it, for he came into camp and merely told me what had happened, as though that was a matter of no consequence to him. This was one of his peculiarities, and it would sometimes hurt my feelings to hear him sing in the most happy mood, when I was the most troubled because of our many difficulties. To me this stoical indifference only aggravated the case, and I resolved that an effort should be made to regain possession of the mule at all hazards. It was a desperate resolution indeed, to think of going out after dark, short-sighted as I was, and expect to capture a mule on the open prairie; besides there was the risk of falling in with the hostile Indians. But these thoughts did not enter my mind at all, because the mule and its capture was all I could think of.

As none of my partners would undertake the task, I had to do it, if it should be done at all, and so that stray government horse was quietly saddled up and brought to me, without the knowledge of our captain or anyone else. I was only armed with a revolver—and I don't think that I had ever fired a shot with such a weapon—but I trusted in God for success, inasmuch as I was on His errand as a missionary, and I started off about sundown. Darkness soon followed sunset, and being short-sighted and a very poor horseman and even unprovided with a rope or lasso, I cannot now see in what way I could expect to capture that fleet-footed animal; but it was accomplished anyhow.

The horse was very large and was, no doubt, trained as a cavalry horse, and that helped me a geat deal, and I soon had passed over some five or six miles of the road on which we had traveled during the day, and found myself again on the banks of the Sweetwater River, where the low land was thickly overgrown with tall willows, and yet I had not seen any mule, but she had heard the clatter of my horse's feet and came out to greet him in her own peculiar way, but not to be captured, for she at once struck out on the road and galloped at her best still farther back and west, the way we had come. Fortunately the road had taken her away from the willows and although it was now quite dark, it was comparatively easy for me to see the white animal, but not so very easy to pass her and turn her in the direction that would bring us into our company's camp. For some time it became quite a race between the big cavalry horse and my mule, for quite a distance, but I finally succeeded in passing her and turning her in the desired direction, and by keeping her continually at full gallop, I brought her into camp about midnight.

From the guard on duty I was instructed to report immediately to our captain, Bishop Preston, as he had been very anxious about my safety since he had learned of my desperate undertaking, and he would not have given his consent to it if he had heard of it in time to prevent it, but as it had now been accomplished successfully, he was glad it was done, and from that time on he showed me much kindness in various ways.

One morning about half an hour after leaving our camping-ground, we found the corpse of a young man lying in the road, stripped of all his clothes except his shirt and his socks. He had been killed by Indians the night before and they had carried away his scalp along with his gun and his clothes. It was indeed a ghastly sight to behold in such a place and in such a condition; an arrow, which was left sticking in his side, showed that he had been killed at close quarters. He belonged to a company of emigrants, who had been camping about a mile distant from our last night's camping-place, and some of their men soon joined us after our discovery of the murdered man's remains. The men gave us the following information concerning this sad affair:

He had left their company, about dusk, the previous day, as they drew near to the place where they finally made their camp, as he had seen some game and desired to secure some for the company. He must have come unawares upon the Indians, who perhaps were also out hunting, and he had evidently made an effort to escape from his pursuers and reach the company's camp, and, at last, he had fired his gun at them, but without effect, and then he was set upon by his cruel assailants and murdered in his defenseless condition.

The emigrants tried to persuade us to join them in pursuing the Indians and taking revenge upon them, but in this they did not succeed, so we left it to themselves to take care of the remains, as we were traveling in opposite directions; their destination being Oregon.

After such an object lesson, we had additional reasons for being very humble and at the same time to watch as well as pray, which, however, we had done all the time, and this, no doubt, accounts for the marvelous protection which we had enjoyed thus far.

Our next camping-ground was selected with special care for security, as well as concealment, on a piece of dry ground in the midst of some extensive swamps where the tall grass and rushes almost hid us from view, and in addition to this a heavy thunder-storm came up with rain and lightning, which kept us pretty well awake and most likely also kept the Indians from annoying or attacking us; for we were pretty sure that there were some of them not very far off.

After this we met with no adventure of special interest. God was still with us. We had henceforth, most of the time, good, level roads to travel on, yet many of the animals began to show signs of fatigue as they had had but very little grain along the journey and most of them none at all. Some of the brethren had been on missions before, and while walking they would sometimes relate incidents of personal experience to each other, and testify by their experience to their own actual knowledge of the truth and divinity of the work of God in which all were so much interested. Others would relate what their veteran fathers had experienced during the trying ordeals through which they had passed when persecuted by the mobs in Missouri and Illinois. I will here relate one of these wonderful stories, which tended to increase my faith and reliance on a kind Father in Heaven and made me trust in Him for the satisfactory termination of the present journey, with all its troubles and difficulties.

A brother, by the name of Hoagland, (whose father was then Bishop of the Fourteenth Ward in Salt Lake City) related the following incident in his father's experience:

It was in the Spring of the year 1844, when many of the best men in the Church were sent out on a special mission, to advocate the election of the Prophet, Joseph Smith, to the presidency of the United States, that Bishop Hoagland was traveling with Elder George A. Smith, stumping the country for this purpose. They were traveling in a light one-horse wagon, taking their chances with the people, for their food and lodgings. One day, when they had gone without these necessary accommodations too long, they both felt much in need of something to eat. They had entered a small patch of timber, where there was some nice, green grass, when Elder George A. Smith; said: "Let us stop here and ask the Lord for something to eat." This suggestion was at once carried out. The horse was unhitched and let out on the grass, while the brethren retired into a more secluded place and engaged in prayer, especially asking for something to satisfy their hunger. After prayer they felt entirely satisfied as far as the cravings of their stomachs were concerned, and after a while they hitched up and proceeded on their journey, but they had only gone a very short distance, when they were surprised by finding a large cheese lying upon a stone in the middle of the road and a clean new knife lying crossways on the top of it. Brother Smith said, here is our supper, and so they stepped out and with thankful hearts proceeded on their journey, taking the cheese with them.

The government horse we delivered to the commanding officer at Fort Laramie, as we could not with safety let it go with us any farther for fear of being charged with having stolen it.

At every station along the road we found both soldiers and civilians alarmed on account of the Indians, whose depredations extended all along the line from the Rocky Mountains to within a comparatively short distance from some of the thickly settled portions of the State of Nebraska.

Thus, when we arrived at a place called Grand Island, about 150 miles from Omaha, another remarkable circumstance happened, under the guidance of a kind Providence, which proved the first leaf turned in our favor. Our team being weak, was traveling some distance behind the rest of our company, as we at that time considered ourselves pretty safe from the Indians. At Grand Island was a large supply-store, kept by a couple of Germans, and one of the Manti brethren—Elder Andrew Nielsen—had talked with these merchants about the risk of living in such an exposed locality, without any means of getting away, even if they could be warned in time to flee. He finally suggested that they should buy our whole outfit, which they could get cheap, and by giving the animals rest and plenty of grain and grass, they would do them good service. The result was, that we sold these gentlemen our outfit and received a draft for $225.00 on the Bank of Omaha, and what little luggage we had was kindly taken by our brethren in their wagons, while we took it gladly on foot the rest of the way to within a couple of miles from Omaha, where we made our last camp in an organized capacity.

The next morning an informal council was held in our camp, with a view to arranging for the disposal of the teams and other things that would be of no further use to us, and to get our ticket bought as cheaply as possible for the journey to New York. Here a new trial awaited me. My unfortunate partner, Brother L., appealed to the brethren for means, wherewith to pay his transportation toward his final destination, which was Norway. But he met with a severe rebuff, as he was plainly told that he should have made his arrangements for that purpose before leaving Utah instead of calculating on somebody else. His plea, that his mule was taken from him in Salt Lake City, did not convince the brethren that he had a claim upon their means, as he should have stayed back and looked after his interests in that city and not in Omaha. Thus he was absolutely without any means of his own with which to proceed farther, and he consequently felt very bad, and I did also. By dividing the money, which we had obtained for our outfit, and paying the other man his share for his horse, there was plenty left for me to pay my expenses, but Brother L. had nothing. I asked him sympathetically, what he proposed to do, and, to my surprise, he answered, I have no other to fall back on for help except you, Brother Christensen. I at first remonstrated with him on this proposition, as it would make me just as unable to reach my destination as it would make him—neither of us would have enough—but he said, that we should trust in the Lord and act as brothers. So I divided all the money I had with him, and he assured me that I should have a full half share in his mule, which had been taken from us in Salt Lake City. I had but very little faith in ever getting a cent back from that source, but what money I had left would at least pay my fare to New York, and I thought of earning some money there, by working at my trade as a painter, if no other way was left me to get to my field of labor.

When the other outfits were sold at auction in Omaha, not one of them brought anything near the price which our poor despised outfit had brought us, and most of them not even half as much.

Bishop Preston purchased tickets to New York for us at $65 each. We traveled by steamer from Omaha down the Missouri river to St. Joseph, and from there, by railway, to New York. I had therefore only a few dollars left after paying my fare. Our tickets entitled us to go by any one of four different steamers that belonged to the same company, whenever we could catch them; for there were no regular time arrangements for their coming or departure, consequently, all passengers were expected to watch for them, if they wanted to be taken along.

My limited resources would not allow me to lodge in a hotel, so I sought for and found some Scandinavian acquaintances, that I had heard were in Omaha, and I was received by them with the greatest kindness. They had partly lost faith in the Gospel, and one of the families had even been in Utah, while the other family had never got any farther than Omaha, but I had known them both intimately, and the family that had been in Utah, had been my next door neighbors. They were very good people, and made me welcome to their home and such comforts as they could bestow upon me, as long as I would stay, and I soon found that my presence was a God-send to them, as the smouldering embers of their first genuine Gospel-love began to burn again in their honest-souls. My desire, however, was to get on board the first steamer that would take me off; but the Lord seemed to want it otherwise, for I came too late three or four times, and once I was even so near the steamboat, that, if I had come only one minute earlier, I could have got on board. I felt almost like swearing at my bad luck, yet I afterwards learned that the Lord had other plans for me. I was thus kept in Omaha a whole week and performed some good among these people, who have since all come to Utah and proved themselves to be excellent Latter-day Saints. It must be borne in mind, that Omaha was at that time a general dumping ground for all kinds of dissatisfied Mormons and for rank apostates, and I had some of them to contend against occasionally, yet my personal character gave me some advantage over their bitter attacks upon "the Mormons" as a whole. They could not charge me with anything improper, except that I was going out to deceive people, etc. One of my early fellow-laborers in Scandinavia, I found there as a bitter apostate, yet he pretended to still have much personal friendship for me, but I could not accept of such false friendship and left him in disgust and with pity.

When finally, I reached New York, I found myself again one day too late, the most of the other missionaries having left that port the day before my arrival. Here I was in that large city, almost without money, and I felt quite sore and disappointed over it. But when I found Brother Wm. H. Miles, who was the local president of the small branch of the Church there, he encouraged me by informing me that Bishop Preston had deposited $30 with him with which to pay my fare to Liverpool; and , said he, "You can sleep here in my office and visit the Saints and get your meals with them, so that your stay will not cost you anything." These were indeed encouraging tidings, but I was advised to wait a whole week in New York, as he expected some of the missionaries, that had not yet arrived, would come in and thus I should have company across the sea.

221The money thus bestowed upon me, was a gift from Captain Wm. H. Hooper, our Territorial Delegate to Congress; as he had donated $200, and left the amount with Bishop Preston, for the benefit of any missionaries who might be found short of means. I felt exceedingly grateful for this unexpected assistance and the time was passed very agreeably in New York.

221With only a faint hope of learning anything more about the lost mule, I called every day during the week at the banking house of Holladay & Co., but, no news nor money came along. I finally had bought my ticket to Liverpool, and, on my way to the dock, I called again at the bank, when to my happy surprise, I found a letter that had come that morning containing a draft for $150, sent by Brother Van Cott. He had proven his rightful ownership to the mule that he sold us, had obtained the animal, and then had sold it again for the sum which the enclosed check called for.

221Thus I sailed from New York with quite a sum of money in my possession, and I herewith humbly and with gratitude acknowledge the hand of our kind Father in Heaven in thus detaining me long enough, both in Omaha and in New York, for this much needed money to reach me, as it otherwise would have been lost to us.

I arrived safe in Liverpool, where I related to President Daniel H. Wells my trials and their fortunate termination, and I offered to pay the $30 back, which I had received in New York to pay for my passage across the sea, but he refused to take the money, and told me to keep it with his blessings, as I had yet a long way to go to reach my field of labor—Norway.

Arriving there, I found my friend and much tried partner, Brother L., very happy to meet me, and especially to receive from me $75 in ready cash, as his share of the mule money.
