Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

223DEATH OF ELDER JOSEPH STANDING

223By John Nicholson

223(President Rudger Clawson, when 22 years of age, went through the terrible experience of having his missionary companion shot down by his side, near Varnell's Station, Georgia, by a wicked and murderous mob. The following well-written account of the tragedy is from the pen of John Nicholson, one of the early Utah writer.—P.N.)

223IN 1879, Elder Rudger Clawson was called to go on a mission to the Southern States, and proceeded to his field in the early part of that year. He labored in the State of Georgia, associated with Elder Joseph Standing. Before he reached that part of the country the latter had accomplished a good work in Whitfield County; particularly in the neighborhood of Varnell's Station, where he had succeeded in raising up a branch of the Church.

223A short time before he was murdered, Brother Standing had a dream which made a powerful impression upon his mind, and caused him to have forebodings of approaching trouble. He told it to Rudger, and several times subsequently to other persons in his presence. It was about as follows, as near as his precise language can be recollected:

"I thought I went to Varnell's Station, when suddenly clouds of intense blackness gathered overhead and all around me. I visited a family who were connected with the Church. The moment I entered their house the most extreme consternation seized them, and they made it clear beyond any possibility of doubt that my presence was objectionable. They appeared to be influenced by a sense of great fearfulness. There was no clearing away of the clouds nor abatement of the restlessness of the people, when I suddenly awoke, without my being shown the end of the trouble."

In the meantime a conference was appointed to be held in Rome, Georgia, and Elders Standing and Clawson received an invitation to be present and participate in the proceedings. They accordingly set out on a journey to that point. Standing decided that a call should be made, on the way, at Varnell's Station, that they might visit some of the Saints, most of whom were new members of the Church. They reached that place on the evening of Saturday, July 9th, and proceeded to the residence of J—. As soon as they got to the house the inmates seemed to be in a state of great excitement. They said that threats had been made against the brethren, and the feeling toward them in the neighborhood was bitter and murderous. They declined to allow them to stop over night, because if anything happened they would have to share the trouble.

This reception chilled the feelings of the Elders and Rudger said to himself involuntarily: "This is the fulfilment of Joseph's dream."

"What shall we do?" said the missionaries. "It is now nine o'clock and getting quite dark. Can you tell us of a place where we can find shelter?"

"Yes," said J—, "you can go to Holston's a mile and a half farther on. He will doubtless entertain you."

There being no alternative, the two travelers left the house of the J—'s and set out for that of Henry Holston, who was not a member of the Church, but had shown a very friendly disposition toward the Elders. They trudged through the thickly wooded country, about one half of the way in pitchy darkness.

On reaching the Holston place, they discovered that the family had retired. In response to a knock, the voice of the proprietor was soon heard, saying, "Who is there?"

"Standing and Clawson," was the reply.

"Well?" said Mr. Holston, in that peculiar intonation that gave the impression that he was slightly hesitating about extending his hospitality.

The situation was briefly explained, the relation winding up with—"We would like the privilege of stopping over night."

The door instantly opened and Mr. Holston said, with that cordiality for which he was noted, "Come in."

After the brethren entered he was very kind. He explained to them, however, that there was danger in the air. Threats of mobbing, whipping and even killing the Elders had been freely made, and he expected to get into trouble on account of entertaining them. He said, however, that he would take his chances on that head and would defend them so long as they were under his roof.

When the guests entered the room assigned them, Standing appeared pale, anxious and determined. It is not known whether his dream had occurred to him on account of the situation, as no expression from him denoted that such was the case. It was evident, however, that he was impressed with a premonition of approaching danger. He had always felt an intense horror of being whipped and more than once had declared that he would rather die than be subject to such an indignity. Notwithstanding that he appeared to be deeply impressed with a sense of the near presence of danger, he was naturally a courageous young man.

He carefully examined the windows and securely fastened them. He then got hold of an iron bar, which he placed in such a position as to be within easy reach of his hand, in case of necessity.

"What is the meaning of these precautions?" said Rudger.

"I expect the mob tonight, and I want to be ready to receive them," was the resolute response.

"I don't think we will be disturbed," said the imperturbable Rudger, who forthwith fell into a sound slumber, from which he did not awaken till broad daylight.

Next morning was the Sabbath and the weather was clear and beautiful, all nature appearing to rest in peaceful serenity. The two Elders set out to go to the house at which they were received with such meagre hospitality the night previous, for the purpose of getting their satchels, etc., and bringing them on to Mr. Holston's place. They found the J—'s still fearful because of the bitter feeling they knew existed in the neighborhood toward the brethren, and the stay of the latter was brief.

The road between J—'s and Holston's was densely wooded on both sides. On the way back to the residence of the latter, turning a bend the two young missionaries suddenly came in full view of a posse of twelve men. Some were mounted, the remainder were afoot and all were armed. As soon as they caught sight of the Elders they set up, unitedly, the most demoniacal yells of exultation, and came rushing toward them like a pack of hungry wolves who had discovered the prey they were about to tear to pieces and devour.

The feelings that were inspired in Joseph Standing at this appalling spectacle can only be judged by his appearance. His face was pale as death, his features rigid, while his eyes betokened the intensity of the subdued excitement under which he labored.

The sensations that passed through Rudger's mind and frame were entirely new to him, as he was now facing a danger that had no parallel in any former incident of his life, which he thought he was about to be compelled to surrender.

As soon as they came up Joseph Standing, in a clear voice, loud enough to be heard by all of them said:

"Gentlemen: by what authority are we thus molested upon the public highway? If you have a warrant of arrest or any other legal process to serve upon us, we would like to examine it, that we may be satisfied as to your authority to interfere with our movements."

"We'll show you by what authority we act," some of them shouted.

One of the mounted mobbers then jumped from his horse and approached Rudger with a cocked revolver. He flourished this weapon, whirling it menacingly in the face of the young man, who looked down the muzzle of an implement of that character for the first time. It is perhaps needless to state that it looked exceedingly formidable to him. The murderous fellow who performed this part of the program accompanied his threatening antics with the most foul and blasphemous abuse, while his companions were moving around and indulging in vile and profane cursings. The excitement of Bradley—a large and powerful man—was singularly noticeable. He was on horseback and was holding a double barrelled shotgun in front of him, across his animal, with both hands. He shook so that the weapon bobbed about as if he were about to drop it.

"Come with us," was the command from the mob.

The singular procession then started back in the same direction from which the Elders had come.

Standing appeared to be laboring under a terrible strain. His face continued overspread with a deathly pallor; he walked rapidly, and with his figure erect as an arrow. He moved so quickly that he kept pace with the front line of the mobbers, with whom he constantly reasoned and expostulated. "It is not our intention," said he "to remain in this part of the state. If we had been unmolested we would have been away in a very short time. We use no inducements to persuade people to join our Church. We preach what we understand to be the truth and leave people to embrace it or not, as they may choose," etc.

Such expostulations had not the slightest effect in mollifying the lawless band, but rather exasperated them all the more. Indeed it was not what the missionaries might do for which these base fellows had resolved to punish them, but for what had already been done, some of the best and most respected people in that section having embraced the gospel through Elder Standing's ministrations. They said: "The Government of the United States is against you, and there is no law in Georgia for Mormons."

Rudger manifested no hurry in accompanying the gang. His overwhelming sentiment on that subject was one of reluctance. He could see no developments ahead but those of a most appalling character, and he was the reverse of anxious to hasten their consummation. He expected he was going to his death, and he had no desire to meet the grim monster any sooner than might be compulsory. He walked rather slowly, in order that he might not get too far ahead of his inclinations.

One of the ruffians, becoming exasperated at his tendency to lag, came up behind and struck him a terrible blow on the back of the head. Being stunned for the moment, Rudger reeled and fell forward, saving his body from the full shock of the fall by extending his hands. Recovering speedily, he was on his feet in an instant, his heart fired with consuming rage. He turned for the purpose of identifying his cowardly assailant, and found him to be a young man—probably the most youthful person of the party. Rudger knew that to resent the brutal outrage would be certain and almost instant death. He looked at him, however, in such a manner as to convey all the contempt that could be indicated by facial expression.

This seemed to enrage the wretch almost as much as if he had received "blow for blow." Shortly after the helpless victim of his attack had resumed the melancholy line of march, the fellow assaulted him again. He raised a heavy club and was about to bring it down upon Rudger's head with all the force he was capable of using, when another member of the band seized his arm and told him to desist....

The party at this juncture turned out of the main road and went deeper into the woods. They had scarcely more than taken this change of route when they met a young girl named Mary Hamlin. It subsequently transpired that she and her mother, who were friendly to the Elders, had seen the mob and feared greatly that they might meet the brethren and kill them. At the suggestion of Mrs. Hamlin, her daughter set out to intercept the missionaries, put them on their guard and enable them to evade the mobbers. She was just a little too late, but it was no fault of this heroic girl, who had traveled with all the speed she could command.

When she comprehended the situation her face assumed a bleachy whiteness.

A terrible fear, combined with a determined resolution seized upon Rudger. Doubtless the mind of Brother Standing was similarly exercised. Knowing the unscrupulous characters of those who held the Elders in custody, an idea shot through his mind that they might commit an outrage upon the girl. In that event any attempt to prevent them consummating such a purpose would be certain death to himself and companion, yet he resolved to make it. Unarmed and helpless as he was, he purposed selling his life as dearly as possible, if need be, in defending this innocent young woman.

One of the men said: "You see we have got your brethren. As soon as we dispose of their case we purpose attending to you."

"The Lord is with them and my prayers are forever for them," replied Mary, the tones of her voice evincing deep emotion. She then went on her way.

At this juncture three of the members of the party who were on horseback left the main body and made a detour, probably to reconnoitre to get others to join them in their villainous work.

The remainder, in charge of the two intended victims of their satanic hate, proceeded a short distance farther, when they reached a lovely spot—a spring of clear water, overshadowed by a huge, out-spreading tree. Here a halt was made and the party seated themselves around the mirror-like pool.

From the time the Elders were captured by the mob, Standing seemed to be affected with a burning thirst, probably occasioned by the suppressed excitement under which he was laboring. On the way he several times appealed to his captors for water, and now an opportunity was presented for the first time for him to obtain it.

One of the men, pointing to the spring, told him to drink.

The young man was farthest from the pool, and in order to reach it would have to pass close to several of the mobbers, and while reclining to reach the water would be an easy prey to any of the blood-thirsty crew who might take advantage of his prone position to do him violence. This probability appeared to flash across his mind, and he said: "I don't wish to drink now."

The man who told him to slake his thirst evidently divined what was passing through his mind, and said: "You needn't be afraid; you can drink, as we will not hurt you while you do so."

Standing went to the spring and took a copious draught. He was still very pale, his features rigid, and overspread with an expression of deep anxiety.

After he had returned to his place, James Faucett, aged about sixty years, and who was seated upon a horse, addressing the Elders, delivered himself as follows:

"I want you men to understand that I am the captain of this party, and that if we ever again find you in this part of the country we will hang you by the neck like dogs."

A general desultory conversation ensued, in the course of which the vilest accusations were laid against the "Mormons," the beastly talk of the mobbers merely serving to show the depravity and corruption of their own hearts. They betrayed a deepseated hatred of President John Morgan. They were desirous of ascertaining his whereabouts from the Elders, and appeared disappointed on learning from them that he was at that time in Utah.

The space of about one hour was consumed in this way, when the three horsemen who had left the party came in sight. As they rode up, one of them exclaimed: "Follow us."

234At this time Joseph Standing was sitting with his back toward the horsemen, but no sooner had the command embodied in the two words quoted been uttered than he leaped to his feet with a bound, instantly wheeled so as to face them, brought his two hands together with a sudden slap, and shouted in a loud, clear, resolute voice—"Surrender."

234A man seated close to him pointed his pistol at him and fired. Young Standing whirled or spun three times round upon his feet, fell heavily forward upon the ground, turned once over, bringing him face upward, and spread his arms widely out, his form being in such a position as to be in the shape of a cross.

234As if moved by one impulse all those who had been seated upon the ground arose to their feet. Suddenly a member of the party, pointing to Rudger, said to his companions, in an authoritative tone—"Shoot that man."

234In an instant every weapon was turned upon the defenseless young missionary, who felt that his last moment on earth had come and that in a few seconds he would be launched into eternity. He fully realized the situation, his feelings being intensified by the expectation that a bullet was about to crash through his brain, the very idea of which had always been to him most horrible.

The murderous wretches paused a moment with their weapons leveled upon their proposed victim, who folded his arms—showing an outward calmness at the most extreme variance with his inward feelings—and said with apparent deliberation: "Shoot."

The suspense of a lifetime seemed to be thrown into the next few seconds. A whirling sensation passed over his brain and then all was dark. This condition was but momentary, and when he recovered the position was unaltered—the murderous ruffians still stood with their guns and pistols pointed at him. The man who had directed that the young Elder be murdered suddenly changed his mind and countermanded the first order by shouting, "Don't shoot."

The men at once lowered their arms. They then appeared to sense the horrible character of the deed that had been committed. As soon as it flashed fully upon them, they were seized with sudden consternation and instinctively rushed together in a compact group, as if seeking mutual protection from each other, from the probable consequence of the bloody act.

Rudger walked over to where young Standing was lying, stooped and looked into his face. The spectacle that met his gaze sent a shock through his system that can never be erased from his memory. There lay his companion, recently in the full vigor of life and health—bright, capable and intelligent—in the throes of death. There was a large ghastly wound in the forehead directly above the nose and the death-rattle was sounding in his throat. Rudger gently raised the dying man's head and placed his hat under it to keep it out of the dust. He was then seized with a deep sense of grief, succeeded by a feeling of utter loneliness, which may well be imagined from the appalling character of the situation. Under the circumstances, he could but put his trust in God, who, for a wise purpose, had permitted one of His faithful servants to be brutally murdered.

As Rudger stood gazing at his friend and companion, he was approached by one of the Nations brothers, who said with a strong emphasis upon the last word of each exclamation: "This is terrible! This is terrible! This is terrible; that he should have killed himself in such a manner."

The missionary perceived the intention to resort to the suicide theory, and deeming it both imprudent and unsafe to openly repudiate it, replied: "Yes, it is terrible."

Then realizing the danger of giving the gang any time to sense the fact that to permit him to escape alive would be a menace to their safety, he saw there was no time to be lost.

He exclaimed: "Gentlemen, it is a burning shame to leave a man to die in the woods in this fashion. For heaven's sake either you go and procure assistance that the body may be removed and cared for, or allow me to do so."

He urged this point so earnestly and vehemently that the gang consulted a moment and then, turning to him, said: "You go."

It need scarcely be said that he did not wait upon the order of his going, but went at once. He felt that he had urgent business at a convenient distance from that mob, and that he could not breathe unrestrainedly while within range of the villainous crowd.

Before he could reach a wooded part of the country it was necessary to cross an open space extending a distance of about twenty rods. He had an almost uncontrollable desire to run, but he dared not do so lest that course might cause the lawless fellows to change their minds. He walked rapidly, however, yet it seemed to him like a journey of fifty miles. Every moment he was expecting to be shot in the back, and the relief he experienced when he reached cover is beyond the power of description.

As soon as he was out of the sight of the murderers, Rudger almost flew through the air. Urged on by a terrible desperation, his feet scarcely touched ground as he placed the greatest practicable distance between himself and his enemies in the least possible time. The house of Mr. Holston, about two miles distant from the scene of the tragedy, was the objective point of the race he was running. When he had proceeded about a mile he heard a sound of chopping in the woods. It fell like sweet music upon his ear, as he though it probably indicated the near proximity of some one who might prove "a friend in need"—a welcome change, in view of the experience of the last few hours.

He hailed the wood-chopper, by shouting, "Halloo."

"Halloo," responded the axe-wielder. Rudger located the source of the sound, but was on the other side of a creek from the owner of the voice. Without seeing him he called to him in entreating tones: "A man has just been murdered in cold blood about a mile from here. Will you, for heaven's sake, go with me to the spot and assist in removing the body?"

After a pause came the heartless response: "No; I haven't time."

Rudger resumed his run for Mr. Holston's house, at which he soon afterwards arrived.

That gentleman had been informed by persons who had seen the armed mob that the lives of the Elders were in danger; he was therefore partially prepared for the tale of blood which was hurriedly related to him.

Said Rudger: "Will you go and look after the body while I go and obtain the services of a coroner?"

"Yes. I will go at once."

"Will you let me have the use of a horse?"

"Go to the stable and find an animal that will suit your purpose."

Mr. Holston then left for the scene of the assassination and Rudger started for Catoosa Springs, on horseback where the coroner resided.

The road to Catoosa was lonely, that part of the country being but sparsely populated. Rudger put the animal on which he rode upon its metal. Doubtless it traveled at a speed that would have satisfied any ordinary, and even some extraordinary demands. To the impatient and overstrained mind of the rider it appeared like the progress of a snail compared with the rapidity with which he desired to go over the road.

By the direct route from Holston's to Catoosa, the distance was about five miles, but owing to his being misdirected he got out of his way, making it seven miles by the route he took.

When about two miles from his destination, in turning a curve in the road he beheld a group of horsemen, numbering about six or seven approaching him from a distance. They appeared to be in a hurry, as they were traveling at a rapid rate.

When they came within about twenty rods of Rudger, he was confronted with a new and unexpected terror—he recognized them as members of the gang who had murdered Elder Standing. He felt as if it would have been a relief for the earth to suddenly open and swallow him. He anticipated neither more nor less than that the wretches would assassinate him.

He could make a dash for cover, as the country was wooded, and thus have a chance, meagre though it might be, to escape.

No sooner had this idea flashed upon his mind than he abandoned it. He resolved to confront the danger, although it appeared to involve certain death. The condition of his mind at meeting, alone and defenseless, with those whose hands were reeking with the blood of his late companion, must be left to the imagination of the reader. It cannot be adequately delineated by the pen of mortal. The approaching party were all armed. The courageous young man rode forward. When he reached them, all reined up, and he fully anticipated being shot down. He expected no mercy.

"What have you done with Standing?" one of them exclaimed.

"I have not disturbed him, and I presume he lies just where he fell."

"Where are you going?"

Rudger extended his arm westward and, pointing with his index finger, said: "I am going in that direction."

Some of them smiled, and all rode on, their departure lifting a load from Rudger's mind that seemed like the removal of a mountain.

The satisfaction of the mobbers at the answer given by Rudger as to where he was going, is easily explained. They imagined that he was fleeing from the country and was traveling in hot haste, in a terror-stricken state, for Utah. This was precisely the impression he wished to make upon them, and he misled them by pointing toward Catoosa, which lay directly west from the point where he encountered the party.

His meeting with them was a cause for astonishment to him as well as terror. The reason for their presence at that point was, however, quite obvious. It was close to the line which separates Georgia from Tennessee, and they were making their way over the border into the latter State in order to evade pursuit and arrest for murder by the officers of the law.

Rudger pushed on to Catoosa, at which point he shortly arrived.

After the coroner had been notified of what had occurred, that official, his clerk and Rudger, set out for Mr. Holston's place, where they arrived at about five o'clock in the evening.

Mr. Holston then related to them the following particulars:

"At the same time as Elder Clawson left for Catoosa, I set out for the scene of the assassination, and found Standing lying in his blood. I examined the wound, and while doing so I discovered that the young man was not yet dead. I made another discovery that caused me to fear every moment that I would be murdered myself, as I was unarmed, and consequently not in a position to defend myself. I saw armed men—members of the party who committed the murder—loitering about the edge of the adjacent woods, closely watching my movements. Notwithstanding the alarm I naturally felt under the circumstances, I remained a sufficient length of time to enable me to construct a shade of bows to shelter the body from the scorching rays of the sun, the weather being extremely hot. After having performed that office, being about all I could do under the circumstances, I returned home."

A little party, consisting of the coroner and clerk, Rudger, Mr. Holston and four or five others proceeded to the spot where the murder was committed. When they reached it the sun was setting, and a group of awe-stricken and silent people were standing around Brother Standing's body. It was a solemn and impressive scene.

A jury was empanelled on the spot and an inquest held by the coroner. The testimony of Rudger Clawson, Henry Holston and others was taken. It was on information imparted by Mr. Holston and some others who testified that the names of the actual murderers were obtained. This enabled the jury to return a clearly defined verdict, which was to the effect that the deceased came to his death by gunshot wounds, inflicted by means of weapons in the hands of the twelve men whose names were known.

When the inquest was concluded, a momentous question was broached by the coroner, he said: "What is to be done with the body?"

There was one man who had stood by Rudger thus far. Had his friendship faded? As this reflection passed through Rudger's mind that same person—the noble and generous-hearted Holston—broke the stillness and said: "Take the body to my house."

A large, wide plank was procured from an adjacent deserted cabin. Upon this the corpse was laid. Four pieces of wood were placed under the board, so that eight men could carry the inanimate burden. Rudger, the coroner and Mr. Holston were among the pall-bearers who carried this rude, extemporized bier. The others were promiscuous persons who had gathered to the spot from curiosity.

By this time the sad procession was ready to march through the woods, it was dark. They had moved but a short distance until the gloom was impenetrable.

This monotonous gloom was suddenly relieved by the human voice. The coroner addressed Rudger: "What disposition do you propose to make of the corpse?"

"I intend to take it home to Utah."

"I think such an idea is preposterous. I do not believe you could find a railway company who would give you transportation for it, and even if you did they would probably throw it off somewhere on the road. It appears to me that the better way would be to bury the body here, and then, in the course of two or three years, the bones could be taken up and removed to any point that might be desired."

"I view the matter quite differently," was the resolute response. "I feel that the spirit of Elder Standing would never be satisfied to have his body buried where he was murdered. He would prefer it to be laid away in the land where his friends and kindred dwell. I should feel so if I were in his place, and I intend doing in regard to him as I would wish should be done by me under similar circumstances."

This ended the conversation, and the bearers of the body soon reached Mr. Holston's house.

A rude support was constructed in the front yard of the premises, upon which the body was placed.

At this juncture a new difficulty presented itself—no person present knew anything about preparing a corpse for the casket. In this dilemma Rudger, who had never had the slightest experience in that line, was under the necessity of undertaking the task.

A tallow candle was procured and placed near the head of the body. A vessel of warm water was brought and with these materials and some cloths Rudger proceeded with the melancholy and distressing work before him. This labor of love and friendship occupied a full hour, the operator receiving no assistance or aid from the group of curious on-lookers, who stood around and gazed upon the weird spectacle.

Finally Rudger's dreary task was finished, the body being washed and clothed in clean garments. A sheet was thrown over the corpse and all retired into the house.

About this time the sheriff of Whitfield County, accompanied by a deputy and posse, arrived from Dalton, a town of 9,000 population, distant about twelve miles. This officer was a tall, sinewy man, of tawny complexion. His hair was turning grey, and he had the appearance of a person of about fifty years of age. He was exceedingly demonstrative and made strong professions of interest in Rudger. To the latter this was quite refreshing, because it was something new, for even Mr. Holston was not loud in his manifestations of friendliness. His friendship was evinced by acts more than words. Altogether Rudger thought the sheriff a pretty good fellow, but was not favorably impressed by his deputy, a short, dumpy man, approaching middle age, who was quite reserved.

Said the sheriff: "Mr. Clawson, I very much regret that such a cold-blooded murder should have occurred in my county. I can assure you that every possible effort will be made to capture the perpetrators and bring them to justice."

The officer was informed of the fact that seven of the assassins had been traveling with hot haste toward the Tennessee border.

The posse then left, and, as it was approaching midnight, Rudger retired to rest after passing through an experience in one brief day that has but few parallels in individual history.

The following morning Rudger set out for Dalton to obtain a metalic casket. He had on a former occasion visited that place in company with his late deceased companion, the news of whose assassination was now well known throughout the town. It caused a profound sensation, and Rudger, being recognized, was a center of attraction and curiosity. He was plied with questions and advice on every hand. He was advised strongly not to return to the vicinity of Varnell's to get the body as those who thus counseled him believed if he did his life would be taken. The reply to all this was that he should go in any event, no matter as to the risk he might run.

246Rudger had no money, but the undertaker let him have the casket, and forwarded it by conveyance to Holston's, he taking the young man's word that he would obtain means for payment within a few days. Accordingly he telegraphed to Benedict, Hall & Co., of New York, for $200, which was promptly furnished, with an assurance from that firm that they could be commanded for any further amount that might be needed.

246Rudger, accompanied by an employee of the undertaker's, followed the casket in a buggy. On the way he related the circumstances of the murder to his companion. He soon questioned his own prudence in doing this, as the narrative so excited that individual that he became almost panic-stricken. Every now and then he would lean out of the vehicle and peer into the woods and along the road. He seemed to take every clump for a group of anti-"Mormon" mobbers in ambush, and each bare and projecting limb of a blighted tree seemed in his eyes to take the form of a shotgun. His exclamations erstwhile were in unison with his movements.

246Holston's was reached at about five o'clock in the evening. The body was soon enclosed in the metalic casket, and the undertaker's employee left for the place from whence he came.

The following day the body was conveyed to Dalton. Here the undertaker, instead of removing the body from the case in which it was enclosed, simply made a very large one, placed the other in it and filled the intervening space with cinders and dust from a locomotive. This material being heavy, the combined weight of the body and casing was thus increased to nearly nine hundred pounds.

In this shape the corpse was conveyed by rail to Utah, where Rudger arrived in charge of it on the first day of August, 1879. The news of the tragedy had created a deep sensation in the community of Latter-day Saints. At Ogden a brass band, an organized body of members of the Young Men's Improvement Associations, and a multitude of other people awaited the arrival at the depot of that town. In Salt Lake also a concourse of people had assembled at the Utah Central Railway station. By the time Rudger and his sacred charge reached that point, however, night had cast its sombre mantle over the city of the Saints, and the body of the youthful martyr was taken directly to the office of Sexton Taylor.

The obsequies were conducted in the Tabernacle on Sunday, August 3rd, in the presence of about 10,000 people. The speakers on the occasion were President John Taylor and President George Q. Cannon.

The body was interred in the Salt Lake City cemetery, the same day.
