Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkDean, Joseph H.256SKETCHES FROM THE SAMOAN ISLANDS

256By Joseph H. Dean

256(The experiences of the first missionaries to the Samoan Islands in 1888 are interestingly related in the following story by Elder Joseph H. Dean. This story was first published in the Juvenile Instructor in 1889. Brother Dean, now in his 87th year, is a resident of Blackfoot, Idaho.—P.N.)

256IN the year 1862, two Hawaiian Elders were sent from the Sandwich Islands to Samoa, by Walter M. Gibson, to preach the gospel. Their names were Belio and Manoa. They left Honolulu December 23, 1862, on the whaling vessel "Massachusetts," Captain Green, and arrived at Aunuu, the smallest inhabited island of the Samoan group, January 24, 1863. They acquired the language and did some little missionary labor for the first two or three years; but as no white brethren were sent down to assist them, and they hearing that Gibson who had chosen and sent them, was an imposter, and had been cut off from the Church, they soon discontinued the missionary work and began making money.

On my first mission to the Sandwich Islands (1877-1881) I often heard of Belio and Manoa, and that they had written to their friends wondering that white missionaries were not sent to Samoa as well as to Hawaii. Being again called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1887, I mentioned the subject to the authorities, and all felt that the time had arrived when efforts should be made to establish a mission on Samoa. Our mission (my wife being also called) was therefore extended to the Samoan and Society groups of islands, and to any others that the Spirit of the Lord might inspire us to visit.

We arrived in Honolulu June 10, 1887, and labored there as missionaries for one year, during which time I got in communication with Manoa, by letter. He informed me that Belio had died June 3, 1876, and that the Samoans, who had joined the Church through their administrations, were either dead or had gone back to their old churches, and that he was the only one upon the Samoan Islands that pretended to be a Latter-day Saint. He thought the prospects were good for the establishing of a mission there, and said he had a house we could live in until we could do better.

By June 10th, 1888, just one year from the time we landed, we were ready to leave Hawaii's sunny isles for our new home. As our fellow missionaries and the native Saints pressed around us at the wharf to bid us goodbye, it was with pain that our adieus were spoken, for among the most strong, and yet tender ties that the human heart can conceive, are those that spring up between fellow-missionaries in foreign lands, and between them and the Saints among whom they labor. More especially is this the case, I believe, with those who labor among the simple and kind-hearted natives of the islands of the Pacific. Though they have their weaknesses, and are often backsliding in keeping the commandments of God, yet are they kind and hospitable to a fault, and will give you the last bit of food they have and sleep out in the mosquitoes so that you may have their netting for a covering, and in many other ways show a kindness of heart for which one cannot help but admire them. But the Alameda sounds her deeptoned bellowing whistle, and we just have time to say "Aloha oukou apau loa" (goodbye all) and run up the gangway. The hawsers, that hold us to the wharf, are quickly untied. The captain pulls the rope that sounds the gong in the engine-room and rings "Forward!" The ponderous engines are set in motion, and we begin our long voyage. We stand on deck and wave our handkerchiefs to our friends as long as we can see them. We pass by the American, English and German men-of-war, together with numerous other craft, on our way out of the harbor. We soon get clear of everything that obstructs the sight, and have a delightful view of the beautiful city of Honolulu, nestling in her forest of evergreen trees and running vines and flowers, with the mountains in the background covered with perpetual verdure. It is indeed a lovely picture, and we would willingly have stood upon the deck and silently gazed upon it until it vanished in the distance, if the ship had stood still, but alas! It seemed to take delight in seeing how many different positions it could take to the minute. This made us sea-sick, and we then cared very little whether Honolulu had evergreen trees or Utah sagebrush for shade trees, and would rather have a comfortable place to lie down than a view of a hundred cities. When we started the fumes from the cook's quarters smelt very pleasant and we felt as though we could "eat our rations;" now all his viands seem to have gone bad, in fact the whole ship seems infected with bad smells. I shall not endeavor, however, to explain the peculiar agonies of sea-sickness to the readers, for after I had done my best they would have a very imperfect idea of it. Many of the boys, also, will yet be called upon foreign missions, some probably to Samoa, and they will then find out what it is by experience; and ten minutes sea-sickness will give one a better idea of what it is than a day's explanation. There is one consolation about sea-sickness however—it generally leaves one in a better condition than it found him.

In about two days we get our sea legs on and can then enjoy ourselves again. The cook's dishes smell much better, and the way we can eat is really surprising. Like the boy fasting, we make up for lost time.

The distance from San Francisco to the Sandwich Islands is 2100 miles, and from the latter place to Samoa 2200 miles. This, added to about 900 miles from Utah to San Francisco, puts us some 5200 miles from our mountain home. The Sandwich Islands lie between 19 and 22 north latitude, while the Samoan group are between 13 and 15 south latitude. Our ship plowed through the ocean at the rate of a little more than 13 miles per hour, or 314 miles in 24 hours, so that we made the distance in seven days.

The fourth day out from Honolulu, at 8 p.m., we crossed the "line" (equator). An old lady aboard wondered if we could have seen it had it been daylight.

As we were traveling south, every succeeding night brought a change in the heavens, new constellations appearing in the south, and those we were accustomed to setting in the north. About the time we crossed the equator the North Star disappeared below the northern horizon and the "Southern Cross" rose in the south. This is a cluster of bright stars resembling a cross. The first Spanish mariners that entered the Pacific, attributed the quietness and tranquility of the ocean to the influence of this cross. By the time we reached Samoa the "Great Bear" or "Dipper" had gone down in the north, and we have seen no part of it since. So you see we are not only in a strange land, and among strange people, but the stars above us are strangers to our eyes.

We landed upon Aunuu, and thereby got to the end of our journey, June 21st, 1888. Upon reaching the shore Faasopa, Manoa's wife, escorted us to her house through the grove of cocoanut trees, leading my wife by the hand. The women and children scampered along in a wild and uncivilized fashion, laughing aloud in unrestrained and natural heartiness. Aunuu was enjoying a circus, so to speak, and the exhibition did not close until, in self-defense, we closed the doors and hung up curtains to the windows to shut out the gaze of the greatly entertained audience.

When Manoa had assisted the men to haul their boat up on the beach, he came to the house, and, as the room in which we were was full of natives, he led me into another where we could be alone. Then taking me by the hand he said with much emotion, that he was thankful that the Lord had preserved his life to meet one of His servants upon Samoa.

Manoa is about fifty years of age, six feet high and somewhat slim. He is the reverse of good-looking, but kind-hearted and straight-forward in his dealings. He has had a vast experience and is therefore considerably above the average of his race in intelligence. In 1882 while fishing with giant powder it exploded prematurely in his right hand, shattering the limb badly. He decided to amputate it at the wrist. He took an old chisel he had, and placing the wrist of the right hand on a log, held the chisel on it with his left, while a native struck the chisel with a club. He fainted before the operation was completed, but upon reviving, the mutilated hand was finally hacked off. He was laid up on account of this accident for fifteen months.

He has done considerable trading in copra (the dried meat of the cocoanut) and made a good deal of money. He has a nice lumber house the material of which cost $1,200. It is 40 x 20 feet, one and a half stories high, with a shingled roof, and porch the full length; also a back kitchen the full length of the building. He built it himself, with the assistance of two or three young Samoans. The house contains three rooms besides the kitchen, and is very well built throughout.

Manoa gave us the south room to live in, and we were soon enabled to make ourselves quite comfortable.

I told Manoa to give out among the people that we would hold meeting Sunday morning if he would interpret for me. He did so, and at the appointed hour Sunday morning, June 24th, we held our first services.

The house was crowded and the porch full of natives anxious to see and hear. What a consolation it would have been if I could have spoken to them in their own tongue! Manoa gave out a hymn from the Church of England hymn book beginning with the words, "iesu, e ou le aso sa." Everybody, old and young, knew the hymn by heart, and joined in singing it with a spirit and gusto that was not only inspiring but also startling. Manoa offered prayer. After another hymn I spoke to them for forty minutes as best I could through an interpreter. Explained to them in a general way the subject of my coming to Samoa and the character of the work I had come to present. They seemed much interested and paid strict attention.

263Next day I suggested to Manoa that he be rebaptized and renew his covenants before the Lord, to which he willingly assented, and so I baptized him in the sea (there being no running water on Aunuu) in front of his house.

263After returning to the house I prepared to confirm him, and as his wife Faasopo and another woman named Malaea were in the house, I asked Manoa to invite them into our room to witness the ceremony. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out in rich abundance upon us, and though the two women could not understand what I said, they felt the spirit by which we were surrounded, and to my great joy and consolation, Malaea immediately applied for baptism. We had prayed earnestly to the Lord for months before coming here that the hearts of the people might be prepared to receive the gospel, and here was one applying for admission to the Church before I could begin to speak the language. My heart was filled with joy and gratitude to the Lord, for He had done all the converting. So I baptized my first convert on the Samoan Islands, June 24, 1888. She has stood firm in the faith ever since, and her husband and four of her six children have since been baptized.

Two days after, the principal chief of Aunuu, Lemafa, and his wife Leutuva, applied for baptism. The former had been baptized many years ago by Belio, but after the latter's death had again returned to the Church of England society. Two days after, five more made application, and by the time Sunday came again (July 1st) the members of the Church on Aunuu, including ourselves, numbered fifteen.

We administered the sacrament of the Lord's supper that day for the first time in Samoa. We used bread-fruit and water, there being no bread upon the island. Manoa and Lemafa bore their testimonies, and though we could not understand them, and I could only speak to them through Manoa, yet we all rejoiced exceedingly before the Lord, being filled with the same spirit.

One of the sisters that was baptized, Tumoe by name, had been afflicted for a long time with an alarming complaint, and her family had been afraid for months that it would cause her death. When she applied for baptism I explained to her that people were often baptized for the restoration of their health, and that I thought that if she would exercise faith and believe that the Lord would hear our prayers, she would be completely healed. She replied that she believed all I said was true, and that the Lord would have respect unto my petition in her behalf. So when we went into the water I baptized her for the remission of her sins and for her restoration to health. Her testimony is that from that moment she has been completely healed, not having felt the least symptom of her sickness since.

Thus was the Lord with us to comfort our hearts and sustain our promises, and enable us to plant the Gospel among the Samoan people.
