Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

ConversionWidtsoe, John A278THE SHOEMAKER BEARS HIS TESTIMONY

278By John A. Widtsoe

278(In his latest book, entitled "In the Gospel Net," Elder John A. Widtsoe has written a charming and interesting account of the life of his mother, Anna K. G. Widtsoe. He has kindly allowed us to use two chapters of this book which contain the account of his mother's conversion to the gospel and the difficulties she and her children experienced in making the long journey to Utah.—P.N.)

278SOON after her arrival in Trondhjem Anna Widtsoe rented an apartment for herself and her two boys on Steenbakken (Steens Hill) which was then being invaded by residences. Above the dwelling, further up the hill, stood the old, historic fortress; below, and far into the distance, lay the beautiful panorama of the old city, the thousand year old cathedral standing high, the harbor, the clustered ships, the fjord, and all around except where the fjord zigzagged out toward the ocean a background of fir-covered hills. It was beautiful to look upon at all times of the year.

In these two rooms she proceeded to make a home and to look the future in the face. What was left of the Schoolmaster's library, except for a half-hundred choice selections, she had stored in Grandfather Widtsoe's house, lower down the hill. She had added a little to the treasured articles of furniture brought from Namosos. Equipment for dressmaking had been provided. She was kept busy enough with household cares, dressmaking, and reading and studying her Bible, and trying to reconstruct her shattered world.

One day she asked a neighbor, a ship's captain living in the same house, an older resident, to recommend a shoemaker to whom she might take her son's shoes for repair. One Olaus Johnsen, a very competent, honest workman was recommended. In fact the shoemaker's son Arnt (at this writing living in Logan, Utah), brought to the house a pair of the captain's shoes, and took with him for repair, a pair of John's shoes. When the boy's shoes were returned, a Mormon tract was stuffed in each shoe. A little later with a parcel containing another pair of old shoes, the widow set forth in the warm sunshine of the spring of 1879 for the half-hour walk to Johnsen's shoemaker shop. It certainly did not occur to her that she was making the most fateful visit of her life. Yet, who can say that it was the most fateful. The events of life are like the threads of tapestry—all together make the pattern and picture.

Olaus Johnsen was a wholesome, well-spoken man in his forties, a workman who knew his craft. His wife was of the sturdy Norwegian type. Anna Widtsoe first met the wife, and made inquiry about the meaning of the tracts found in her son's shoes that had been returned, repaired. Mrs. Johnsen declared that they told the truth, but that Mr. Johnsen would explain the whole matter.

The shoemaker agreed to put soles on the shoes strong enough to last a good while even under the wear of a lively, active lad, who was always moving about. The details of business were soon agreed upon; the commonplaces of courteous people were exchanged, the widow was about to leave the shop, yet a little curious about the tracts which she had found in the first pair of shoes when they were returned, but unwilling to ask too many questions.

Anna Widtsoe's hand was on the door latch, when the shoemaker said, somewhat hesitatingly, for the business was concluded and the lady was a stranger, "You may be surprised to hear me say that I can give you something of more value than soles for your child's shoes." She was surprised. She looked into the eyes of the man, who stood straight and courageous in his shop. "What can you, a shoemaker, give me better than soles for my son's shoes? You speak in riddles," she answered. The shoemaker did not hesitate. "If you will but listen, I can teach you the Lord's true plan of salvation for His children. I can teach you how to find happiness in this life, and to prepare for eternal joy in the life to come. I can tell you whence you came, why you are upon the earth, and where you will go after death. I can teach you as you have never known it before, the love of God for his children on earth."

281Understanding, happiness, joy, love—the words with which she was wrestling! But, this was a shoemaker's shop. This man was clearly a humble man who knew little of the wisdom of schools and churches. She felt confused. She simply asked, "Who are you?" "I am a member of the Church of Christ—we are called Mormons. We have the truth of God." Mormons! It was terrible. She had innocently walked into a dangerous place. Hurriedly she thanked the shoemaker, left the shop, and climbed the hill.

281Yet, as she walked homeward, the words of the shoemaker rang in her ears; and she remembered a certain power in his voice and majesty in his bearing when he delivered his message and bore his testimony. He was a shoemaker, but no ordinary man. Could it really be that the Mormons had the truth of the Lord? No, it was absurd! But, it made her thoughtful and restless. When the repaired shoes were brought to the house a day or two later, by the shoemaker's young son, Arnt Johnsen, Anna Widtsoe found, carefully tucked into each shoe, a Mormon tract. The shoemaker was valiant. He missed no opportunity to fulfill the obligation of a Latter-day Saint, to bear witness modestly and properly but steadily, to all the world.

281Then began two years of struggle.

The tracts in the shoes aroused her curiosity, to the extent that one Sunday she went to a Mormon meeting. The meeting room was on the second floor of the shoemaker's home, a sturdy log house. A small group of people were there; and a fiery speaker, a missionary, raised all manner of questions in her mind. The main effect of that meeting was a resentment against the primitive environment of the meeting, and the quality of the people constituted the membership of the Trondhjem branch. Class distinctions were sharply drawn in the land. Anna Widtsoe, though a fishermaiden, had been well born, in the economic as well as in the moral sense; and she had moved upward with the years. She was now of the professional class. To join such a group as she saw there that Sunday seemed to her tradition-bound mind to be a step downward. One day, some months later; when the truth was forcing itself upon her, she came home, stood quietly in the middle of the floor, and said aloud, to herself, "Must I step down to that? Yes, if it is the truth, I must do so."

Soon, however, all was forgotten in her battles with the shoemaker and the missionaries upon points of doctrine. She knew her Bible. Time upon time she came prepared to vanquish the elders, only to meet defeat herself. She had not read the Bible as these men did. Gradually she began to comprehend that her reading had been colored and overshadowed by the teachings of the church of her childhood; and that these men, these Mormon missionaries, accepted the Bible in a truer, more literal manner. She liked it. Nevertheless she fought fearlessly. It was no use. At length she had to admit that the Bible was all on the side of the Mormons.

283Even then she was not ready. There were other matters to be settled. Questions of authority, revelation, life within the church, and a hundred others that her quick mind formulated, were presented to the missionaries, debated, discussed and taken up again. She had a worthy teacher in the missionary then in Trondhjem, Elder Anthon L. Skanchy, whose knowledge of the Gospel was extensive and sound, and whose wisdom in leading inquirers to truth was unusually fine. This well-informed, intelligent widow tested his powers. Upon her he directed the full battery of Gospel evidence. Unwillingly, yet prayerfully, she became convinced that she was in the presence of eternal truth.

283At length, on April 1, 1881, a little more than two years after she first heard the Gospel, she was baptized into the Church by Elder Anthon L. Skanchy. Thin ice still lay over the edges of the fjord, which had to be broken to permit the ordinance to be performed. The water was icy cold. Yet, she declared to her dying day that never before in all her life had she felt warmer or more comfortable than when she came out of the baptismal waters of old Trondhjem's fjord. The fire within was kindled, never to be extinguished. The humble people of the branch became her brethren and sisters. She loved them, and rejoiced in their company.

All this is easily told; but who can tell the full story of the spiritual and mental battles, the inner struggles, of those who must lay by the whole of their past lives, as it were, to accept the new-found truth? In the case of Anna Widtsoe there were many and long wakeful nights. There were days of uneasy misgivings. Long solitary walks helped to clear the mind. Prayer, always prayer, brought solace. All that she had of knowledge, strength and intelligence was brought to bear upon the problem. Moreover, she was obliged to count the material costs. She would be cast out from her circle of friends, of that she was certain. What of her boys! Their futures were fairly well assured. Would her acceptance of Mormonism affect them? There were times when she trembled with physical weakness and mental faintness. She was so alone! Her decision must be her own. Those who have charged that men and women accept Mormonism for ulterior motives know little of the intense search for truth and exhausting conquest of self that have preceded conversion. Only along the path of sacrifice does the Latter-day Saint enter into his joy. A gladness of soul it is, indeed, when the certainty of truth begins to glorify life. Peace is restored. The price seems small for so great a jewel. Anna Widtsoe found it so. Never, during her life did she speak of sacrifices for the gospel, but always of the blessings that it had brought to her.

The widow was now well in the Gospel net. The news that Anna Widtsoe had become a Mormon spread rapidly among her friends and relatives in Trondhjem, and soon was common gossip on Froya, her home island. She was not the type to hide her joy in the new-found truth. The inevitable happened. The schoolmaster's friends, though they pitied the widow and her boys, could not afford to become smudged by contact with Mormonism. All but a few heroic ones turned away from her. The priests threatened to have her pension cancelled unless she came back into the state church.

Her husband's relatives, as had the friends, first reasoned with her, and pointed out her worldly folly; but pursued by her biblical proofs and clear argument they left her, and tried to forget her. There was no more visiting between the little family and the relatives. The schoolmaster's oldest and only own sister, who had married and was living near Oslo, and who had deeply loved her brother John, pleaded with the widow to forget the insanity which possessed her.

In sheer distress, the new convert took a trip to the island, to find peace among her own people. To her amazement, her dear ones there, who had heard of her scandalous behavior, would have nothing to do with her. Their hearts and houses were closed against her. Those whom she had fed and clothed and nursed preferred not to speak to her. A few poor, humble folk gave her shelter and listened reservedly to her tale of God's restored Gospel.

Heavy-hearted, slightly embittered, but more determined than ever to keep the commandments of the Lord, she returned to her rooms in Trondhjem. Her faithful, devoted sister Petroline was then living with her, but even she could not understand the behavior of her sister. It seemed so foolish. Truly the fishermaiden was alone in the world. But, she had found the truth; she had entered God's earthly kingdom; she was preparing for a great eternal blessing; she trusted the Lord.

The perplexing thing was that the plain, simple principles of the Gospel did not seem to be comprehended by her friends and relatives. It seemed to her that the truths of the Gospel were so clear that no one with intelligence could fail to understand them. How could it be so? She had yet to learn that truth is neither comprehended or accepted unless the man desires to know the truth and values it above all else. That is the law in all pursuits of truth, within and without religion.

Anna Widtsoe turned to the little branch of Latter-day Saints, and took hold of its activities. Her fresh outlook on the Gospel, her experience and quick intelligence, and especially her deep devotion to the latter-day cause, helped to vitalize the branch. It was before the days of the Mutual Improvement Associations in the mission field; but a Relief Society had been organized. Soon she was in the presidency of the Relief Society. Studies, discussions, social gatherings, excursions gave new life to the membership. She was nothing if not dynamic. Until very recently, and perhaps now, there hung in the Trondhjem meeting place, a framed original verse, composed by the new convert, "Sister Widtsoe," in honor of some festive Relief Society affair.

Loosely translated, it reads,

Jesus, our Brother, is King

For us He the victory won;

Rejoice dear brethren and sisters

In the newfound light and life.

Our Zion awaits the Savior

We hope to meet Him there;

His bride He will fetch to His home,

Only be humble and true.

She enjoyed also to entertain the missionaries at her home. She had moved into the center of town, and occupied the top floor of a business building in the heart of the business district. The location made it easy for her customers—she was still dressmaking—to find her. In this apartment occupied by Anna Widtsoe and her sister, Petroline Gaarden, and the two boys, the missionaries were honored guests. At the meals, gospel questions and answers flew swiftly across the table, and the widow was buoyed up in her feelings.

Some missionary stalwarts visited Trondhjem in those days: Anthon L. Skanchy, Hans O. Magleby, Thorvald A. Thoresen, Christian H. Steffensen, and many others whose long missionary careers are thrilling to hear.

288It was an evidence to her of the truth of the Gospel message, that her life in the branch, among members and missionaries, was fully satisfying to her. She had not known before such genuine happiness. Besides, despite the unfriendliness of her immediate friends and relatives, her business prospered. She worked hard, but she enjoyed it, and to pay her tithe to the Lord. It seemed as if she might live her whole life, with fair success financially, and with life's real enjoyment, in the Trondhjem branch of the Church—the Church of Christ—to which she had given her allegiance.

288Soon, however, a restless spirit within her turned her thoughts, then her desires and at last her hopes, to the land in the far west which her people—the Latter-day Saints—had wrested from the desert, and were now inhabiting as the headquarters of the Church. There was Zion, a promised land; there were thousands who like herself in love of truth had accepted the restored Gospel; there were prophets and apostles, bearers of the eternal Priesthood of God. She must go there! The spirit of gathering was upon her.

This matter also required careful consideration. She loved her native land, the sea and the mountains, the sagas and the song, the sturdy people; and in this land rested her forefathers, and here she had thought to rest, and here lived her loved ones, albeit they disdained her religion. The customs would present new problems possibly beyond her power to conquer. She would lose her pension, that she had been told officially. Her boys? That was the real question. Would they have the chance in the new land that they would have here? Their futures were fairly well assured here, given reasonable intelligence and good behavior. The question of emigration, of gathering, was weighed and considered, thought about and discussed. Her decision was of course a foregone conclusion. She decided to break away from the past, and chance the future and to gather with her people.

She was unable to raise the emigration money at once, and looked forward to several years of saving before the required substantial sum of money was available. However, the help of three men in Zion hastened her departure. Elders Anthon L. Skanchy, Christian H. Steffensen, and Ole Berkhoel, each contributed a small sum, which added to the little that she could raise, was more than enough to enable her and her two boys to take the long journey from central Norway to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains. Elders Skanchy and Steffensen had known the widow in Trondhjem. Elder Berkhoel, a brilliant, cultured gentleman, a gifted violinist, had known the schoolmaster and his family in Namsos, had later become converted to Mormonism, and, with his family, had emigrated to Utah. To these good men Anna Widtsoe owed the opportunity to take the westward journey in the fall of 1883, a little more than two years after her baptism.

In the spring of 1883, she set about to make preparations for the long journey. Her furniture was to be sold, more auctions of the schoolmaster's library to be held, her various small resources to be collected, goodbyes to be said to the people on the island as in the city. It was a busy summer. At the end, boxes of books and many articles of small value had to be left behind, for they could not be sold under forced conditions. She only smiled. She was gathering with the people of the Lord! Her one deep sorrow was that she would have to leave her only and beloved sister, who of a thoroughly independent mind, could not yet convince herself that the Gospel embraced by her sister was really true.

At this time Anna Widtsoe's son John was eleven, her son Osborne, five years old. Loyal to the schoolmaster's memory she took the boys to their father's relatives for farewell visits. As said, however, her husband's oldest sister lived near Oslo, five hundred miles to the south, but on the way to America. She therefore sent John, early in the summer, to spend three or four months with his aunt, Johanna, to whom the lad was very dear because of her love for her brother, the lad's father. Osborne was, of course, too young, and remained with his mother while she made her preparations.

At length, in October, she set forth upon the journey. Never had Norway looked so beautiful to her. Only those who have so left their native heath can understand the tugging at the heartstrands, when the land of birth and home fades from view. It does not matter how much promise the new land offers. Human nature will have its way. It has been the lot of the Latter-day Saints ever to be torn from the moorings of home, whether in America or foreign lands—but in the end they have rejoiced to sacrifice for truth and righteousness.

On the way southward, she stopped at the country estate managed by the husband of her sister-in-law, and secured her son, John. A miracle occurred there, for the aunt had determined, with the connivance of her husband, to hide away John, to save him from his awful fate among the Mormons. That story is to be told elsewhere; and the widow reached Oslo in safety with her two sons and three trunks.

On the morning of October 20, 1883, she boarded the ship for Hull. Twenty Norwegian Saints were emigrating in the same company. The Oslo branch was out to bid the travelers farewell. The widow's trunks were firmly roped by two kindly, fine men, Christian D. Fjeldsted, later one of the Presidents of the First Quorum of Seventy, and Martin Christopherson, who later presided over the Scandinavian and Norwegian Missions. The Saints on shore sang a hymn, handkerchiefs were wafted; tears were shed; the ship moved slowly down beautiful Oslo Fjord. That evening, as night fell, the widow looked long from the deck at the dimming shoreline of the land of her forefathers. The fishermaiden was indeed in the Gospel Net.

The ship after bumping for sixty hours over the shallow North Sea, landed safely in Hull. Then the emigrants and their baggage were taken by rail from Hull to Liverpool, over England's smudgy midlands district. There, in Liverpool, for the first time did the widow see an Apostle of the Lord. He was as she had expected, a kindly man, but she looked at him with joy as she recalled the authority of the Priesthood committed to him. There the party was augmented by emigrants from Denmark, Sweden, and England. The party embarked on the S. S. Wisconsin on October 27, 1883, and reached New York after a rough but otherwise uneventful voyage on November 7, 1883. The next day the long railroad trip from New York to Logan, Utah, was begun.

While the trip was long, it was interesting to the widow and her two sons. New countries, constant change, a new language, strange sights and sounds made time pass quickly. True, every once in a while there was a tug at the heart, the anticipation of the unknown, but it was not colored with fear or heaviness. Safe and sound, eager for the next experiences, the party arrived at their destination, the promised valleys of the Rocky Mountains.
