Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkWood, Edward J.298THE HURRICANE AT APIA

298By Edward J. Wood

298(In 1889, while he labored as a missionary on the Samoan Islands, Edward J. Wood, now the President of the Alberta Temple, witnessed the great hurricane at Apia. His experiences are interestingly related in the following narrative, which first appeared in an early number of the Juvenile Instructor.—P.N.)

298WE thought by leaving Vatia at midnight we could reach Upolu with a fair breeze by the following night. Accordingly, as the full moon rose above the eastern hills, we (Brothers Dean, Beesley and I) bade an affectionate goodbye to those remaining, and quietly rowed out and over the breakers to sea. We had scarcely left land when a strong breeze blew up in our favor, and with all sails set we seemed to glide along at a rapid rate. We soon learned that our small boat could scarcely cope with the monstrous white-capped swells, which would often break over the sides and almost submerge us.

It was a long night to us, and a more weird scene cannot be pictured than when beautiful day did come and we had lost our bearings. Standing close to the creaking mast, with the wind whistling through the rigging, we scanned the horizon for only a speck that would develop into an island, but all in vain. As is the case also in the early morning, the wind started up afresh, and kept one of us bailing water all the time lest we should flounder.

We had prayers, and felt somewhat easier, but looked in vain for land, until finally the haze we had taken for the horizon rolled itself curtain-like to the heavens, and there to our unbounded joy lay the island Upolu in comparatively plain view. We soon discovered that we were a long way off our course, as the island now lay away to the north and had the day been dull and cloudy we might not have seen the island. We at once veered round and headed for land, which we reached, entered the reef and anchored at 1 o'clock p.m. A native rowed out in his canoe, and we asked about Ifopo, who we were told lived close by, but he had gone to the seat of war.

Our objective point now was Apia, the capital of Samoa; so after resting we again set sail in the direction that the native indicated. We understood the distance to be about two miles down the coast. They have a word for mile, but know little of its meaning; yet they can tell quite accurately the distance of one place from another by the position of the sun when they leave and arrive at different points.

We sailed after and passed a number of native boats loaded with vegetables and food for the natives at the place of battle. The wind blew direct from land, and when we neared the coast the wind seemed to die out until we came opposite a long gulch, where it seemed waiting for us. Down the "catspaw" tore the wind like a cyclone, and in less than a twinkling our boat was blown completely over and we and all were in the sea, about a quarter of a mile from shore, but between us and shore rolled the dreaded breakers. We were all good swimmers, and helped the natives, who, on seeing our misfortune, hurried to us, and with our aid righted the boat. We were some two hours in this dangerous position, and lost all our food, which consisted of oranges, bananas, cocoanuts and kalo. We managed to hold to our satchels and trunks, and but for the damage done by the sea water, our clothing was uninjured. We were afraid, however, that we should have another capsize, with none to help us. We couldn't find Apia that night, so passed the tedious hours in our boat. The next morning we could see the masts of the seven huge men-o'-war in Apia harbor, and we were then observed as we went by them. We knew no one in the small seaport town of Apia, and therefore had to seek a lodging house. As we hadn't heard from home for several months, our funds were very low. We explained our very embarrassing condition to the hotel man, and he hesitatingly allowed us three to occupy one room instead of three. Our next difficulty was to get food. We had to make a can of salmon and a few sea biscuits serve us for a day.

Our prayers for relief, however, were not in vain, for a few days later a Mr. Morse (an American storekeeper) kindly proffered, without our asking, the use of a loft over a barn and slaughter house. It was small, and so full of openings that we could scarcely burn a candle at night; yet our rest on the hard boards of the floor was sweet indeed. It was here we witnessed the wrecking of those beautiful men-o'-war, which caused a loss of lives of over two hundred brave and helpless sailors, as a result of that terrible hurricane which visited Samoa on the 14th, 15th and 16th of March, 1889, commencing only two days after our arrival in Apia.

The hurricane started on Friday, and by nightfall the seven men-of-war, had their rigging trimmed and the tops of the masts taken off, and otherwise prepared for the "blow." We heard it rumored on the streets that the barometer registered lower than it had in seventeen years, yet all expected it to be over before morning, but not so, for towards night it blew a steady gale, indicating that it was only the first of the cyclone, and as the native weather prophets say, it must change from a south to southwest, then to west, thence to northwest, and when it blows the strongest it veers back to southwest, or a few points south of west, then, they all know it is blowing its hardest.

I can't imagine that time will ever erase the recollection of what I saw during our imprisonment in that old shanty, not knowing scarcely the hour we would be carried into the roaring breakers. Besides numbers of schooners, cutters, barques, barges and other vessels, there were seven men-of-war, namely: (American) "Trenton" crew 500, "Vandalia" crew 450, "Neipsic," crew 250; (German) "Olga," crew 450, "Adler," crew 350, "Eber," crew 250; (English) "Caliope," crew 450.

All Friday night the wind with rain blew a terrible gale, and Saturday morning a cyclone strengthened with all forces of the elements, seemed pouring in Apia harbor. It was then that the English distinguished themselves by being able to get their ship out of the harbor; yet I don't attribute her getting out to the superiority of her officers' ability, as is generally done by the press and public, but it was because she was intact; she did not get damaged as every other vessel did, by being run and bumped into during Friday night. It was good seamanship, however, that helped her out. She was about two hours forging a quarter of a mile, and many times the blinding spray would completely hide her from our view. When passing the ill-fated flagship, "Trenton," her band played the "Star Spangled Banner," and in return the "Trenton's" gallant boys in blue played "God Save the Queen," the notes of which were heart-rending in the extreme to those on shore who could only now and then, catch a sound in the roaring wind and waves. The first reported disaster was of the Eber, which struck the reef during the night, and went to pieces; losing 89 men.

All day we were almost forced to see dozens upon dozens of sailors lose their lives, and the wind was still blowing when darkness shut from our view the sickening sight. Towards morning the storm abated somewhat, and the vessels had so washed ashore, as to allow hundreds of the men a safe landing, but the loss of life was terrible, and many pages could be written of what we saw during the storm. By Sunday noon the wind had ceased to blow, and the rest of the day was spent in caring for the dead and wounded. Apia presented a devastated appearance, and the beach was lined for miles with wreckage, while the harbor was thickly dotted with hulls of sail-boats and unmasted steamers, or men-o-war.

The mail steamer from Australia arrived on Tuesday, bound for San Francisco, and on Wednesday, we hoisted our little sail, and with peculiarly sad feelings started for our little island away to the east.
