Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

Missionary WorkRichards, LeGrand304SOME OF MY MISSIONARY EXPERIENCES

304By Bishop LeGrand Richards

304(Bishop Le Grand Richards, the present Presiding Bishop of the Church, has furnished us with accounts of a number of his interesting missionary experiences. Bishop Richards has filled four missions for the Church and throughout his life has manifested the true missionary spirit.—P. N.)

304WHEN I went on my first mission there were two other young men accompanying me, one from Idaho and one from Southern Utah. Upon our arrival in Rotterdam, Holland, the one from Southern Utah was assigned to labor in the Rotterdam District, and the one from Idaho in the Groningen District, and I was assigned to the mission office.

304When the young man from Idaho was called to the Netherlands Mission, his parents were somewhat disappointed because they were from German descent, and they felt that it would have been better had he been called to Germany, so that he might have done some genealogical research work while there.

When he arrived in the Groningen conference, he was assigned to labor in the city of Veen Dam, and he and his companion commenced looking for furnished rooms. After passing a number of houses with signs on, of furnished rooms for rent, this young man said, "This looks like a good place." They arranged to rent rooms there. After he had been some weeks there, he found a record containing many names of his father's family, which had been brought across the line out of Germany.

See how marvelously the spirit of the Lord can direct in matters of importance pertaining to the salvation of our Heavenly Father's children. The inspiration of the Lord directed the First Presidency to send this young man to Holland, and the same inspiration inspired the mission president to assign him to the Groningen District, and the same spirit directed the district president to assign him to the city of Veen Dam, also the same inspiration guided him and his companion to this home, which in itself could hardly be regarded as a coincidence in a city of over 50,000 people.

A REMARKABLE CONVERSION

WHILE filling a mission in Holland from 1905 to 1908, the following experience was related to me by a member of the Rotterdam Branch. He indicated that he had formerly been a minister of the Gospel, and that he had had a church congregation of his own in Rotterdam. At that time he was a man around sixty, with a splendid personality, a grey beard, and imposing in appearance. The missionaries had converted quite a number of his congregation, and these good saints loved this minister so much that they pled with him to investigate Mormonism. Finally they persuaded him to attend one of our meetings in Rotterdam. At the close of the meeting, the missionaries engaged him in conversation at the door, and he denounced Joseph Smith as a false prophet, as an imposter, and everything vile he could think of. He then left and returned home. He said he did not know what he had done, but he knew he had displeased God because when he retired to bed he could not sleep. He tossed from one side to the other, until the early morning hours when he arose and walked the streets until he thought the missionaries would be up, and then he presented himself at the mission office and asked the privilege to borrow a copy of the Book of Mormon.

It has been my privilege to speak in the same meeting with this man upon many occasions, and to visit homes of investigators. I have never had a finer missionary companion, and I have thrilled over and over again as I have heard him stand and with all the fervor and sincerity that a man could possess, testify that he knew that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and the Book of Mormon was true.

SPIRITUAL GUIDANCE

DURING the time that I served as president of the Netherlands Mission from 1913 to 1916, one evening the mission secretary and the president of the Rotterdam District had been out visiting investigators together. On their return the mission secretary invited the district president to stay with him at the mission office. This he consented to do. As was customary with the missionaries, they knelt down for prayers together, and retired to bed. The district president seemed very restless and after a few moments he said to the mission secretary, "I feel impressed that I should return to the district office." The mission secretary replied, "If you feel that way about it, I think you had better go." With that, the district president arose, redressed himself and returned to the district office, which was at the Church in Rotterdam. He arrived just in time to intercept two men carrying his trunk down the front steps which contained the money of the Rotterdam District, amounting to several hundred dollars.

A REMARKABLE HEALING

WHILE laboring as president of the Netherlands Mission from 1913 to 1916, we had been out holding a baptismal service when a member of the branch called at the mission office to get some of the Elders to come and administer to his wife. Sister Richards directed him to the home of one of the new converts where we had gone to spend the evening following the service. He informed us of the desire of his wife to be administered to, and so we accompanied him to his home. Upon our arrival there, she explained to us that she had been out nursing, performing the services of a midwife for a poor woman, who was a charity case. In doing so, she had contracted a contagious skin disease. She had been to the doctor and the doctor treated her hands and wrapped them up in bandages, and told her she would not be able to put them in water for days. As we entered the home, she said that she knew that if we would administer to her she would be healed, and we assured her that if she had the faith to be healed that we knew she could be healed, whereupon we did administer to her. The next day was Fast Day, and in the fast meeting she displayed her hands unbandaged, and testified that the Lord had healed her immediately through the administration of His servants.

SPIRITUAL GUIDANCE

I FILLED a short term mission in the Eastern States in 1926. On my way to the mission field, I met an Elder Wadsworth. We were assigned by President B. H. Roberts to the Boston District, and by the district president to labor in the city of New Bedford, Massachusetts.

When Brother Wadsworth was set apart for his mission by Elder George F. Richards of the Council of the Twelve, he was promised that he should not only be able to do a good work in preaching the gospel to the living, but that he should be able to do a great work in gathering the genealogy of his father's family.

The first real stormy day that came (and it knows how to storm in that country), I suggested to Elder Wadsworth that we go to the Library and see what we could find in the way of information regarding his father's family. They had a very fine genealogical department in the Library at New Bedford. We found letters from Brigham Young, from my grandfather, Franklin D. Richards, and others. We also succeeded in locating a book containing several thousand names of Brother Wadsworth's family. This book covered, as I recall, the genealogy of the poet, Longfellow, whose mother was a Wadsworth; and it also contained the record of Elder Wadsworth's grandfather, indicating that he went west with the Mormon Pioneers and gave the names of his two wives.

We wrote to the publishing company and found that the book was out of print, and that the author had passed away. The next time we went to Boston I suggested to Elder Wadsworth that we try the second hand book stores. We went into one large book store, and when we told the proprietor what we wanted, he scratched his head and replied, "I believe I have one of those books," and reaching up on one of the high shelves, he pulled a copy down all covered with dust. Elder Wadsworth arranged to purchase the book by making a deposit on it. Truly the words of Elder Richards were fulfilled. He did a great work in gathering the genealogy of his father's family.

A TESTIMONY OF TITHING

WHILE visiting in Providence, Rhode Island, on April 25, 1926, I remarked to the president of the branch that he must have an outstanding testimony of the law of tithing, since I had noted that he paid a large tithing and paid it so regularly. He replied that he had and I asked him if he would mind relating the same to me, which he did in about the following manner. He said that his wife and children joined the Church in England some years before, and when he indicated the name of the Elder who preached the gospel to them, I found that he was one of my early M. I. A. teachers. He said that the reason he didn't join the Church was because he did not have faith to pay his tithing and he did not want to be a hypocrite. Some time later when one of the young missionaries was being released to return home he came to this brother and told him he wanted to baptize him before returning home, to which the brother replied: "You cannot because I haven't the faith to pay my tithing, and I do not want to be a hypocrite." The spirit of the Lord seemed to rest upon the young missionary, and he replied in words something like this, "Brother, if you will let me baptize you before I return home, I promise you that within a year from now you will be in America with your family, and will be earning three times as much as you are at the present." The brother said he could not resist availing himself of such a promise, and so he was baptized. He said he could not feel that the promise could come true, as he at the time was under contract to work for the company he was with for an additional two years. It was during the time of the world war when we had such a difficult time to get cloth in this country that would hold its color, and the dye workers of America sent representatives to England to induce some of the dye workers there to come to America and teach them how to make dyes. Representatives of the American firms called on this man's father, and he indicated that he was not interested, but his son might be. So they approached the son. He said that he could not accept their offer because he was bound to work for his company for an additional two years. They asked if he would be willing to go if they would buy him off so the company would release him from his contract, and he indicated that he would. "Now," he said, "the Lord just threw in a little for good measure. Within a year's time according to the promise of the Elder, I was in America with my wife and children, and was earning four times as much as I was when he made me that promise." The genuineness of this experience is attested by the faithfulness of this brother in the payment of his tithing, following his baptism into the Church.

HOW THE LORD PREPARES THE WAY

UNDER date of September 22, 1934, while presiding over the Southern States Mission, I received the following letter written from McBee, South Carolina, and signed by Daniel M. Bethune:

312"Dear President Richards:

312I heard there was an Elder Shurtliff in Georgia District, and I understand he is a son of Bishop A. T. Shurtliff of Salt Lake. If this is true, I would like to know if he will be at conference in Columbia. If so, would you permit him and his companion to come to my home for a day or so at least?

312My reason for asking this is that in November, 1913 I saw Bishop Shurtliff and his companion, David L. Turner, in an open vision in my home. The eleventh evening in November, 1914 they came to my home and fulfilled that vision, they being the first Elders that had ever been in my home. I would like to put my arms around that boy whose father the Lord had used as an instrument to give me a testimony of this great and mighty Latter-day work. I would love to explain in detail how his father was shown to me not in a dream, for I was wide awake.

312In making this request, I know that you will be guided by the spirit of truth in regard to it, and will try to be satisfied with the result if he can come or if he can not."

313Some few months after receiving this letter I slept in Brother Bethune's home and discussed this experience with him. He said that when these missionaries arrived he recognized them immediately from the dream he had had a year before. This really is marvelous to think how the inspiration of the Lord rested upon that man, and how, notwithstanding the frequent changing of companions in the mission field, the spirit of the Lord, indicated in this dream the very identical two missionaries who would call at his home to bring him the message of the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ.

AN ANSWER TO PRAYER

ON December 1st, 1934, while Sister Mamie E. Stephens of Tampa, Florida was in Atlanta, Georgia with a sick daughter for treatment, Sister Richards and I visited her and she related the following experience, which led to her conversion to the gospel.

She said she had lost a twenty-two year old son about two years previously and that he had died without having been baptized; that she had been reared as a Baptist, and according to her teachings her son would be entirely lost. She was greatly concerned about this matter, and one morning she went to her bedroom and prayed to the Lord to give her an assurance that all would be well with her son, and if there was anything she could do for him to let her know. Shortly afterwards a knock came to the door. She arose from her prayer and went to the door, and there stood two lady missionaries, the one holding in her hand a tract, entitled: "Baptism for the Dead." She said, "I looked at the missionaries, and then I looked at the tract, and I said, 'Come in and tell me all about it, for that is just what I want to know.' " After a few visits by the missionaries, she was baptized and made a member of the Church in April, 1933.

HEALING OF MINISTER'S DAUGHTER

FOLLOWING the visit of Elder Melvin J. Ballard at Jacksonville, Florida, on December 8, 1935, one of the Elders, with only thirty-five cents in his pocket, started out to return to his field of labor in South Georgia. He attempted to hitch-hike on the highways without the usual success, apparently for a wise purpose. About ten o'clock in the evening he found himself still quite a distance from his field of labor, so he decided he would "tract in" (seek entertainment) for the night.

After being unsuccessful at two homes, he called at the third and was met at the door by a Minister of the Gospel. He introduced himself as a Mormon Missionary, whereupon he was invited in. The Minister explained that he was in deep distress—that his little daughter was very sick and the Doctor gave them no hope of her recovery. By this time they had entered the living room where the family was sitting and the Doctor was at the side of the bed upon which the little girl was lying.

The Minister remarked: "You believe in anointing the sick with oil, do you not?" The Elder replied in the affirmative. He then added: "I wish you would anoint my little girl—I have prayed for her without avail," and he offered the Missionary a bottle of olive oil. The Missionary asked if it had been consecrated, and the Minister replied: "I am afraid I do not understand what you mean," so the Elder suggested that he use his own oil and he invited the family to kneel with him about the bed to engage in prayer before performing the sacred ordinance. They seemed rather reluctant as though they had given up all hopes. The Elder led in prayer and then administered to the little girl. As he removed his hands from her head she relaxed, and the Doctor immediately reached for her pulse as though he feared she was breathing her last.

For about twenty minutes, the Elder sat visiting with the Minister and his family at which time the Doctor again felt the girl's pulse and remarked: "There is no need of my remaining any longer—your little girl will be all right. I have seen it with my own eyes and yet I cannot believe it."

Addressing the Elder, the Minister said: "You were seeking a bed for the night, were you not?" And being informed by the Missionary that he was he explained that he was not prepared to accomodate him, but that he was willing to take him to the hotel and pay for his room, or he would drive him in his auto wherever he wanted to go. He explained that his destination was sixty miles from there, but the Minister was perfectly willing to take him that distance, and upon reaching their destination, the Minister offered the Elder ten dollars for what he had done in his home, but the Elder refused to accept the money, explaining the instruction of the Master to the Twelve when He sent them forth: "Freely ye have received, freely give."
