Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences ( 1942)

317THE RETURNED MISSIONARY

317By President Joseph F. Smith

317(The concluding article in this volume is from the pen of President Joseph F. Smith, and was printed in an early number of The Juvenile Instructor. It contains valuable advice for the returned missionary.—P. N.)

317ATTENTION was recently called through these columns to the spirit of laxity, which sometimes manifests itself even among our missionaries in the field. The justice of the plainly-stated but kindly-meant criticism there offered has been demonstrated by sundry comments that have come to our attention since the article was written.

317We are told that this disposition toward inactivity in practical affairs clings to some of the missionaries after their return, and to a great degree unfits them for the daily labor required at their hands. To cite a specific instance:

The manager of one of our large business houses was in need of a young man in a position where activity, energy and skill were required, and for which a good salary would be paid. Among the young men named to him in response to his inquiries was a recently returned missionary whose business experience prior to his ministerial labors abroad had fully prepared him for the vacant situation. The manager remarked, "I know him well, my only objection to him is that he has too much of the missionary spirit about him." "What do you mean?" was asked. "He is inactive," was the prompt reply; "he is a good talker, and can hold his own in discussion and debate, but he is out of practice as far as hard, plodding, persistent work is concerned. I have had some such as he in my service before; they find it difficult to learn that words are of little use where 'hard licks' are demanded, and that the drudgery of business is essentially different from argument, however eloquent."

Such a condition must appear almost incredible to one who had not investigated for himself. We cannot believe that it is wide-spread, but that it exists at all is unfortunate. Is it possible that a special call for a season's labor in the direct service of the best of Masters can disqualify the servant for thorough work in material affairs? Experience in the army of the Lord should make of men the truest of soldiers, giving them added bravery and skill for the practical battle of every day life.

Service in the Lord's cause is a means towards obtaining a true education, and an education that is worth the name widens the field of its possessor's usefulness, and imparts zest and energy to all his undertakings. One's religion should make of him a better son and brother, a more loving husband and father, a stronger citizen, in short, a true man. One's labors in the missionary field should broaden his field of vision, vitalize his energies, enlarge his capacity for good work in any direction, and make of him in every way a stronger and more useful citizen, as well as a more devoted member of the Church.

While a missionary is actually engaged in the field he should be wholly a missionary, devoting the best of his energies to the special duties assigned him. When he returns to his home community, he is still a missionary in the general sense, but he must remember that he has again taken his place in the ranks of the toilers, to earn his bread by the sweat of his brow. The period of missionary field-service is generally too short to permit a feeling of professionalism to assume any great proportions; and this is as it should be.

Returned missionaries ought to be in demand where brave hearts, strong minds and willing hands are wanted. The genius of the gospel is not that of negative goodness—mere absence of what is bad; it stands for aggressive energy well directed, for positive goodness—in short, for work.

We hear much of men who are specially gifted, of geniuses in the world's affairs; and many of us force ourselves to think that we are capable of little and therefore may as well take life easy since we do not belong to that favored class. True, not all are endowed with the same gifts, nor is every one imbued with the strength of a giant; yet every son and every daughter of God has received some talent, and each will be held to strict account for the use or misuse to which it is put. The spirit of genius is the spirit of hard work, plodding toil, whole-souled devotion to the labor of the day.

Let no one think that any honorable labor is beneath him; harbor no dislike for the work of the hands, but let the mind direct them in skill and energy. The example set by our late beloved President, Wilford Woodruff, has often been cited abroad, and held up for the admiration and emulation of those who are not of us; it is that of most of the leading men of our Church. Even in his old age he did his share of physical toil, and rejoiced in his ability to "hoe his row" and hold his own with his grandchildren on the farm.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a practical gospel; it has to deal with natural as well as with spiritual matters. Its tools are the scriptures and the implements of industry. Its sanctuaries are its tabernacles and temples, its workshops and factories and farms.
