Dear youth, what a beautiful conference session we are having! We have already heard three living Apostles of Jesus Christ. What a wonderful blessing! And we will still hear one more, Elder Henry B. Eyring. The spiritual feast continues!

When I spoke last year, we learned how to face this world through David’s experience with Goliath. Remember the five stones? Today I am sharing an Old Testament story I read at your age which left me wanting to be like its protagonist. The Bible does not tell us her name, so we will call her the woman of Shunem because this is the name of her town.

One day the prophet Elisha was passing through Shunem, and we read that there “was a great woman; and she [invited]¹ him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in … to eat bread.”² I imagine the prophet Elisha was so happy with the invitation to eat at her house! He had already gone several times, when one day the woman said to her husband, “Now, I perceive that this is an holy man of God.”³

The woman says, “Now, I perceive.” It seems she invited Elisha to her house without knowing he was the prophet; she received her testimony through the Holy Ghost by listening carefully to what Elisha said and taught. (Remember, there were no pictures at that time! So it was hard to recognize the prophet just by his face.)

But the story does not end there. One day the woman said to her husband, “Let us make a little chamber, … and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in.”⁴

This faithful woman was willing to build a room in her house so that the prophet, passing through the city, would have a place to stay!

Today we can learn a powerful lesson from this experience.

The Lord testified to the woman of Shunem that Elisha was a prophet of God, and she acted by opening her house to receive him.

We too can receive a personal testimony of God’s prophets today and open our hearts and minds—our house—to the message that our Heavenly Father has for us in these latter days.

Dear youth, I invite you to ask yourself this question: “Do I have a personal testimony of God’s living prophets?”

Let’s start at the beginning.

What is a prophet? A prophet is a man whom God has called to speak for Him.⁵ There are prophets on the earth today, just as there were in ancient times.⁶

Prophets are seers and revelators. That means they can see what others cannot see, and they can prophesy of future events. They can also prepare us for calamities. Prophets receive commandments and revelations from the Lord.⁷ The ninth article of faith speaks of the continuing revelation in these last days. It says, “We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.”

Elder Gary E. Stevenson said, “The Lord continues to reveal His commandments and will to His prophets today because He desires to lead us to happiness in this life and to celestial glory in the next life.”⁸

Prophets also proclaim the gospel and are inspired teachers and messengers of God to everyone on earth.⁹

Each member of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is a prophet, seer, and revelator.¹⁰ Serving as a council under the Lord’s direction, they have the authority to declare and interpret doctrine and establish policy for His Church.¹¹ They carefully pray and deliberate, for the decisions of these quorums must be unanimous. In this way, the Lord assures us that His will will be done.¹²

Prophets testify of Christ—His existence, His ministry, and His divinity.¹³

Let us read some testimonies from prophets in the Book of Mormon.

“God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.

“And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God.”¹⁴

Samuel the Lamanite also testified that Jesus Christ is “the Son of God, the Father of heaven and of earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning.”¹⁵

And the prophet Moroni said, “I have seen Jesus, and … he hath talked with me face to face.”¹⁶

When Christ visited the Nephites, one of the first things He did was call twelve Apostles.¹⁷ And He said to the people, “Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen.”¹⁸

Now, let me share a few words for parents or other family members raising children. The Lord Himself taught Adam and Eve the truths of the plan of salvation. And then He said to them, “I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children.”¹⁹

What does it mean to teach freely? It is learning the truths of the gospel, having a personal testimony of them, and sharing that knowledge with our children.²⁰ It is promoting both formal and informal teaching moments.²¹ It is living according to that knowledge and testimony.

The Book of Mormon describes the 2,060²² stripling warriors as “men of truth and soberness, for they had been taught to keep the commandments of God and to walk uprightly before him.”²³ These young men faithfully obeyed Helaman, who at that time was their military leader and also their prophet, and they recognized that their mothers had filled their hearts with truth and faith.²⁴

Parents, in this world where there are many voices and sometimes much darkness, God Himself has commanded us to raise our children in light and truth.²⁵ He entrusted us with the responsibility to teach our children the saving truths of the gospel. If we fail to do so, the world will not do it.²⁶

Dear young friends, I have an invitation for you: In the coming days, I invite you to kneel, open your hearts, and pray with faith to Heavenly Father, asking Him to confirm to you that His chosen prophet and apostles are His voice on the earth today.

The woman of Shunem taught us that we can have that testimony through the Holy Ghost. I promise you that once we know they are God’s anointed ones, our lives will be easier in spite of our ongoing challenges,²⁷ as we will obey their voices with trust, faith, and hope. To listen to and obey the voice of the prophet is crucial to holding on to every good thing until the Second Coming of our Savior.²⁸

The world’s wickedness is growing, but the Church of Jesus Christ and His kingdom are stronger than ever. Zion is putting on its beautiful garments,²⁹ and Christ’s throne will not fall.³⁰ The Lord expects us to be strong in our testimonies, to be full of faith, and to repent daily. Our Savior, Jesus Christ, is counting on each of us to carry on His work.

Once, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, “Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause?” However, since my message is mainly for you, the youth, I would like to use the word youth instead of brethren. Ready?

“[Youth], shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, [youth]; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad.”³¹

I am grateful for the guidance and consecrated efforts of the living prophets. I give you my solemn testimony that they are called by God to carry forth, establish, and lead His kingdom on earth today.³² And it will always be so. It will always be the Lord who chooses His servants.³³ In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

Notas

1.  The Spanish translation of this phrase conveys the meaning “insistently invited.”
2.  2 Kings 4:8 .
3.  2 Kings 4:9 ; emphasis added.
4.  2 Kings 4:10 .
5.  See Amos 3:7 .
6.  “Under the Lord’s direction, [the President of the Church] presides over the Church and is the only person on earth authorized to exercise all priesthood keys. … He has authority to receive revelation and declare the will of God for the whole Church” ( General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 5.1.1.1 , Gospel Library).
7.  See Doctrine and Covenants 1:38 .
8.  Gary E. Stevenson, “ The Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Cheering Sound ,” For the Strength of Youth , July 2025, 5.
9.  See Matthew 28:19–20 ; Doctrine and Covenants 21:1, 4–5 ; 107:35 .
10. “Each Apostle holds all the keys of the kingdom and exercises those keys under the direction of the President of the Church” ( General Handbook , 5.1.1.1 ).
11. See General Handbook , 5.1.1.1 .
12. See Doctrine and Covenants 107:27–31 .
13. “The Twelve Apostles are ‘special witnesses’ of the name of Jesus Christ. … They witness to all the world of His divinity and the reality of His Resurrection” ( General Handbook , 5.1.1.1 ).
14. Mosiah 15:1–2 .
15. Helaman 14:12 .
16. Ether 12:39 .
17. Speaking of the Book of Mormon, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught: “This book also tells us that our Savior made his appearance upon this continent after his resurrection, that he planted the gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessings; that they had apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers and evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessings, as were enjoyed on the Eastern Continent” ( History, 1838–1856, volume C-1 [2 November 1838–31 July 1842] , 1282, josephsmithpapers.org).
18. 3 Nephi 12:1 ; emphasis added.
19. Moses 6:58 ; emphasis added.
20. See Doctrine and Covenants 68:25–28 .
21. “We should seize every opportunity to share the teachings of Jesus Christ with children. These teaching moments are precious and far fewer compared to the relentless efforts of opposing forces. For every hour spent instilling doctrine into a child’s life, there are countless hours of opposition filled with messages and images that challenge or ignore those saving truths. “Some of you may wonder whether it might be better to draw your children closer to you through having fun, or you may ask whether the child may start to feel overwhelmed by your teachings. Instead, we should consider, ‘With so little time and so few opportunities, what words of doctrine can I share that will strengthen them against the inevitable challenges to their faith?’ The words you share today could be the ones they carry with them, and today will soon pass” (Henry B. Eyring, “ Simple Is the Doctrine of Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , Nov. 2024, 97).
22. Every youth is important! (see Alma 57:6, 20 ).
23. Alma 53:21 ; emphasis added.
24. See Alma 56:44–48 ; 57:21 .
25. See Doctrine and Covenants 93:40 .
26. We also have the example of Enos’s parents, who raised him “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord” ( Enos 1:1 ) and taught him about “eternal life, and the joy of the saints” ( Enos 1:3 ). Enos did know the character of God (see Enos 1:6, 15, 17 ).
27. See Doctrine and Covenants 21:1–2, 4–6 . “While the world insists that power, possessions, popularity, and pleasures of the flesh bring happiness, they do not! They cannot! What they do produce is nothing but a hollow substitute for ‘the blessed and happy state of those [who] keep the commandments of God’ [ Mosiah 2:41 ]. “The truth is that it is much more exhausting to seek happiness where you can never find it! However, when you yoke yourself to Jesus Christ and do the spiritual work required to overcome the world, He, and He alone, does have the power to lift you above the pull of this world. “Now, how does overcoming the world bless our lives? The answer is clear: entering into a covenant relationship with God binds us to Him in a way that makes everything about life easier. Please do not misunderstand me: I did not say that making covenants makes life easy . In fact, expect opposition, because the adversary does not want you to discover the power of Jesus Christ. But yoking yourself with the Savior means you have access to His strength and redeeming power” (Russell M. Nelson, “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 97).
28. See Ether 8:26 ; Moroni 7:19–25 .
29. See Isaiah 52:1 .
30. See Psalm 125:1 ; Isaiah 28:16 .
31. Doctrine and Covenants 128:22 ; emphasis added.
32. See Doctrine and Covenants 1:30 .
33. See Articles of Faith 1:5 .
