Three years ago, I was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease—a disorder causing progressive tremors and stiffness. It was overwhelming news, and I thought my life was over.

During the next few months, I fell into a well of darkness, anxiety, and depression. I was afraid of the challenges ahead. I thought I couldn’t live long with the continuous pain in my arms and the tremors in my hands. How I longed to sit in the Savior’s path and touch His garment, as did the woman with the issue of blood!

“For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole” (Mark 5:28).

Despite medical treatment and many prayers begging for relief, a cure did not come. One day, as I opened my heart to Heavenly Father, I gained deeper understanding. The Lord was healing me—not with the physical healing I hoped for but with the healing I needed: spiritual healing.

That’s when I realized that my trust in God’s “spiritual tutoring” was growing. My prayers and empathy for others became more fervent. I started to take time daily to meditate and get away from distractions, looking for the lessons I could learn from my challenges. The Atonement of Jesus Christ took on new meaning, and my need for repentance became more urgent.

Amid my pain, when I felt I had nothing more to contribute, I was surprised by a call to serve as ward Relief Society president. Forgetting about my problems as I served other women was a blessing from a loving Father, as if He was saying He still trusted me. In return, I have received the love and affection of kind sisters who understand my challenges.

Today I feel that I am sitting in the Savior’s path. As I wait for Him, my challenges are refining me.

The Lord can heal our pain, whether physical, emotional, or spiritual, but we must exercise faith in His healing and wait patiently. Somewhere along the path, the Savior will be so close that we can touch His garments and hear Him say, “Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague” (Mark 5:34).
