For over two centuries, military chaplains have stood as pillars of spiritual support for His Majesty’s Armed Forces in the United Kingdom and wherever duty may call. They offer solace, guidance and care to service personnel and their families. In early years, this vital role was primarily filled by Anglican clergy, but over time the UK has permitted more faiths to send chaplains to reflect its rich tapestry of beliefs.

Until recently, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was not an Endorsing Authority for chaplaincy candidates in the UK. This meant that Church members, even if eager to serve their country and its military as chaplains, were unable to pursue this vocation. However, the Church achieved a significant milestone in December 2024 when the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) approved its application to become an Endorsing Authority. As a result, members of the Church may now apply to become chaplains of the British Army, the Royal Navy, and the Royal Air Force on either a full-time or reserve basis.

Commenting on this development, Elder Robert F. Schwartz, area seventy, remarked: “We are deeply grateful to the MOD for making The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints an Endorsing Authority. If we think of this in the context of our Heavenly Father’s work of salvation and exaltation, a chaplain is a minister, someone who works hard to care for the needs of others. We are confident that HM Armed Forces will find wonderful ministers in the members of our Church who successfully apply to become chaplains.”

Brother Todd Linton, director of military relations and chaplain services for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, adds: “We are heartened by this development and grateful for the opportunity it affords members of our faith to take part in the vital work of chaplaincy. In an era of declining religiosity and increasing social isolation, chaplaincy plays a crucial role in fostering meaningful connections, personal peace, and uplifting inspiration. Our chaplains minister to individuals of all faiths—or none at all—helping them connect with the spiritual. The work of chaplaincy is uniquely positioned within secular institutions to provide the divine perspective that trials, tribulations and tragedies—when approached with the right spirit—can bring us closer to God and each other. Our chaplains look forward to serving alongside all in the MOD as dedicated partners in this noble endeavour.”

The journey to this recognition has seen miracles that are a testament to the Lord’s guiding hand. To name but one example: when Brother Joel Matthews published a note in the UK pages of the December 2023 Liahona about his desire to become a military chaplain, outlining the life steps he had taken, the Church did not have a path to making this dream a reality. One year later, the path was open.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can now apply to serve as chaplains in HM Armed Forces, with opportunities for both full-time and reserve paid positions. The application process for chaplaincy in the British Army and Royal Navy can take between 9 and 18 months, and the process for the RAF typically ranges from 1 to 2 years.

If you would like to learn more, please refer to this information from the various services:

British Army: https://jobs.army.mod.uk/roles/royal-army-chaplains-department/chaplain/

Royal Navy: https://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/careers/roles/chaplain

Royal Air Force: https://recruitment.raf.mod.uk/roles/roles-finder/chaplaincy/chaplain

If you would like to initiate an application, please apply to the relevant branch of HM Armed Forces online and also send an email to: chaplainservices@churchofjesuschrist.org

Further information can also be found on the Church’s military chaplaincy website: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/callings/military-and-chaplain/chaplains
