I have been a member of the Church since February 2002, and in May 2002 my husband and son were baptized too. We are so grateful for all we have learned since our baptism. We thank the missionaries from the bottom of our hearts.

The Liahona has helped us in difficult times, and the magazines are priceless to us. Each time we read an article we learn something new.

We are preparing to go to the temple and hope to be able to go soon. We are so grateful that we were guided to this Church.
Lucica Dobre, Constanta Branch, România Bucharest Mission

We are happy each month when we receive the Liahona. The articles are always very uplifting and are often the basis for our family home evenings.
Radeke family, Kassel Branch, Hannover Germany Stake

I’m very grateful to have the Liahona in my life. It has helped me understand the principles of the gospel by using examples from members all over the world. I love the Visiting Teaching Message. It encourages me and comforts my spirit.
Siria Cordero, Alma Rosa Ward, Santo Domingo Dominican Republic Ozama Stake

I love the Liahona because it strengthens my faith and helps me walk in the light of Jesus Christ. I especially enjoyed the October 2003 issue. I read all the articles, and every one applied to my life. I am so thankful for the Church and the magazine that helps people around the world.
Tina Sensok, Phnom Penh Eighth Branch, Phnom Pehn Cambodia North District

I love the Liahona, especially the children’s section, and so do my children. They have enjoyed the stories from the Bible and the Book of Mormon, and they love the pictures of the prophets and the temples. My daughter, who is six years old, learned about the temple in Primary, and she has a desire to go there one day.
Yadira González, Cincuentenario Ward, Panama City Panama Stake

Please send experiences about children trying to follow the Savior’s teachings to Trying to Be like Jesus, Liahona, 50 E. North Temple St. Rm. 2420, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3220, USA; or e-mail to liahona@ldschurch.org. Please include the child’s complete name, age, address, and ward and stake (or branch and district). Include a photograph of the child and, if possible, of others in the article.
