Prayerfully select and read from this message the scriptures and teachings that meet the needs of the sisters you visit. Share your experiences and testimony. Invite those you teach to do the same.

Joseph Smith—History 1:69: “Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins.”

President Joseph F. Smith (1838–1918):“Let us rejoice in the truth, in the restoration of the Priesthood—that power delegated to man, by virtue of which the Lord sanctions in the heavens what man does upon the earth” (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [1939], 441).

President Gordon B. Hinckley: “I thank my Eternal Father for the restoration of the holy priesthood. … I have seen the beauty and wonder of that priesthood in the governance of this remarkable church. I have felt its power flow through me to the blessing and the healing of the sick. I have seen the ennoblement it has given to humble men who have been called to great and serious responsibility. I have seen it as they have spoken with power and authority from on high” (“My Testimony,” Ensign, Nov. 1993, 52).

President Heber J. Grant (1856–1945):“Every gift, every grace, every power and every endowment that came through the holy Priesthood of the living God in the days of the Savior are enjoyed today. I rejoice in knowing that … the blessings, the healing power of Almighty God, the inspiration of His Spirit whereby men and women have manifestations from Him … are enjoyed today by the Latter-day Saints” (Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Heber J. Grant [2002], 103).

D&C 84:19–20:“This greater [Melchizedek] priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.”

Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “The priesthood of God gives light to his children in this dark and troubled world. Through priesthood power, we can receive the gift of the Holy Ghost to lead us to truth, testimony, and revelation. This gift is available on an equal basis to men, women, and children” (“Blessings of the Priesthood,” Ensign, Nov. 1995, 32).

Coleen K. Menlove, Primary general president:“Righteous priesthood leaders have the authority and power to govern and bless the Lord’s people. … We have the opportunity to be women whose ears are attuned to the words of prophets and other priesthood leaders as if they are from the Lord Himself. Let us rejoice in the opportunities we have as sisters in Zion to assist priesthood leaders in the work of bringing families unto Christ” (“Joining in the Mighty Work of God,” Ensign, Oct. 2002, 46, 49).
