Simeon and Anna were very old. One day they saw the baby Jesus in the temple. They knew He had come to earth to save people from their sins. (See Luke 2:21–38.)

Jesus grew just as you are growing. He “increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man” (Luke 2:52). We increase in stature when we eat good food and exercise.

Jesus also grew strong in spirit (see Luke 2:40). When He was 12, He went to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover. His parents thought He was traveling home with their group, but Jesus had stayed in Jerusalem. When they found Him three days later, He was talking with the learned men in the temple. “And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers” (see Luke 2:41–51).

To grow in spirit and in wisdom Jesus must have studied the scriptures. He was obedient to His parents (see Luke 2:51). His family kept the commandments and obeyed the law of the Lord. Because Jesus found favor with God and man, we know He chose the right and was honest and kind to others.

Even as a child, Jesus set an example for us to follow. We, too, can grow strong in spirit and in wisdom and in favor with God and man. Jesus showed us the way.

Remove page 7 from the magazine and mount it on heavy paper. Cut along the broken lines around the panels and around each window. Cut a piece of heavy paper the same size as Panel A. Make a pocket by placing Panel A (printed side up) on the cut paper and gluing the bottom and sides together. Answer the question “How Can I Grow?” by inserting Panel B into the pocket, reading each window, opening it, and reading the information inside. Pull up Panel B so more information appears.

Jesus Christ Shows Us the Way

“And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man” (Luke 2:52).

How Can I Grow?
Try to be like Him.
Keep the commandments.
Ponder the scriptures.
Serve others.
Pray often.
Eat right. (See D&C 89.)
Exercise.

1.  Use pictures from the meetinghouse library or the Gospel Art Picture Kit to tell the stories of Anna and Simeon (see Luke 2:21–38) and of Jesus’ visit to Jerusalem (see Luke 2:41–51). Ask the children what is meant by Luke 2:40, 52. Explain that there are many ways in which we grow. Post a wordstrip for each category below, and teach the children an action for each. Give a child a clue, and have him or her indicate the category the clue fits in by doing the appropriate action. Examples: STATURE—flex arm muscle (drink pure water, get daily exercise, avoid drugs); SPIRIT—fold arms and bow head (say your prayers, obey your parents, serve others); WISDOM—touch forehead (ponder the scriptures, work hard in school, keep the commandments); FAVOR WITH GOD AND MAN—put hand over heart (try to be like Jesus, choose the right, be kind to others). Explain that the clues can apply to more than one category. Sing “I’m Trying to Be like Jesus” (Children’s Songbook, 78–79; Tambulilit, April 1990, 6–7).

2.  Invite four adults to present these stories of Jesus: feeding the 5,000 (see Matt. 14:15–21); raising Jairus’s daughter (see Mark 5:21–24, 35–43); healing the woman who touched His robe (see Mark 5:25–34); raising Lazarus (see John 11:1–45). Bear testimony that miracles bring healing and comfort to us. Explain that the greatest miracle is described in John 3:16. Have the children repeat this scripture. Sing “He Sent His Son” (Children’s Songbook, 34–35; Tambulilit, April 1992, 10–11).
