I would like to thank all those who send their stories to the Liahona. Every one edifies me. I am the only member in my home, and I know how difficult it can be to live the gospel of Jesus Christ in that situation. But the Lord always helps—and part of that help is the Liahona.
Aline Gonçalves da Silva, Brazil

I want to thank each of you—the translators and all those who help publish the Liahona. It is because of you that I have the blessing of holding the words of our prophets and the General Authorities in my hands.

I was baptized as a child but was lost to the Church for a long time. When I heard Elder Richard G. Scott of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (in October 2004 general conference), he helped me believe that the Savior made it possible for me to be redeemed from my sins. I have experienced that change of heart spoken of by Alma, and my joy is complete.
Araceli Arroyo Romero, Mexico

The Liahona is a constant blessing in my life. The articles in it reach the bottom of my heart. It was a special blessing when my whole family was baptized on the same day in October 2003, and the Liahona has been a blessing to all of us ever since then.
Jessica Lisseth Sinche Urgano, Peru

I have wanted to serve a mission since I was 8 years old. I am now 15 years old, and I want to serve the Lord. When I read “The Hope of a Missionary” in the July 2005 Liahona, I was inspired to begin preparing to serve. The young man in the story made many sacrifices to be able to serve, and I can do the same.

I want to express my gratitude for those who are involved in distributing the good news of the Liahona all over the world. It inspires us and can help us obtain great blessings.
Julius J. Andrada Jr., Philippines

Just as the Liahona directed Lehi and his family, the Liahona magazine can be a compass for new members as they continue learning about the gospel.

The October 2006 issue will be a special issue for new members. You can help a new member friend by sharing the issue with him or her or by giving a gift subscription to the Liahona. Contact your local distribution center for ordering information.
