Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter One

Recognizing the Strength of Your Calling

Most people newly called to positions in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints feel apprehensive about what lies ahead and wonder whether they will be equal to the challenge given them. So, if you have concerns and feelings about a new calling, be assured that these are fairly normal. However, your apprehensions can be turned into strengths if you understand fully the divine nature of your calling and seek to magnify it in the proper way.

Humility versus Pride

Humility is a virtue. One who possesses it is teachable and amenable to instruction. You should, therefore, be humble and "hunger and thirst after righteousness" so that your abilities may be developed, your gifts cultivated, your skills polished, and your confidence increased. In the process, you will "be filled with the Holy Ghost" and strengthened in your calling (3 Nephi 12:6).

At the same time, you must guard against overconfidence and the feeling that you know it all. Such feeling is related to false pride and causes a person to turn a deaf ear to the counsels of God and others (see 2 Nephi 9:28-29).

Usually, when people embark upon a new adventure, such as a calling from the Lord, they are very humble and willing to learn. But, as time goes on and as they gain more and more experience, they may feel "puffed up" in their knowledge and totally self-sufficient. Such was the repeated story in the Book of Mormon, wherein the people went from one extreme to the other—from the holes of humility to the peaks of pride.

You must not permit fear or feelings of inadequacy to inhibit your performance. Similarly, you must never allow yourself to feel that you are beyond reproof or instruction. Seek to be truly humble through the word of God and by recognizing the distinctiveness and the potential strength of your charge or commission.

A Successful Program—Four Reasons

While serving as a mission president in Texas, I had a friend who was a Protestant minister. The man would come occasionally to the mission home and discuss the gospel with me and the missionaries. He was basically a fine man who enjoyed conversing with the members of the office staff.

One day he walked into the office with a troubled look on his face. He was obviously distraught and carrying a heavy burden of some sort. I asked why he was so quiet and glum. He explained that he had just received an appointment from his church to preside over a mission.

I said, "Wonderful! Now you can experience some of the joys I have received through my calling."

"You don't understand," he responded. "I've been a mission president before for my church, and it wasn't a pleasant experience." He then became very pensive and commented: "Your church has the most successful missionary program in the world. Tell me, why do you succeed when so many others fail?"

After I had collected my thoughts, I told him that there were four basic reasons why the Lord's program succeeds. I said, first of all, we succeed because we are led by a living prophet, who is the mouthpiece for God on the earth, who receives inspiration—revelation—on behalf of the Church.

Second, we succeed because we work under the power and authority of the holy priesthood. We don't assume that authority, we don't take it upon ourselves, but it is given to us by the laying on of hands, and we are duly delegated to go out and preach the gospel. We have the priesthood.

Third, I said, we succeed because we are teaching the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored in this day. We don't play, as Elder Boyd K. Packer has taught, on one key; we play the entire keyboard. We know where we came from, why we are here in mortality, and where we will go after the death of the body.

And fourth, we succeed because we do what we do on the strength and power of personal testimony. Our young people serve and teach, not because of some promise of remuneration, but rather because they have a testimony. They forego college or delay it and put other personal plans aside so that they can share their testimonies with the world. I said to my friend, "When your church can conduct a program with a prophet directing the work, under the power of the priesthood, with missionaries teaching the fulness of the gospel, and with all involved working on the strength of personal testimonies, you can do exactly what we are doing. And," I added, "there is no need for you to go to all that trouble. We already have the program organized and functioning. Why don't you join us?" He didn't accept my invitation.

The Strengths of Alma's Calling

I didn't realize it at the time, but I was simply sharing with my friend the same reasons Alma cited as the strengths of his calling. The account reads: "Alma went and began to declare the word of God unto the church which was established in the valley of Gideon, according to the revelation of the truth of the word which had been spoken by his fathers, and according to the spirit of prophecy which was in him, according to the testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who should come to redeem his people from their sins, and the holy order by which he was called" (Alma 6:8).

You will note that Alma fulfilled his calling:

Such records contained the teachings that had been handed down from father to son—from one generation to another. We today in our callings, like Alma of old, can use the words of our fathers as recorded in the Standard Works of the Church. And, these words of prophets past and present contain a fulness of the gospel that arms us with a weapon more powerful than the sword (see Alma 31:5; 1 Nephi 21:2).

There are certainly other reasons underlying the success of the work in which we are involved. I don't suppose, however, that many reasons exceed in importance the four discussed above. What is more essential than revelation, prophecy, testimony, and priesthood? Our challenge is fourfold: (1) to know and use effectively the revelations, (2) to follow the prophet and to seek the spirit of prophecy, (3) to nourish and express often your testimony, and (4) to honor the priesthood by which you were called.

Prophecy Fulfilled

In recognizing the strength of your calling, you must also keep in mind the prophecies relating to the great latter-day work. For instance, in 1831 the following revelation was given through Joseph Smith the Prophet: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth. Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen." (D&C 65:2, 6.)

For many years the "stone" cut out of the mountain seemed to be at dead rest. Church growth came painfully slow. But, in recent years the growth has accelerated noticeably, and prophecy is being fulfilled. A few statistics illustrate this point rather dramatically.

The Church required 117 years to reach a membership of one million (1830-1947).

It required sixteen years to reach a membership of two million (1947-1963).

It required eight years to reach a membership of three million (1963-1971).

It required seven years to reach a membership of four million (1971-1978).

It required four years to reach a membership of five million (1978-1982).

It required four years to reach a membership of six million (1982-1986).

It required three years to reach a membership of seven million members (1986-1989).

Notice the rapid—even phenomenal—growth since 1963. And, notice how fast the increment of time between each million gained is diminishing. It is altogether conceivable that the Church will be growing at the rate of one million per year before the turn of the century. Of a fact, prophecy is being fulfilled, and the "stone" will, as decreed, fill the whole earth.

At a time when critics were forecasting the demise of the Church and the cloud of persecution hovered over the Saints, the Prophet Joseph Smith boldly proclaimed the standard of truth. Here are his words:

Persecution has not stopped the progress of truth, but has only added fuel to the flame, it has spread with increasing rapidity, proud of the cause which they have espoused and conscious of their innocence and of the truth of their system amidst calumny and reproach have the elders of this church gone forth, and planted the gospel in almost every state in the Union; it has penetrated our cities, it has spread over our villages, and has caused thousands of our intelligent, noble, and patriotic citizens to obey its divine mandates, and be governed by its sacred truths. It has also spread into England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales: in the year of 1839 where a few of our missionaries were sent over five thousand joined the standard of truth, there are numbers now joining in every land.

Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, and in Germany, Palestine, New Holland, the East Indies, and other places, the standard of truth has been erected: no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing, persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished and the great Jehovah shall say the work is done. ("The Wentworth Letter," Times and Seasons 3 [1 March 1842]: 709.)

What a thrilling statement concerning missionary service and the growth of the Church! Only a prophet could see into the future and make such a prediction.

Conclusion

May the Lord bless you in your divine calling. Strive to prepare yourself fully for the challenges that lie ahead. Be humble. Learn quickly. And, remember that "if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30). This is the Lord's work; it will not come to naught, and those who oppose it will find themselves fighting against God (see Acts 5:34-40). Yes, the strength of your calling is based upon revelation, prophecy, testimony, priesthood, and more—much more.
