Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Two

Writing Your Own Blessing

You undoubtedly received a beautiful blessing when you were set apart in your calling. I encourage you to think often of that blessing throughout the term of your service and to remind yourself periodically of the blessings pronounced in your behalf. You must remember, however, that the blessings mentioned are predicated upon your faithfulness.

A Mission Blessing

A number of years ago, while laboring in the Palestine-Syrian Mission, I was called to serve as the second counselor in the mission presidency. After I was sustained by the members, President Alma Sonne of the European Mission set me apart for the new calling. In doing so, he pronounced a most memorable blessing, one I shall never forget.

At the conclusion of the blessing, I thanked Elder Sonne for the beautiful and inspiring words he had spoken. He graciously accepted my expression of gratitude; however, he placed his hand upon my shoulder, looked intently into my eyes, and said, "Elder Asay, I had the power and right to say what I said, but remember, you will write your own blessing by the way you live and serve." Then he added, "Go and write the best blessing that has ever been written."

We do, in fact, write our own blessings by the way we live and serve. Blessings do not come to us automatically and simply because hands have been placed upon our heads and beautiful words spoken. Blessings flow from the divine source and are channeled to mortals when laws are honored and when lives are made to harmonize with the will of Deity. It is written: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

Patriarchal Blessings

When a stake patriarch places his hands upon our heads, gives us a blessing, and inspires us with pronounced prophecies and promises, an exciting beginning has been made. It is left to us to keep those prophecies and promises riveted in our minds—regarding them as attainable goals—and proceed forward with righteous living and faithful service so that we might draw claim upon the related blessings.

By way of illustration, the patriarch stands with us at the starter's gate. He envisions for us the race that lies ahead. With the aid of his special gifts, he outlines the rules of the contest, describes the challenges we will face, and cites the laurels that may be won. However, we, the runners, must stay in the marked lane, abide the rules, cover the course, and cross the finish line if we expect to receive the victor's prize.

Being Set Apart for a Calling

When you were set apart in your calling, you were commissioned to participate in a divine work. You were probably reminded of the importance of such service and instructed in how you should live and conduct your affairs. You may have received such promises as the development of a Christlike character, a forgiveness of sins, and the acquisition of unspeakable joy. Nonetheless, these and other stated blessings do not come by the wave of a wand or the sound of the lips. They come in accord with desire and a worthy performance of duty. The Christlike character grows step by step and blossoms as a result of disciplined and righteous living; the forgiveness of sins occurs as we repent, climb for higher ground, and exert the effort to lift or save others; and, the unspeakable joy comes as we witness one of the miracles of the gospel—the transformation for good of those we faithfully serve.

Temple Sealings

When we are sealed in the temple to a companion for time and eternity, an authorized agent teaches us much concerning celestial marriage. In the process, he extends marvelous blessings pertaining to (1) the prospects of participating in the first resurrection, (2) all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and (3) the blessings of powers and kingdoms. But the sealer also calls to our attention that such blessings will be ours only if we are true and faithful to the covenants made in the temple.

The fact that a couple kneels at an altar in the house of the Lord and exchanges sacred vows is no guarantee of abiding happiness here or hereafter. Abiding happiness is claimed through acts of kindness, unselfish living, fidelity, charity, and all else associated with God's form of marriage. One of the early chapters of an enduring union is written as we are sealed in the temple; however, the final chapters with all their blessings are written as we learn, live, and love in holy matrimony.

The Power of Agency

When you are called to serve in any Church capacity, be it a teaching or a presiding assignment, keep in mind the sons of Lehi. All of them—Laman, Lemuel, Sam, Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph—were extended blessings. All of them, I suspect, felt the weight of their father's hands upon their heads. Their ears received the sounds from his voice as blessings were spoken. Still, they were left with their agency—the right to choose good or evil, the right to pen or erase their own blessings. Lehi warned his eldest sons: "If ye will hearken unto him [Nephi] I leave unto you a blessing, yea, even my first blessing. But if ye will not hearken unto him I take away my first blessing, yea, even my blessing, and it shall rest upon him" (2 Nephi 1:28-29).

Despite the warning, the eldest sons rejected the Spirit of God because their hearts were hard and their minds were blinded to the truth. They lost their privileges and were cursed. The other sons heeded their father's counsel, followed a path of righteousness, and retained the greater privileges.

These things cause me to reflect upon the teachings of the prophet Alma. He spoke of faith, callings, ordinations, and good works. He referred to those who had been called and prepared for holy callings. Among other truths, he declared, "They have been called to this holy calling on account of their faith, while others would reject the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as great privilege as their brethren" (Alma 13:4).

Hardness of heart and blindness of mind not only cause many to forfeit service opportunities but also deprive some people of the privileges and blessings associated with honorable service. John Greenleaf Whittier must have had this in mind when he wrote, "Of all sad words of tongue or pen, the saddest are these: 'It might have been.' "

Father's Blessings

Soon after my eighteenth birthday, I felt the weight of my father's hands upon my head as he gave me a special blessing. This was occasioned by my entrance into the military during World War II. My father anticipated my apprehensions about leaving home and becoming involved in the business of fighting. So in the blessing he gave me reassurance. He also admonished me to rely upon the Lord and to keep the commandments. Specifically, he told me to live the Word of Wisdom (avoid the use of tobacco and alcohol) and to maintain the moral standards of the Church. Then he promised me that if I would do all of these things, I would return home safe, whole, and unstained by the world.

Throughout my stint in the army, the words of my father remained vivid in my mind and heart. Many times I was enticed to live less than the Latter-day Saint kind of life. But, each time temptation presented itself, the promise of returning home safe and well resounded in my ears. I wanted to draw claim upon the blessings cited by my father. In due time the pronounced blessings and more were mine; I had written my own blessing; I had proven the words: "Behold, this is the promise of the Father unto you if you continue faithful" (D&C 108:5).

Worthy of a Father's Love

I once interviewed a very humble young man who was just beginning his mission. We had not exchanged many words when he began to sob almost uncontrollably. I wondered what was wrong.

After many tears had dropped upon the carpet, he looked up at me and said: "President, it isn't what you are thinking. I am not guilty of any major sin. But rather, it is all the little errors which I have made over the years that come flooding back to my mind, making me wonder whether I am worthy to serve the Lord."

I put my arm around the missionary and assured him that his call was inspired, for he possessed a broken heart and a contrite spirit and had met all of the expected qualifications. I indicated that the path of youth was generally very slippery and that few escape slips and slides along the way. I also read to him the following promise: "Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins" (James 5:19-20).

He responded to my words and the scripture by saying, "That's what I want more than anything else." Then he added, "Tell me, president, what must I do to claim the promise and to be forgiven of my foolish transgressions?"

I advised him to be completely honest, obedient, and faithful in fulfilling his holy calling. And, so he was. During the next two years, the only complaint I ever heard from the young man's companions was, "He is working me to death."

The time passed quickly, and the young man's mission came to an end. When he reported at the mission office for his closing interview and testimonial, he was a spiritual giant—one who had been sanctified through his selfless service.

As the missionary bore his final testimony in the mission field, he became very emotional. Among other inspiring things, he stated: "Few of you know that my father is a patriarch and a very demonstrative man. He is filled with love and is quick to hug and kiss others."

The elder paused, wiped away a tear, and continued: "Before my mission, I tried to avoid my father. Whenever he attempted to embrace me, I would shrink away and push his arms aside. I did so because I felt unworthy of his love."

A longer pause followed with still more tears. Then the young man cried: "I can't wait to get home tonight; I can't wait to feel my father's arms about me. For the first time in many years, I feel worthy of his love!"

All of us are much like my missionary associate. We, too, seek the love and approbation of our fathers, both mortal and heavenly. Such love and approbation, however, will come only if we live and serve properly and remain faithful to the end.

Conclusion

Over the years Elder Sonne's words, "You will write your own blessing by the way you live and serve," have echoed again and again in my mind.

Each time I have been called to serve in a Church position, each time I have received a setting-apart blessing, I have reflected back to the sage counsel I received in the mission field. And, I have consciously striven to live and serve in such a manner that I might draw claim upon all the blessings found through the gospel of Jesus Christ and in the kingdom of God on earth.

Said the Lord, "All who will have a blessing at my hands [or the hands of priesthood leaders] shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world" (D&C 132:5).

As Elder Sonne challenged me, so I challenge you to abide the laws, expectations, and conditions linked to your calling and to go and write the best setting-apart blessing that has ever been written.
