Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Three

Obtaining and Building a Personal Testimony

Perhaps when you were called to your position, you bore your testimony, acknowledging your weaknesses and pledging to serve the Lord with a singleness of purpose. Your testimony of the Savior and his work is an important tool in fulfilling your calling.

What Is a Testimony?

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

A testimony of the gospel is the sure knowledge, received by revelation from the Holy Ghost, of the divinity of the great latter-day work. . . . Three great truths must be included in every valid testimony:

Each of the Standard Works of the Church is a testimony in and of itself, for all testify of the truths mentioned above. Each is a witness or testament of God and his divine purposes. Each is a library of testimonies born by prophets and apostles who received the testimony of Jesus and enjoyed the spirit of prophecy (see Revelation 19:10).

From the Old Testament, we draw such inspiring declarations as Job's: "Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God" (Job 19:23-26).

From the New Testament, we receive this stirring witness of Peter's: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the Living God" (John 6:68-69).

From the Book of Mormon, we hear the bold testimony of Abinadi: "There is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ. He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened. . . . Repent of your sins, and remember that only in and through Christ ye can be saved" (Mosiah 16:8-9, 13).

From the Doctrine and Covenants, we read the thrilling vision given Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:22-24).

Yes, so long as we have the holy scriptures we are "compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses" (Hebrews 12:1). And, "in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!" (2 Nephi 27:14).

How Is a Testimony Recognized?

While serving as a bishop, I invited a faithful and clean young man to serve a mission. He refused. I was shocked; I had not anticipated his answer. He claimed that he did not have a testimony, and he felt that it would be hypocritical of him to serve without a testimony. Six months later I called him in and issued the invitation once more. Again he said no, adding that he still didn't have a testimony. This time the Spirit came to my rescue. I said, "Young man, answer me some basic questions. Is there a God in heaven?"

"Well, of course there is. If I didn't believe there was a God, I wouldn't pray."

I said, "Thank you. Is Jesus the Christ?"

"Yes, of course he is. I've never doubted that fact. He is the Son of God; he is my Savior."

I said, "Thank you. Was Joseph Smith the Prophet of the Restoration?"

"Oh certainly, Bishop," he said. "I feel certain that he received a divine commission from God to perform his work."

I said, "Thank you. One more question, young man. Is the man whom we sustain as the president of the Church really a prophet?"

A big smile crossed his face, and he asked, "When do I leave?" He had the testimony all the time. He just had not realized what a testimony was and how to verbalize it.

Some young people grow up in the Church and take many things for granted, including a testimony. They are exposed to saving truths but ask few integrating questions. They hear a string of testimonies but never bear their own. They see the gospel work miracles in the lives of people yet never make the connection between principle and practice. Hence, the raw ingredients of a testimony are all about them, only awaiting the mixing and stirring actions required in the formation of a testimony.

How Is a Testimony Obtained?

A short time ago, two missionaries found and taught a woman who was interested in receiving the fulness of the gospel. The missionaries taught her all of the discussions; she attended Church meetings and made other commitments. However, she refused the invitation to be baptized, saying that she had not received a personal witness or testimony of the restored gospel.

One day this nonmember woman went to a physician's office for a physical examination. Upon her arrival at the office, the waiting room was full of patients. Therefore, while waiting for her appointment, she took from her purse a copy of the Book of Mormon and began to read it.

A man who was sitting across the room watched with deep interest as she read the book. When his curiosity got the better of him, he crossed the room and sat down beside her. He asked, "What are you reading?"

"The Book of Mormon," she responded.

"What is that?" he said. "I've never heard of the Book of Mormon."

The woman proceeded to tell him what the missionaries had told her. She spoke about Joseph Smith, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the account of the ancients of America. In the process, she marveled at how much she had remembered from the teachings of the missionaries.

At the end of the woman's explanation, the man said, "Very, very interesting—that's the most intriguing story I've ever heard. But," he added, "I have one question. Is the book true?"

The Spirit enveloped the young woman, and almost instinctively she declared with excitement and strong emotion, "Yes, yes, it is true!" Tears came to her eyes as she realized that her testimony was born as it was borne. She rushed home following the doctor's appointment, called the missionaries, and requested baptism.

The experience of this young woman verifies a principle taught by Elder Boyd K. Packer. He stated:

A testimony is to be found in the bearing of it! Somewhere in your quest for spiritual knowledge, there is that "leap of faith," as the philosophers call it. It is the moment when you have gone to the edge of the light and stepped into the darkness to discover that the way is lighted ahead for just a footstep or two. "The spirit of man," as the scripture says, indeed "is the candle of the Lord" (Prov. 20:27).

It is one thing to receive a witness from what you have read or what another has said; and that is a necessary beginning. It is quite another to have the Spirit confirm to you in your bosom that what you have testified is true. Can you not see that it will be supplied as you share it? As you give that which you have, there is a replacement, with increase! ("The Candle of the Lord," Ensign, January 1983, pp. 54-55.)

Elder Packer's words and the experience of the young woman are in harmony with the teachings of the Christ. The Savior taught: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17).

This statement reminds us that we gain a testimony of tithing by paying it; we gain a testimony of the Word of Wisdom by living it; we gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon by reading and praying about it; we gain a testimony of living prophets by following their counsel; and, we obtain and retain a testimony of the gospel by sharing it with others. It is in the doing or application of something that its truthfulness is tested.

One of the finest summary statements of how a testimony is obtained was expressed by Alma. He said:

I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety? Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me.

And moreover, I say unto you that it has thus been revealed unto me, that the words which have been spoken by our fathers are true, even so according to the spirit of prophecy which is in me, which is also by the manifestation of the Spirit of God (Alma 5:45-47).

What Is Pure Testimony?

Reference to "pure testimony" was made by the prophet Alma, who forsook the judgment seat to reclaim an apostate people. It is recorded that he could see "no way that he might reclaim [the people] save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them" (Alma 4:19).

One wonders what it is that makes testimony pure. Is it the message? the testator? the means or method used? Or, is it a combination of all of these? Alma stated that he would use "the word of God" to stir them up in remembrance of their duty and to pull down their pride, craftiness, and contentions. So, it seems to me that the pure "doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Father" is requisite (2 Nephi 31:21). Moreover, it seems to me that the testator must be one "with a pure heart and clean hands" and one who is filled with charity or the pure love of Christ (see Alma 5:19; Moroni 7:47). A pure doctrine taught by a pure man or woman with pure motive will result in a pure testimony.

Testimonies and the Book of Mormon

A discussion of testimony would be incomplete without reference to the Book of Mormon and the Prophet Joseph Smith. I say this because both the book and the man played vital and companion roles in the restoration of the gospel. And, if the book is true, then the translator was a prophet; contrariwise, if the man was a prophet, then the book he translated was of divine origin and fulfilled divine purposes.

Recently, a research group published a statement about the Book of Mormon and its translator that merits thoughtful consideration:

Consider these amazing facts about the Book of Mormon and the astonishingly short time Joseph took to translate it:

Recent research into the historical record shows it unlikely that any more than 65 to 75 days were involved in the actual translation. . . . These were busy days. From April to June, one must also allow Joseph time to reveal several sections of the D&C; to restore the Priesthood; to baptize others; to give personal instructions to Oliver, Hyrum and Samuel Smith, and Joseph Knight; to move on buckboard from Harmony to Fayette (3 to 4 days); to obtain the copyright; and to eat and sleep.

In practical terms alone, this is an impressive feat: 7 to 10 current book pages per day, final copy, day after day. Imagine, on average, only a day and a half to compose King Benjamin's speech, or a week to do 1 Nephi, or a couple of hours for Alma 36! No wonder Oliver wrote in 1834, "These were days never to be forgotten." (Insights: An Ancient Window [Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies], February 1986, p. 1.)

The work of Joseph Smith is even more amazing when we compare the compilation of the King James Version of the Bible and the translation of the Book of Mormon. Consider these additional facts:

The Bible was translated by six companies of scholars consisting of fifty-four members. The Book of Mormon was translated by one relatively unlearned farm boy.

The translation of the Bible required four years of labor (from 1607 to 1611). The translation of the Book of Mormon required from sixty-five to seventy-five days (April to June, 1829).

The average production rate for the Bible was one page per day. The average production rate for the Book of Mormon was seven to ten pages per day—final copy. (See Bible Dictionary, p. 625.)

No one, however learned and skilled, could have, without divine assistance, done what Joseph Smith did in bringing forth the Book of Mormon. But, with the help of the Lord, Joseph Smith produced a work rightfully referred to as a marvelous work and a wonder. Each page shouts aloud, "This is a book of divine origin!" Of a surety, the Book of Mormon is not a man-made publication. It is another witness of Christ and his prophet, even the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Promise of Testimony in the Book of Mormon

A further testimony of the Book of Mormon is the promise given the reader in the closing chapter. Moroni, the prophet who sealed up the record about a.d. 421, wrote:

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moroni 10:3-5.)

Please observe that a testimony of the book is centered in the power of the Holy Ghost—the sure witness of truth—and that four essential actions are requisite:

If you take these steps, your prayers will be answered and the promise will be realized. God does not lie, and, if he says that he will manifest the truth to you or any person, he will do so through the power of the Holy Ghost.

Conclusion

I have read the Book of Mormon many times and received in each reading a confirmation of the truthfulness of the book and its translator. It is the word of God, and through it we can testify that we have heard the Lord's voice and know of his words (see D&C 18:34-36).

May we have the faith to do and to share goodness with others, as did the widow of Zarephath. By so doing, our barrel of faith shall not waste nor will our cruse of testimony fail (see 1 Kings 17:8-16).
