Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Five

Becoming Men and Women of God

You may be wondering why you were the one called to fill your position. Perhaps you are uneasy, worrying about your lack of training or experience. I understand well the questions and doubts that may be running through your mind. Most people go through this same type of trial, especially at the beginning of their calling.

First, I would advise you to heed Paul's words to Timothy: "Let no man despise thy youth [in your calling]. . . . Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect not the gift that is in thee. . . . Take heed unto thyself, and . . . save thyself, and them that hear thee" (1 Timothy 4:12-16).

God does use the seemingly "weak things of the world" to accomplish his purposes (see D&C 1:19). You may feel inexperienced now, but with the help of the Lord, you can become one of his strong advocates.

Second, don't allow your doubts or questions to cast a shadow over your divine calling. No, you probably haven't received a degree in religious studies or organizational behavior. You probably have, however, enjoyed the divine tutoring of parents, concerned priesthood leaders, and an army of Church teachers. You may also have grown through auxiliary programs, seminary, and other classes. Like Amos of old, you have been taken by the Lord and given a message to proclaim, a task to perform (see Amos 7:10-17). So don't apologize for your lack of formal training. In time, you can become all or more than you imagined, if you apply yourself fully to your calling.

I counsel you strongly not to be persuaded or influenced by those who question your faithfulness and determination to live the gospel. Perhaps your standard of gospel living is higher than the standards of those who live about you. It should be, for you enjoy a fulness of the gospel that most people don't. But, because I know of the worldly landmines and pitfalls that endanger the safety and success of those called to serve, I want to discuss some thoughts about becoming a man or woman of Christ.

A Personal Test

Soon after my graduation from high school, I served in the U.S. Army. World War II was in progress, and virtually all men between the ages of eighteen and thirty were serving in the military. I had spent little time away from home, so the army experience was my first real exposure to many worldly influences.

The rigorous basic training program was easy for me because I was young and in excellent physical condition. While most recruits complained about the long marches, I asked for more. Daily calisthenics, obstacle courses, and other exercises were dreaded by nearly all; however, I ran through each as if it were a game.

Most of my associates lived for the weekends when they could leave the camp and go into town. Their reasons for going into the nearby cities were made evident on Monday mornings in the form of hangovers and other miseries related to licentious living. I was content to remain at camp and to spend my time in the recreational hall, library, and chapel.

On one occasion, I was persuaded to join a group on a weekend excursion. I was told that the itinerary for the day included some sightseeing, a lunch, and a movie. I was promised that there would be no carousing. All the men knew that I was a Latter-day Saint and that I was deeply committed to the moral standards of the Church.

Upon reaching the city, we visited a place or two of historical significance and ate lunch. Then the inevitable happened—the group turned toward a bar and a house of ill-repute. I refused to enter these dens of iniquity, and I openly expressed my anger over the broken promises of my associates.

As I walked away with the determination to return to camp, my companions taunted me by shouting, "When are you going to grow up?" "When will you stop being a sissy and a religious fanatic?" "When are you going to be a man?"

Manliness

It was obvious that my associates were worldly people who equated manliness with the ability to swill liquor, the ability to blow tobacco smoke out of all the facial cavities, and the inclination to sow one's wild oats like some animal on the street. They were "Malboro Men," "Lucky Lager Lads," and "macho men" who, like Old Scratch himself, wanted me to be miserable like unto themselves (see 2 Nephi 2:27).

Perhaps you too have been tested as I was tested on that occasion. Perhaps you too have been subjected to ridicule or derision simply because you were determined to live in accord with the whisperings of the Spirit, with the dictates of your conscience, and in harmony with the truths you have been taught.

Perhaps you too have learned to appreciate the feelings undergirding this scripture: "Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (2 Nephi 15:20).

A New Twist

In recent years, the evil one has been pushed into a corner. The myth of the Marlboro Man is going up in smoke with the aid of science and religion. Much of the luck related to lager and other strong drinks has gone down the drain. And, to some extent, the "machoness" of carnal living has suffered some disillusionment.

Oh, the battle isn't over; there are still some who equate manliness with liquor, tobacco, illicit sex, and long hair. But, it seems that Satan has launched a new attack upon young people in his diabolical effort to enslave their souls.

This new attack is soft, subtle, and serious. I refer to it as a "new twist" because it takes truth and turns it ever so slightly until it becomes gross error. It was introduced to me by a full-time missionary who observed some of the rules and commandments; he worked part of the time; and on occasion he displayed respect for his calling.

However, when I asked why he seemed satisfied with a mediocre or "spotty" performance, he replied, "I'm deliberately holding back because I don't want to become too religious." He added, "I want to go home as a 'balanced man.' "

Balance

A cold chill went through my body when I heard these damning words, for I realized that Lucifer was now preying upon the young—even the young people of the Church—with perverted thinking that fools even some of the elect. In the name of balance, he warns against becoming too good, too honest, too righteous, and too saintly. And, he does all of this as if a little of this and a little of that is the preferred way—the balanced way—to live one's life.

Satan's Song

It is the same old song that has been sung by Satan's swingers since the days of Adam. He may have changed the tune, but the lyrics are the same:

Satan's Song You should give a measure, grab a measure, In this world of strife. You should seek some pleasure, shun some pleasure, And live the balanced life. You must labor a little, loaf a little, But don't do the best you can. You must obey a law, omit a law, And become the balanced man. (Carlos E. Asay)

With such lyrics, Satan pacifies and lulls people into a false sense of security until they say: "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us. . . .Nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God" (2 Nephi 28:7-8). Nephi wrote of such people:

They are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men. . . .

And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance. . . .

Therefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! (2 Nephi 28:14, 21-22, 24).

Awful Chains

The "awful chains" with which the devil binds his subjects are not placed around the wrist or neck of the so-called "balanced" man or woman all at once. They begin as a single flaxen thread and grow into chains that become progressively more and more controlling.

You see, Satan is the founder of works of darkness, and he does, as mentioned in the Book of Mormon, lead the balanced man and woman "by the neck with a flaxen cord, until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever" (2 Nephi 26:22).

The Real Issue

The real issue is: Can a man or woman be too religious or too righteous? If religion is defined as that pure religion described in the Epistle of James, the answer to the question is an emphatic no! To say otherwise is to say that a man or woman can become too Christlike (see James 1:27).

In one of my favorite stories, two men seeking adventure rode by a church early in the morning. Both had been exposed to the life of a monk—both had been trained in a monastery. One, remembering that they had forgotten to pray, said: "What! not one word of prayer before God's own open house? How can ye hope for His blessing upon the day?"

"My friend," said the other, "I have prayed so much during the last two months . . . that I feel that I have over-prayed myself."

"How can a man have too much religion?" cried [the first] earnestly. "It is the one thing that availeth. A man is but a beast as he lives from day to day, eating and drinking, breathing and sleeping. It is only when he raises himself, and concerns himself with the immortal spirit within him, that he becomes in truth a man. Bethink ye how sad a thing it would be that the blood of the Redeemer should be spilled to no purpose" (Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,"The White Company," Works of A. Conan Doyle, p. 181).

This inspired thought reminds us that the life of an animal is ruled by the appetites of the flesh. It also reminds us that the spirits within us are the offspring of God and should be the ruling forces in our lives. Our task is to rise above the level of beasts and to become the true reflection of him who gave us life.

Be Men—Be Women

You will recall the stirring counsel Father Lehi gave his sons as he approached death. Among other things, he declared: "Arise from the dust, my sons, and be men, and be determined in one mind and in one heart, united in all things, that ye may not come down into captivity. . . .Awake, my sons; put on the armor of righteousness. Shake off the chains with which ye are bound, and come forth out of obscurity, and arise from the dust" (2 Nephi 1:21, 23).

Lehi knew that "all flesh is of the dust" (Jacob 2:21). He also knew that carnal tendencies must be overcome and the Spirit allowed to control one's life. Hence, he pleaded with his sons to grow up in spiritual things and to become men—men of the Spirit.

Jacob, the son of Lehi, learned well from his father, for he wrote, "To be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal" (2 Nephi 9:39).

Fruits of the Flesh and the Spirit

It is not difficult to determine whether one's life is controlled by the flesh or by the Spirit, for as the Savior taught, "By their fruits ye shall know them" (Matthew 7:20). The Apostle Paul identifies the fruits, or "works of the flesh," as "adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like" (Galatians 5:19-21).

In contrast, his list of the fruits of the Spirit includes "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law" (Galatians 5:22-23).

Paul concludes by saying, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit" (Galatians 5:25). He might have added, "If we live and walk in the Spirit, we shall be men and women of God."

There is no balance in living on the fringes of our faith, with one foot in Zion and one foot in Babylon. We cannot be sinners part of the time and saints part of the time. We cannot be servants of the Lord one moment and people of the world the next. It won't work. It smacks of hypocrisy. Those who attempt to do so teeter on the brink of disaster. As James stated, "A double minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1:8).

Occasionally, I hear of some young people who rejoice when they leave home for the first time and who feel inclined to experiment with worldly influences once they are beyond the sight of parents or other authority figures. They regard their "freedom" as license to stretch the commandments, test the waters of sin, and engage in questionable practices. Usually, those who use "liberty for an occasion to the flesh" do so thinking, I will only do it once or twice, and I can repent later. Such misled people, however, fail to recognize the binding nature of drugs, other stimulants, and undesirable habits. They forget that fire from any source burns or destroys and leaves ugly and sometimes irreparable scars. (See Galatians 5:13.)

Hot or Cold?

We must also remember full salvation does not come by giving 50 percent and withholding 50 percent, on the pretext of living a balanced Christian life. God, through his divine grace, gave us his all—even his Beloved Son. In return, we are expected to give our all, not just a part or token performance of goodness.

There is a story about a man who was asked, "Are you a Christian?" He replied, "I is in spots." What an awful admission of inconsistency and hypocrisy!

Christ had little patience for hypocrites or part-time Christians who "pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law" (Matthew 23:23).

God warns us: "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth" (Revelation 3:15-16).

I have always been intrigued by the doctrine taught in the 15th chapter of Mosiah:

Abinadi said unto them: I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.

And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son—

The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son. . . .

And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yielded not to the temptation, but suffereth himself to be mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by his people.

And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among the children of men, he shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said, as sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.

Yea, even so he shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father. (Mosiah 15:1-3, 5-7; italics added.)

I underscore these words: "The flesh becoming subject to the Spirit . . . the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father."

Christ grew grace by grace and lived the perfect life. The divine spirit within him—not the flesh—gained control of his soul. In time, he became all that his Father wanted him to become, and he did all that his Father wanted him to do. Should we not strive to do the same?

Christ did not seek to obtain a balance or a 50-50 relationship between the spirit and the flesh. To have done so would have caused him to fall short of his divine calling and his Father's expectations.

Becoming Saints

One of the most significant passages in holy writ tells us how to become a saint. Please note that no reference is made to a balance between the flesh (the "natural man") and the spirit: "The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

We must yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit; we must learn to submit to the will of the Lord; and, we must cultivate the fruits of the Spirit—if we hope to become saints through the atonement of Christ the Lord.

Becoming Real Servants of God

The process of becoming saints, men and women of God, is illustrated beautifully in this true account from the life of J. Willard Marriott:

There were twenty-five missionaries on the train bound for New York and the Eastern States Mission. . . . They came from nearly every state in the Rocky Mountain west. One of them Bill [Willard] never forgot, a slender, sun-burnt young sheep-rancher from southern Utah. He swore it was the first train he'd ever seen, and Bill believed him. All the others wore their somber missionary clothes; he came aboard wearing a black suit, but with it a plaid shirt, curled-brim cowboy hat, and high-heeled cowboy boots. In New York, he refused to part with his hat or his boots. He would stutter and stumble through a street-corner meeting and finally give up in red-faced confusion.

A year later, Bill saw him preaching to a crowd on the New Haven Green. He wore white shirt, black tie, and celluloid collar, black suit and shoes, and in his right hand held a black derby. His face was paler, but he spoke confidently and forcefully. The crowd listened intently.

The transformation was amazing. "How'd you do it?" Bill asked after the meeting.

The sheepherder shrugged. "I just realized one day how raw I was, how poorly equipped to do the Lord's work. So I buckled down and changed my ways and my outlook, and studied hard, and began to do not what I wanted to do, but what the Lord asked me to do. I still have far to go. But I've started."

Later Bill said this proved to him for all time the tremendous change that true religion can have on the life of an individual who lives close to the Lord. (Robert O'Brien, Marriott [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977], p. 74.)

What wrought the miracle in this instance? How was the sheepherder transformed into a true undershepherd for the Lord? Answers to these questions are cradled in these words:

"I just realized one day how raw I was, how poorly equipped to do the Lord's work."

"I buckled down."

"[I] changed my ways."

"[I changed] my outlook."

"[I] studied hard."

"[I] began to do not what I wanted to do, but what the Lord asked me to do."

If we hope to become men and women of Christ, we must be born of the Spirit and be "quickened in the inner man" (see Moses 6:65). This process of sanctification occurs as we "fast and pray oft, and . . . wax stronger in [our] humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling [our] souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of [our] hearts, which sanctification cometh because of [our] yielding [our] hearts unto God" (see Helaman 3:35).

Moreover, to become all that we hope to become we must: "hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked" (Helaman 3:29).

Conclusion

Elijah challenged a people by asking, "How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him" (1 Kings 18:21).

We must make a decision and stand our ground, for as Christ taught, "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon" (Matthew 6:24).

Said Alma to a confused and divided son, "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). He could have added, "Wickedness never was manliness."

So, my advice to you is to do all within your power to become a man or woman of Christ. Don't be misled by the miserable voices that sing Satan's deadly lullabies. Don't heed the scoffings of the fools who equate a balanced life with the life of a hypocrite. Seek always to become a saint—a saint of the living God. Seek to become a servant of Christ, for it was he who instructed, "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Nephi 27:27).

Our challenge is to withstand the taunts of worldly men and women, who would have us become creatures of the flesh, and to accept the invitation of the "Master Man" and become creatures of the Spirit. By so doing, we will find happiness in this life and abiding joy hereafter. God help us always in that noble quest to become men and women of Christ.
