Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Seven

Developing Good Habits and Noble Character

Usually when people receive new callings from the Lord, they resolve to improve themselves, to acquire good habits so they can better serve. This resolve should be high on the list for all who enter the work of the Lord. I say this because good habits are the basis of the pattern of behavior that distinguishes a devoted servant of God.

Since habits and character are so interrelated, I desire to share with you some thoughts that may be of help as you develop your abilities.

Binding Threads

I once conducted a demonstration before an audience at Brigham Young University. I invited two newly called missionaries to assist me. Each young man was invited to extend his wrists toward me so that I might handcuff him with flaxen thread. The first missionary, the smaller of the two, I bound with a single strand. I said that this single strand of thread represented one undesirable habit. The second missionary, a rather tall and muscular person, I bound with twenty strands of the flaxen thread. As I wrapped the thread around his wrists, I identified each strand as a bad habit, such as lying, stealing, cheating, profaning, using tobacco, drinking alcohol, procrastinating, and so on.

Once the threads were in place, I asked the missionaries to free themselves of the binding threads. The missionary bound with a single strand broke the string with little effort. My other captive, however, despite his size and strength, could not break the cords that bound him tight. He strained so hard that the thread began to cut into his wrists. Blood appeared on the surface of his skin, and I had to stop him from straining further.

We concluded from the demonstration three things: (1) a single bad habit has limited restricting power; (2) a number of bad habits, one piled upon another, have great and almost limitless power; and (3) that all bad habits should be broken or overcome and not allowed to grow into strong cords.

Chains of Habit

"The chains of habit," said Samuel Johnson, "are too small to be felt until they are too strong to be broken."

Plato, it is said, once rebuked a person for engaging in a gambling game. When the person protested that he had only played for a trifle, Plato replied, "The habit is not a trifle" (The Home Book of Quotations, selected and arranged by Burton Stevenson, 8th ed. [New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1956], p. 845).

When I taught at BYU, I worked with students who fitted, floated, or failed. Those who fitted came with purpose, high resolve, and good work habits. Those who floated appeared on the scene for a semester or two and faded away to something less challenging when their grades finally caught up with them. Those who failed lacked the commitment and discipline required of a person in an institution of higher learning.

It seemed to me that most of the failures were shackled by poor habits. Some were not in the habit of attending class regularly; some were not in the habit of reading required texts; some were habitually late in submitting assignments; some were not in the habit of budgeting time and energies; and some were not even conditioned to work. In all too many cases, so it seemed to me, one weakness seemed to breed upon another, and what appeared at first to be a flaxen habit proved to be a strong inhibiting cord.

A Spanish proverb says: "Habits are at first cobwebs, then cables." I suspect that most students go to school with pure intent. They register, select their courses of study, and attend their classes with high hopes of attaining declared goals. But, when they become careless, when they permit resolve to sag, slouchy habits appear, and academic anemia sets in. This malady comes web by web until learning and growing are choked off by the cables of intellectual inactivity.

Bundles of Habits

More than a decade ago, a young man wrote BYU President Ernest L. Wilkinson to ask what he should do to become a successful leader. President Wilkinson responded with some wise counsel, including this quotation from philosopher and psychologist William James:

The hell to be endured hereafter, of which theology tells, is no worse than the hell we make for ourselves in this world by habitually fashioning our characters in the wrong way. Could the young but realize how soon they will become mere walking bundles of habits, they would give more heed to their conduct while in the plastic state. We are spinning our fates, good or evil, and never to be undone. Every smallest stroke of virtue or of vice leaves its never so little scar. The drunken Rip Van Winkle, in Jefferson's play, excuses himself for every fresh dereliction by saying, "I won't count this time!" Well! he may not count it, and a kind Heaven may not count it; but it is being counted none the less. Down among his nerve-cells and fibres the molecules are counting it, registering and storing it up to be used against him when the next temptation comes. Nothing we ever do is, in strict scientific literalness, wiped out. Of course, this has its good side as well as its bad one. As we become permanent drunkards by so many separate drinks, so we become saints in the moral, and authorities and experts in the practical and scientific spheres, by so many separate acts and hours of work. Let no youth have any anxiety about the upshot of his education, whatever the line of it may be. If he keep faithfully busy each hour of the working-day, he may safely leave the final result to itself. He can with perfect certainty count on waking up some fine morning, to find himself one of the competent ones of his generation, in whatever pursuit he may have singled out. (Letter from Ernest L. Wilkinson to Bryce V. Redd, March 2, 1971, pp. 2-3. Quoted from James, William, The Principles of Psychology, Great Books of the Western World, vol. 53 [Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952], p. 83.)

I would remind you and other "walking bundles of habits" that there is a relationship between thoughts, actions, habits, and characters. After the language of the Bible we might well say: "Thought begat Action; and Action took unto himself Habit; and Character was born of Habit; and Character was expressed through Personality. And, Character and Personality lived after the manner of their parents."

A more conventional way of linking these is found in the words of C. A. Hill: "We sow our thoughts, and we reap our actions; we sow our actions, and we reap our habits; we sow our habits, and we reap our characters; we sow our characters, and we reap our destiny" (Home Book of Quotations, p. 845).

Missionary Character Born of Habit

The power of habit is especially evident in the lives of missionaries because they are in full-time service to the Lord. The true "missionary character," I feel, is the sum of all the good habits acquired through selfless day-by-day service and obedient living. It is molded slowly as the ambassador of righteousness shares the gospel of Jesus Christ and seeks to save souls.

As missionaries completed their work in the Texas North Mission, where I served, I would invite them to sit down, reflect, and list all of the habits they felt they had acquired during their terms of service. Most lists would include phrases like these:

The habit of rising and retiring early.

The habit of praying frequently.

The habit of studying the scriptures regularly.

The habit of goal-setting.

The habit of planning.

The habit of exercising daily.

The habit of working hard and consistently.

When the lists were complete, I would ask the missionaries to identify those habits they felt they should break and discard upon their return home from missionary service. Nearly all the missionaries would eye their lists carefully and respond something like this: "President, I can see only one habit I can afford to place aside."

"What is that?" I would ask.

Invariably the missionary would conclude, "I can drop my daily tracting."

I never objected to the cessation of the tracting habit. But, I did plead for a retention of all the other habits relating to the missionary character. It seemed foolish to me that a young man or woman would invest precious months in the acquisition of something so wonderful as a missionary character and then return home and allow it to slip away.

Habit Formation

If character is truly born of habit—and it is—it is vital that all of us understand the process of habit formation. Not only will this process, if applied, enable us to refine our characters, but it will also assure us success in our Church service, at home, at school, or anyplace else.

I am no expert on the subject of habit. Nevertheless, I would like to share some steps I feel are involved in cultivating a desirable habit.

First, we must define the desired habit. We must identify it, verbalize it, and write it down. We should be as specific as possible. For example, we might write: "I will arise each morning at the appointed hour and prepare myself for proselyting duties." Or, "I will follow a scripture reading program faithfully and seek to become a gospel scholar."

Chances of successfully acquiring a new habit depend much upon how clearly we plant it in our minds and hearts. Fuzzy or vague resolves are usually short lived. A firm and definite declaration of intent has staying power. Joshua did not say to the children of Israel, "Choose, if you like, within the next month or so, whom ye will serve. But as for me and my house, we may, if all goes well, serve the Lord." With firm resolve and clarity of purpose he declared, "Choose you this day whom ye will serve . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Joshua 24:15).

Second, we must bind ourselves to act and to honor our declared resolve. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord taught the Saints how to benefit from meetings and conferences. He commanded that the Saints meet together and instruct and edify one another; and, so that the instruction would not be lost, he asked that we bind ourselves to act. The Lord's words are, "Ye shall bind yourselves to act in all holiness before me" (D&C 43:9). I feel that we bind ourselves best to a desired action by sharing our resolve with a friend, a spouse, a bishop, or someone else who can help monitor our progress. I also feel that we find strength as we share our desires with God and beg for divine assistance.

Third, we must put the new mode of conduct into operation. Just thinking about a Church calling is not sufficient. Thoughts must be supported by action. The old adage "Practice makes perfect" certainly applies in this case. And with each planned and proper action, one repetition after another, comes added strength. President Heber J. Grant often quoted this statement from Emerson: "That which we persist in doing becomes easier for us to do; not that the nature of the thing itself is changed, but that our power to do is increased" (Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards, compiled by G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941], p. 355).

President Grant practiced what he preached. He tells this story of how he attempted to polish some singing skills:

Upon my recent trip to Arizona, I asked Elders Rudger Clawson and J. Golden Kimball if they had any objections to my singing one hundred hymns that day. They took it as a joke and assured me that they would be delighted. We were on the way from Holbrook to St. Johns, a distance of about sixty miles. After I had sung about forty tunes, they assured me that if I sang the remaining sixty they would be sure to have nervous prostration. I paid no attention whatever to their appeal, but held them to their bargain and sang the full one hundred. One hundred and fifteen songs in one day, and four hundred in four days, is the largest amount of practicing I ever did.

Today [1900] my musical deafness is disappearing, and by sitting down to a piano and playing the lead notes, I can learn a song in less than one-tenth the time required when I first commenced to practice. (Gospel Standards, p. 354.)

Fourth, we must bolster our will or desire by riveting our minds upon the virtues of the desired habit. A person does not lick the smoking habit by relishing the pleasure of a cigarette. But rather, he or she gains resolve by thinking about the added health and vitality and savings he or she will realize when free of the habit. Motivation to lose weight comes by anticipating the increased good looks and vitality, not by savoring caloric foods and exotic dishes.

In the scriptures, we read of good desires and wills. Alma taught: "I know that [God] granteth unto men according to their desire, . . . yea, I know that he allotteth unto men . . .according to their wills" (Alma 29:4).

So, when you have made your resolve, build your case and build your will. Gather information, identify reasons, and do whatever you can to justify your struggle in acquiring the new habit.

Fifth, we must not look back or permit exceptions to occur once we have embarked upon our new course of action. No exceptions! Famous last words for the alcoholic are: "Just one more sip. I'll drink only this one, and then it's back on the wagon." Can't you just hear Lot's wife saying, as they raced away from Sodom, "Hold up for a minute; let me take one more look at the city." That was a fatal and very salty mistake (see Genesis 19:15-26).

Once we have determined the new habit or the improved pattern of living, we must guard against any inclination to deviate. No exceptions must be tolerated and no excuses invented. Every breach of our new resolution returns us to point zero, or below, and adds strength to the behavior we are trying to conquer.

"Look not behind thee" (Genesis 19:17) were the Lord's words to Lot and his company, and those words apply to you and to me as we seek to improve our lot.

Sixth, we must plunge wholeheartedly into the new program of conduct. Wholeheartedly: we must not let go of old habits gradually and move into new ones slowly. We must not taper off from the old, because that only prolongs the struggle. It also provides opportunities for the old habit to increase its hold. The new habit, if it is to survive, must be favored in every possible way and repeated in its complete form as often as possible.

I have suggested six steps to help cultivate new habits. Let me review the process quickly: (1) Define the desired habit, (2) bind yourself to act, (3) put the new conduct into operation, (4) bolster your will or desire, (5) do not look back, and (6) plunge wholeheartedly into the new conduct.

One Small Step at a Time

As you follow these steps, please bear in mind the need to take one resolve at a time. The big problem with most of our New Year's resolutions is that the list is generally too long and too ambitious. Our tendency to forsake our resolves seems to increase as the list grows. I believe that one resolve made and kept is better than a dozen made and abandoned. Therefore, move forward in your progress one step, one habit at a time.

I like the words of Hubbard: "It may not be out of place to say that every man (and woman) is controlled by Habit. When Habits are young they are like lion cubs, easily managed, but later there comes a time when they manage you. Bad Habits may put you on the Avernus Jerkwater, No. 23, with a ticket one way to Nowhere. Good Habits are mentors, guardian angels, and servants that regulate your sleep, your work, your thought" (Selected Writings of Elbert Hubbard [New York: William H. Wise, 1922] 2:195).

Sin—Brother of Bad Habits

Sin is the older and uglier brother of bad habit. Sin, like habit, can enter our lives in a seemingly innocuous way. It can begin small and occupy only a corner of our lives. Yet, if left unattended, countenanced, and allowed to flourish, it can consume our souls.

An ancient American prophet understood perfectly this concept of which I speak. He referred to the devil as the founder of sin and works of darkness and warned: "He [the devil] leadeth them by the neck with a flaxen cord, until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever" (2 Nephi 26:22).

Those who become followers of the evil one do not generally reach their captive state with one misdeed; they lose their freedom one sin at a time—one error after another—until almost all is lost. Flaxen cords are transformed into awful chains of steel as they allow themselves to follow the downward course. Each easy step away from the line of goodness and truth makes it more and more difficult to recover.

Several years ago, in a large city, my wife and I saw a sign in front of a church with this notice on the bulletin board: "Sunday Sermon Topic: Nice Sins for Good People." Though I did not attend these services, I have wondered ever since about the flattering and the pacifying and the lulling and the ear tickling that may have taken place in that setting.

Do not be deceived! There are no niceties, no goodnesses associated with sin, however small or large the transgression may appear. King David's flaxen-thread glance at Bathsheba resulted in the strong cords of adultery and death. The little murmurs of Laman and Lemuel led to the large breakup of a family and the splitting of a nation. Moreover, the little errors you and I commit can become very binding if not checked. It is written, "His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins" (Proverbs 5:22).

All of us from time to time need to make a careful assessment of our lives and determine our own state of affairs. And, if we find that we are encumbered with so-called "nice" sins or that we are a little reckless with goodness and truth, we must change. There is immediate danger in the little flaxen threads about us.

Repentance—Cultivating Good Habits

I would also suggest that the process of repentance is the means of escape from the clutches of sin and is not unlike the process of cultivating a desirable habit. Permit me to make the comparison:

Step one in habit formation, I said, was to define the habit. Equivalent action in repentance is recognition of error.

Step two in habit formation is to bind ourselves to action. This step in repentance is the resolve to do better.

Step three in habit formation is to put the new conduct into operation. In repenting, we reform our living pattern.

Step four in habit formation is to bolster will or desire. In repenting, we reflect seriously upon the forgiving nature of God and Christ's atonement.

Step five in habit formation is to not look back. In repentance, we refrain from committing the error again.

Step six in habit formation is to plunge wholeheartedly into the new conduct. This action in repentance is complete faith and reliance in the new direction we are taking.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie describes repentance as "the process whereby a mortal soul—unclean and stained with the guilt of sin—is enabled to cast off the burden of guilt, wash away the filth of iniquity, and become clean every whit, entirely free from the bondage of sin" (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 630).

Without the hopes and prospects embodied in the principle of repentance, perhaps many of us would be unable to retain our balance and sanity. We do err frequently; we do fall short of the mark; we often disappoint ourselves and those around us. If a means of escape and relief through repentance were not extended us, we would probably not be strong enough to cope with life. One sagging spirit, fettered by remorse for sin, cried out:

I wish that there were some wonderful place Called the Land of Beginning Again, Where all our mistakes and all our heartaches And all of our poor selfish grief Could be dropped like a shabby old coat at the door, And never be put on again. (Louisa Fletcher, "The Land of Beginning Again," Best Loved Poems of the American People, selected by Hazel Felleman [New York: Doubleday, 1936], p. 101.)

How blessed we are to know that there is a "Land of Beginning Again"! This land is the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the door to it is that blessed principle of repentance. When we apply this principle in the Lord's way, cords and chains are removed, and we are freed from the enemies of our souls.

A Bad Beginning Is Not the End

Some years ago, Elder Robert L. Simpson, spoke about new beginnings and the principle of repentance. I would like to share with you just a portion of his inspired message. He said:

I can almost hear some of you saying at this very moment, "It's all so futile. Here I am only [38 days into the new year], and already I've goofed twice."

Young people, I want to assure you that you're not too far from par for the course. Just about everybody has had a bad start sometime or another. As I was watching the Rose Bowl game on television the other day, I had a flashback of something that happened on a high school football field not too far from that Rose Bowl many years ago when I was playing high school football. Speaking of getting off to a bad start, I think I hold the record. It was my first year of high school football. I'd been playing second string all through the practice games, and this was the first big league game. Six thousand cheering people were in the stands. As we were breaking after our halftime pep talk, the coach suddenly said, "Simpson, you start the second half." The old adrenaline came rushing, and I went charging out onto the field. This was my chance. Just about that time the coach said, "Oh, and by the way, I want you to kick off, Simpson." I determined right then and there that I was going to kick that ball farther than any football had ever been kicked in history. I really wanted to make a good showing on my first chance on the first string. Well, the referee waved his arm and blew his whistle. I could hear those six thousand people. I looked at that ball and came charging down the field. I felt everything tingling in my body; the excitement was so high. Well, you have probably already guessed it. I missed the ball. . . . But that isn't the half of it. This was back in the days when the quarterback held the ball with his finger. I broke the quarterback's finger.

Now, if you think that you're off to a bad start, I just want to set your mind at ease and let you know that it could be worse. I also want you to know that I had a coach that had confidence [in me] because he left me in. I don't know why, but he did, and I played the rest of the game. If I weren't so modest, I might also tell you that I made all-league that year. ("Your 1975 Game Plan," Speeches of the Year: BYU Centennial, Devotional, and Fireside Addresses, 1975 [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1976], pp. 319-20; also Ensign, January 1977, p. 83.)

I love the lesson that is taught in Elder Simpson's experience. A young man of less determination might have been bound to failure by missing that ball. And, if not by that, certainly by breaking the quarterback's finger. However, Elder Simpson had "plasticity" and confidence and resolve, and he repented of his error and made all-league.

Avoid the Chains of Satan

As you give further thought to what I have said about bad habits and sin, I hope you will retain foremost in your mind a scene that Enoch was privileged to see. He saw in his vision the coming of the Son of Man, the restoration of the gospel, and many other things. Then he heard a voice saying, "Wo, wo be unto the inhabitants of the earth." Then Enoch "beheld Satan; and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced" (Moses 7:25-26).

The chain held by Satan is referred to in the scriptures as "the chains of hell" (Alma 12:11), "the bands of iniquity" (Mosiah 23:12), "chains of darkness (2 Peter 2:4), and "the everlasting chains of death" (Alma 36:18). Such chains are used to make us captives of the evil one. Normally, they are not thrown over us suddenly or in one single act. They start as flaxen threads and encumber us habit by habit, sin by sin, and strand by strand. And if not cut and cast off through the process of repentance, they can become heavy chains and the awful "snare of the devil" (2 Timothy 2:26).

So, be very careful. As you serve the Lord, identify your weaknesses, replace bad habits with good ones, and avoid any and every appearance of evil. I have one desire for you, and that desire is that you will succeed in your calling. Please be careful. Do not allow the chains of Satan to fall upon you. Do not allow those little threads to encircle you about. Throw them off. Cut them loose. Do not allow Satan to make you his. Satan is uncomfortable, he is miserable, and he seeks to make us miserable like himself.

God bless you. I have perfect confidence in you and your ability to achieve success. I know that you can fill your calling honorably and develop the character that will help you to do so.
