Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Nine

Establishing Synergistic Relationships

When people receive callings in the Church, they often find themselves working closely with people who are quite different from themselves, even people they might not ordinarily seek out as friends. This is undoubtedly exactly what the Lord intends, and it presents some interesting challenges and marvelous opportunities.

Two Worlds Meet

When I reported to the mission home in Salt Lake City many years ago, I was introduced to a tall, frail, scholarly looking young man. I quickly sized him up and decided that my associate was a spoiled city boy from the East. I determined immediately that we were a terrible mismatch, and I wondered just how long I could endure the ordeal of eating, sleeping, working, and worshipping with my strange companion.

It took us several days to travel via train to New York City. I thought the trip would never end! Not once did my companion mention basketball, football, baseball, tennis, track, and the other "basics" of life. Instead, he talked incessantly about music, his mother, and other suspect subjects. To add insult to injury, when we were to leave New York City for our field of labor, our ship became involved in a port-of-entry dispute and was detained in New York Harbor for an extra week. That week seemed like an eternity!

During the first few days on the water, both seasickness and the thrill of sailing on an ocean liner took my mind off my predicament. But this diversion of attention was short-lived. Soon the monotony of the three-week voyage caused me to notice more faults in my companion. I learned that he had a nervous habit of grinding his teeth in his sleep. (I rudely pointed out this peculiarity to my companion, but he didn't believe me because he couldn't duplicate this hideous sound while conscious.) He brushed his teeth mechanically fifty times up, fifty times down, and fifty times sideways before and after each meal. He chewed each mouthful of food twenty-five times faithfully before swallowing; this I know to be a fact because I counted.

A Violent Clash

At last we reached our mission field and were assigned a proselyting area. My expectations for a reprieve, however, vanished when I learned that we were the only two missionaries in that field of labor. I was trapped! All thoughts of a transfer to another elder were painfully junked, and I embarked grudgingly in the adjustment to mission life. The days wore on—grindingly.

Although I became busily engaged in learning a new language and in developing teaching skills, I took time to note that my companion had a strange walking gait. It bothered me to no end that his strides were not synchronized with mine. He had a strange way of wearing his hat and tying his tie—this also bothered me. He didn't like Wheaties. He sang while he did dishes. And to top it all off, he always had something significant to say. The fact that he was also a superior student of the language and the gospel created even greater resentment.

Needless to say, the missionary work did not flourish in this atmosphere of contention. Door receptions were generally hostile. People were not interested in our message. The spirit for proselyting was lacking. Prayers seemed vacant, and all efforts to teach appeared futile.

Finally, one day while tracting, the whole matter came to a climax. It was my turn to give the approach. I did so, and my listener slammed the door in my face. This pleased my companion, and he started to snicker. I burned inside, just waiting for my opportunity to retaliate. At the next door, my companion gave the approach. His reception was as cold as mine had been, so I laughed. My offended companion looked at me with disgust and said: "Let's go home. How can we preach the gospel of love when there is no love or understanding between us?" I agreed.

An Unveiling

When we reached our apartment, my companion sat on one side of the room and I sat on the other. After an awkward silence, he said, "I know you don't like me, so why don't you tell me all the things about me that you despise." This was the opportunity for which I had been waiting. I began a long dissertation about grinding teeth, music, eating habits, and so on, which lasted for several minutes. My attack was brutal! When I had finished my critical review, my companion said that he was going to cite some of my weaknesses. I supported the proposal, feeling confident that he could not possibly have more than one or two things to say. For the next half hour, I sat in stunned silence as my companion delineated my long list of faults. I could hardly believe what I heard. My distorted self-image was exposed, judged, and crucified in one fell swoop. What a clod I had been!

Finally, when the exchange of criticisms was ended, my companion looked at me and I looked at him, and we were both ashamed. We were ashamed of our puffed-up pride, our selfishness, our narrow vision, and our self-centered ways of living. We knew full well that we had erred in permitting petty differences to block out the missionary spirit. A recognition of our hypocritical introduction to missionary work troubled our consciences. Both of us were sorry about our past actions and were anxious to repent.

A New Beginning

With broken hearts and contrite spirits, we knelt together and prayed for forgiveness. My companion prayed first, and then I followed. Each of us acknowledged his short-comings before the Lord and begged for forgiveness. Both of us pleaded for strength in overcoming selfishness, pride, and the other barriers that had severed communications and strained our relationship. I don't remember how long we prayed. I do know that it was long enough for the tears to wash my face and stain the bedspread.

Upon finishing our petition for divine cleansing, we stood and looked at each other. I slowly extended my hand to my companion, asked for his forgiveness, and pledged that I would do whatever was necessary to regain his trust and to create the proper missionary companionship. I even promised that I would try to share his interest in music. My companion made a similar resolve. Included in his pledge was the agreement that he would spend a portion of his preparation day throwing a silly little ball through a hoop stationed at the end of a clay court. For the first time in our stormy association, the static was clear from our receivers, and heart-to-heart communication occurred.

David and Jonathan

I don't recall exactly how long my companion and I were together. In time, more missionaries did come to our area, and we were assigned other companions. I do know that a considerable portion of my time in the mission field was spent laboring with this unforgettable young man.

Once we had reached an understanding and had included charity (the pure love of Christ) in our twosome, we couldn't get enough of each other. Our friendship assumed a special character and has continued to this day. This elder is my brother. He is a special friend—one I shall never be able to repay for all he has given me. How can one pay another for polishing personality, refining character, and instilling an abiding love of the gospel?

Though our beginnings were difficult, eventually, as with David and Jonathan of old, "the soul of [Carlos] was knit with the soul of [his companion], and [Carlos] loved him as his own soul" (see 1 Samuel 18:1).

Synergism

Synergism, it is said, is an old Christian doctrine. It purports that the grace of God combined with the good works of mortals results in full salvation.

In our time, synergism is defined as "the simultaneous action of separate agencies which, together, have greater total effect than the sum of their individual effects" (Webster's New World Dictionary, p. 1444).

This principle may be illustrated as follows:

A 24 eight feet long, standing on end, can bear a weight of 615 pounds. If a second 24 eight feet long is nailed to the first, together they can bear not 1,230 pounds (double 615 pounds) but rather 2,400 pounds.

A 26 beam ten feet long, I am told, can bear 400 pounds. If a second 26 beam is nailed to the first, the strength of the two beams is quadrupled to 1,600 pounds!

In both these instances, two are not simply twice as strong as one. Two are four times as strong as one! This is synergism.

Synergism in the Ancient Church

God, the master architect and engineer of the universe, knows and applies all laws perfectly. He knows the limited strength of one board as opposed to two. He also knows the limited strength of one person as opposed to two or three or more. In the meridian of time, he called twelve men as his special witnesses, his apostles. Others, referred to as seventies, he also called. Eventually he called Peter, James, and John to serve together as the First Presidency of his church.

The Lord's representatives in ancient times (Peter, James, John, Paul, and all the rest) were given power over unclean spirits. This power had its roots in the priesthood that had been conferred upon them. However, they received added power from the special commission given them and the synergistic companionship to which they were assigned.

I thrill when I read of Paul and Barnabas at Lystra. So powerful were these two—as one complemented the other—that the people said, "The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men" (Acts 14:11). Paul they called Mercurius; Barnabas they called Jupiter.

Synergism in the Church Today

Soon after the gospel was restored, the Prophet Joseph Smith received instructions about the missionary work that was to be launched worldwide. Included in these instructions were these words: "Ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God" (D&C 42:6).

Reasons for serving with others are many and quite apparent. They include the following:

The Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren (Luke 22:31-32; italics added).

If any man among you be strong in the Spirit, let him take with him him that is weak, that he may be edified in all meekness, that he may become strong also (D&C 84:106; italics added).

We then that are strong [experienced] ought to bear the infirmities of the weak [inexperienced], and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his [companion] for his good to edification (Romans 15:1-2).

Strengthen your brethren in all your conversation, in all your prayers, in all your exhortations, and in all your doings (D&C 108:7).

Alma counseled one of his sons: "I command you to take it upon you to counsel with your elder brothers in your undertakings; for behold, thou art in thy youth, and ye stand in need to be nourished by your brothers. And give heed to their counsel" (Alma 39:10; see also 1 Peter 5:5).

These are only five of the benefits of serving with others. Other and related reasons could be listed. Please understand that synergistic powers are unleashed as servants of the Lord witness, support, protect, strengthen, and counsel one another.

Developing Sustaining Relationships

There are many factors involved in developing sustaining relationships. Such relationships do not evolve overnight, nor do they occur spontaneously. They require earnest effort, and they must be worked for. Below are some suggestions on how this might be done:

The need for empathy is suggested in a prayer spoken by the Sioux Indians: "Great Spirit, help me never to judge another until I have walked for two weeks in his moccasins."

Few actions canker a relationship faster than no words or actions at all. There must be open and building conversation between those who serve together.

Look for the good in others and learn. Give sincere credit where credit is due. Spend less time fault-finding and more time identifying strengths. Yes, try to catch others doing good! Don't put a stumbling block before others; instead, give them a step upward in the form of a recognized success (see Romans 14:13).

We must realize that we are our brothers' and sisters' keepers, and that we share responsibility for the welfare of others.

Conclusion

Some time ago, I heard a missionary confess, "My companion and I don't get along very well. We are working on a 50 percent or less performance level. We could double our production if we were united and pulling together."

It is sad when such a relationship exists between servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. What a waste of time and resources! How contrary to the spirit and calling of a Church representative!

More than one mission has adopted the following motto: "Me lift thee and thee lift me, and we will both ascend together" (Whittier).

I like these words because they conform with this divine teaching: "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also" (1 John 4:20-21).

God bless you and all of his servants to form sanctifying relationships so that synergistic powers may be rallied in behalf of the restored gospel and the kingdom of God on earth.
