Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Eleven

Setting and Striving to Reach Goals

An important part of any calling in the Church is setting goals. Much is said about goals in the business world and in almost every field of human endeavor. Many motivational groups have been organized to market techniques pertaining to goal setting and goal striving. And, there is a tendency for some to regard goal setting as a panacea for all the problems relating to a person's performance of duty. But, like many other things, goal setting is really a process with various strengths and weaknesses that depend on how it is understood and applied.

There are some aspects of your calling over which you have full control. I refer to such things as how much time you spend studying the handbook, the hours you spend preparing for a class, the time you spend in interviews, and other personal and manageable activities. Therefore, establishing goals for such things seems to make real sense and comes rather naturally.

However, there are other aspects of your calling—such as the number of people who will believe what you teach them or follow counsel you give them—over which you do not have full control. People do have their agency and must not be forced in a satanic manner by servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. Consequently, you must do what you can to teach, counsel, and serve others, knowing all the while that the harvest will ultimately be determined by another source or power. As the Apostle Paul wrote, "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase" (1 Corinthians 3:6; italics added). So, goal setting, as applied to these partially controlled aspects of your work, must be done carefully, wisely, and in full compliance with spiritual influences.

Set and Strive to Reach Goals

I have long contended that those who set goals are masters of their own fate. Contrariwise, those without goals become the pawn of time, circumstance, and every wind of influence. President Spencer W. Kimball had this in mind, I think, when he said, "I am convinced that unless we set goals, we move no place."

To me, goals give purpose and direction to life. Have you ever thought what might happen to the game of football if we removed the goal post and erased the goal line? How would we keep the score? How would we know whether we were winning or losing? How would we maintain interest among the players?

In my youth, I would refuse to play a game of basketball if someone suggested that we play for "funzies" and not keep score. What purpose does the game serve if we don't receive credit for putting that ball through the little hoop? How can we get excited or motivated about our involvement in something if we don't count and mark successful efforts?

Ward Cantrell said, "Apathy can be overcome by enthusiasm, and enthusiasm can be aroused by only two things: (1) an ideal (or purpose) that takes the imagination by storm; (2) a definite intelligible plan for carrying that ideal into practice."

Goals that are challenging and yet attainable do excite the imagination and stir interest. Then, when a plan is drafted for achieving those goals, strong anticipation is generated. The goals and the plan work together synergistically in drawing performance upward.

A Divine Model

God, our Father, has an avowed purpose and goal. It is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Moreover, he has a plan for the accomplishment of his goal. We refer to that plan as the plan of salvation or the gospel of Jesus Christ (see Alma 42). Added to all of that, note God's goal-striving determination in these scriptures:

God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round (D&C 3:2).

There is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it (Abraham 3:17).

If these are not firm declarations of intent and strong resolve, I don't know what is.

The Apostle Paul described his goal striving in these words: "This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Philippians 3:13-14).

Words of Caution

Before I explain the goal-setting process I feel is appropriate in Church callings, permit me to voice some words of caution:

I know of some people who have "padded" the record and pushed aside people and principles, all in the name of goal setting and goal striving. Such behavior leads to ultimate failure and hollow pseudo-successes. The motives undergirding our goals must be pure, and the actions directed toward achieving goals must be Christian and in full harmony with the spirit of the Lord's work.

We must not conclude that we can arbitrarily fix a number in our heads and automatically realize it. This is particularly true when we are dealing with spiritual matters and with people, who have their agency. To do so, I fear, under most circumstances, is to ask for "that which is contrary to [God's] will" (see Helaman 10:4-5; 2 Nephi 4:35).

Principles of Setting Goals

Though I have already alluded to some of the principles of goal setting, let me state six of prime significance:

The Process of Setting Goals

There is a process to help in setting goals. The steps in the process are:

As an example, I will apply the process to members and their personal scripture-study program. First, we sense the need to read the Book of Mormon. We know little about it and realize that we must become acquainted with this sacred volume of scripture. Coverage of the book is our major concern; in-depth study will come later.

Step 1: Obtain a vision—set a goal. Knowing that we have one hour of personal study a day, and knowing from past experience that we can read fifteen to twenty pages of scripture an hour, we determine that we can read the book from cover to cover in thirty days, if we push ourselves. So we write in our journal or planner our goal: "To read the Book of Mormon for coverage in thirty days: January 1-30." We also want to define a specific concept or teaching that we will search for to give our reading more purpose. We decide to find and underline all "Come unto Christ" references. Now we have a personal, challenging, and specific goal.

Step 2: Obtain confirmation of the Spirit—seek inspiration. We confirm our goal through study, prayer, and the spirit of revelation. We seek for the burning within our bosom, the whisperings within our mind and heart, and the peace of mind that comes when something is right and in accord with divine will (see D&C 9:8-9; 8:2-3; 6:22-24).

At the same time, we pray that our resolve will remain strong until the goal is reached. We pray that we will be inspired in our planning. And, we pray that our actions will bear fruit and prove acceptable to the Lord.

We receive added confirmation and inspiration as we share our declared purpose with others. Such verbalization of intent commits us even more to the goal and builds an expectancy of performance that is highly motivating. Those with whom the resolve is shared will help to "keep our feet to the fire" until the goal is achieved.

Step 3: Prepare a plan of action. In preparing a plan of action, we must draw upon all of the creative genius within us and upon all of the spiritual gifts available (see Moroni 10:8-19; D&C 46:8-30; 1 Corinthians 12:8-11).

We know that something must be created spiritually before it can be created temporarily (see Moses 3:5-7); that is, the goal is pictured within the mind's eye and the process of achieving the goal is previewed mentally. We do this by anticipating all of the hurdles that lie between us and our goal and by picturing ourselves jumping those hurdles. We then describe the "spiritual creation" in writing, step by step, until the full plan of action is created in fact.

To accomplish our Book of Mormon reading goal, we can take a sheet from the calendar and plot our plan of action. We calculate that the task will be completed in thirty days if we read eighteen pages a day.

We mark daily reading assignments on the sheet, such as Friday, January 1—Title page through 1 Nephi 5. Once the reading plan is charted, we place it on a bulletin board or some other highly visible space. The visualization of the goal and plan will create enthusiasm for the task and serve as a constant reminder of the goal and daily expectancies. Perhaps a picture of a Book of Mormon event could even be posted for visualization purposes.

Step 4: Work diligently to reach the objective. We read day by day and reach our goal. We do not allow outside influences to disrupt our progress. In the process of reading and pursuing the goal, we monitor our progress daily. This monitoring is called verification. To verify is to establish the accuracy or reality of something. If the reading lags, we know to accelerate our efforts. If the reading exceeds expectations, through verification, we can adjust the goal to maintain its challenge.

Few things in life are more exhilarating or motivating than the attainment of a worthwhile goal. It stirs positive thinking ("I can succeed"), encourages the establishment of higher standards or expectations ("I can do more and better work"), and builds self-esteem ("I am a successful person").

These four things blended together (goals, positive thinking, high standards or expectations, self-esteem) constitute the keys to personal motivation.

Much more could be said about the process of goal setting, planning, and striving. Many books have been written on this subject. A number of companies have been organized to market tapes and self-study materials, all designed to help people become goal setters and successful planners. So it should be understood that what I have presented in this chapter about goals and plans is selective and sketchy at best.

I am sometimes offended by those who approach goal setting and goal striving as an exact science. Such people maintain that their processes will almost magically enable us to sell more books, pants, petroleum, and other things. They would also have us believe that these processes are the last word in teaching the gospel or winning souls.

We who are "soldiers of the spirit" understand perfectly the need for purpose and organization in our work. We also know that some ideas conceived by well-meaning people may have some virtue when related to our Church service, providing, of course, that such ideas are based upon correct principles. But, ours is a spiritual work governed by powers beyond paper, pants, and petroleum. We teach truth; we call people to repentance; we change lives; and we invite all to come unto Christ. Our challenge is to do all of this as effectively as possible without forcing minds, hoodwinking listeners, or offending agency. All that we do, including using goals, plans, and so on, must be done in accord with divine will, sacred purposes, and principles of righteousness.

Someone said, "Without some goal and some effort to reach it, no man can live." I subscribe to that thought if a few words are added. I would say it this way: "Without some worthy goal and some honest effort to reach it, no one can live fully."

Madison Square Garden

When I was a young man, I set a goal that helped direct my life. I want to share it with you because it reinforces all I have said about goals.

Soon after I turned fourteen years of age, I was ordained a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood and was assigned as a ward teacher (now a home teacher). The Melchizedek Priesthood member appointed as my companion was Melvin Jensen, a man several years my senior.

Brother Jensen assumed the lead in scheduling the appointments and conducting the discussions in the homes. However, he did involve me in the visits in such a way as to provide me positive experiences.

One night as we walked toward the final appointment for the evening, Mel paused with me under a street light and engaged me in conversation. Among other things, he asked me questions about my future. One specific question was, "What is your great ambition in life?"

I hesitated momentarily—not because I didn't have a goal in mind, but because I feared that my response might sound silly to him. Mel spoke some words of reassurance and won my complete trust. So I said what was in my heart: "Someday, I hope to play basketball in Madison Square Garden."

There was an awkward silence. I don't believe Brother Jensen expected the kind of answer I gave. Thank goodness, however, he didn't laugh at my honest expression. If he had, I believe my hopes and dreams would have been dealt a crushing blow. Instead, Mel placed his big hand upon my shoulder and said: "That's wonderful, Carlos. I know you can do it." He added further encouragement by commenting on my size and ability; and he promised me that if I would keep myself clean and practice consistently, someday my dream would come true.

Brother Jensen's words of confidence lifted me more than I can describe. I had shared an intimate, heartfelt desire with someone I trusted and admired, and that person had, in turn, expressed faith in my ability to perform.

When our visits were completed that night, I said goodnight to my home teaching companion and ran home. Mother was in the kitchen as I entered the house, and I wasted little time in telling her about the conversation with Mel. She, too, was surprised to learn about my secret ambition.

Although my mother's interest in sports was less than avid over the years, she had learned to tolerate the "game talk" and the "Monday quarterback" commentaries of her husband and four active sons, and her interest in me was genuine. She said some reassuring things and wondered just how much I knew about Madison Square Garden. I confessed that I knew very little about the place. "If the Garden is related to your goal," she commented, "why don't you become better acquainted with it?" She suggested that I might want to collect newspaper and magazine clippings of pictures and articles involving Madison Square Garden. So, with her help and encouragement, in the succeeding months I filled my scrapbook and became somewhat of an authority on New York City's Madison Square Garden.

My dream caused me to train consistently. I tried hard to keep my body clean and to improve my abilities. I didn't want any bad habits or physical weaknesses to prevent me from reaching my goal. I recall shooting baskets by the hour, in all kinds of weather, at a hoop attached to an apple tree in my father's orchard. I was never alone, for the surrounding trees seemed like grandstands filled with cheering people as I lived my fantasy.

As the years passed and basketball seasons came and went, I continued to pursue my goal. Following high school came military and other experiences, and gradually my enthusiasm for the scrapbook ebbed.

My enthusiasm for the goal itself, however, remained riveted in my mind. Whenever I practiced or played, there was always that dream of performing before thousands in Madison Square Garden. I remained pointed toward the dream.

In 1946, at the age of twenty, I enrolled at the University of Utah. That fall, as a freshman, I tried out for and won a place on the varsity basketball team. At Christmastime, we toured in the eastern part of the United States. Part of our tour included a game in Madison Square Garden.

Entering the Garden that first time was almost like returning home, for in my mind and heart I had been there many times.

Later that same basketball season, in March 1947, I returned to Madison Square Garden with the University of Utah team to participate in the National Invitation Tournament (NIT). Thanks to a strong starting lineup consisting of Arnie Ferrin, Vern Gardner, Wat Misaka, Fred Weidner, and Leon Watson, we won the tournament.

Immediately following our victory—on the playing floor of Madison Square Garden—my teammates and I were presented with beautiful Bulova wristwatches.

I've worn my wristwatch for many years. Each time I look at it, I'm reminded of the pulling power of a well-defined goal. I'm reminded of the strength and resolution that come when a goal is verbalized and visualized. And I'm reminded of the important role that family and friends play in shaping lives.

I do pray that what I have written may help you in setting and accomplishing your goals. I do want you to be in charge of your life, and I do want you to succeed. You will, of course, want to pray about the thoughts I have shared and make proper applications of the principles pertaining to goal setting that seem right to you and those who preside over you.
