Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Thirteen

Teaching by the Spirit

One of the most common and yet one of the most important callings in the Church is that of teaching, which has been aptly referred to as the Master's art. Such reference is justified in many ways. Our Lord and Savior, Jesus the Christ, was the greatest teacher of all time. He lived and taught in a most persuasive manner, using parables, stories, scriptures, vivid language, and all the other tools needed to convey truth and win followers. He read the thoughts of others, asked and answered searching questions, healed broken hearts, condemned hypocrites, and lifted others with both words and hands. I echo the words of Nicodemus: "We know that [Christ was a master] teacher come from God: for no man [could] do these miracles . . . except God be with him" (John 3:2).

The act of teaching is more than a skill that can be mastered through practice and endless repetition. It is an art that requires a careful blend of sensitivity, thought, understanding, love, and goodness by one whose "brush and strokes" are guided by heavenly powers.

Christ is the exemplar for all Saints, especially for those who have been called to "declare his generation," "publish peace," and declare "good tidings of good" (Mosiah 15:10, 14). Such teachers must seek to follow him and to be even as he is (see 3 Nephi 27:27). Moreover, they must "observe to do, even as [Christ has] done" (3 Nephi 18:6). This means that those who are called to teach must do so with power and authority, after the manner of the Savior (see Matthew 7:29), so that listeners will say, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.)

Teaching—a Transfusion

Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote: "The same reality pervades all teaching. The man may teach by doing, and not otherwise. If he can communicate himself, he can teach, but not by words. He teaches who gives, and he learns who receives. There is no teaching until the pupil is brought into the same state or principal in which you are; a transfusion takes place; he is you, and you are he; then is a teaching" (In The Works of R. W. Emerson, [Roslyn, N.Y, Black's Readers Service Co.], p. 135; italics added).

A number of gems can be mined from this quotation. As it implies, actions do speak louder than words; we cannot give away that which we do not already possess; and, teachers must seek an understanding of their pupil's innermost needs and desires. Yet, the "crown jewel" found in the words of Emerson relates to the transfusion that must take place in the teaching process. Such occurs when eye meets eye, hearts beat in unison, and one spirit speaks to another in the quiet language of the soul.

The Spirit of Truth

The spirit-to-spirit dialogue and the transfusion of testimony alluded to above are described by the Lord in a modern revelation. He declared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and the elders of the Church:

Unto what were ye ordained?

To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth. . . .

Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

And if it be by some other way it is not of God.

And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

If it be some other way it is not of God. . . .

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. (D&C 50:13-14, 17-20, 22.)

Of course, some instruction may occur with or without the aid of the Spirit. The spread of information mouth to ear in a spiritless style or the disclosure of data in a matter-of-fact manner happens all the time and has mixed impact upon us. On the other hand, edification occurs only under the influence of the Spirit. It takes place through mouth-to-heart communication and via the Spirit of truth. The participating parties are inspired and built up morally, giving rise to long-lasting resolves and results. One who is edified by instruction responds as King Benjamin's congregation responded: "Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (Mosiah 5:2).

King Benjamin was a masterful teacher as evidenced by his ability to instruct and edify simultaneously.

Preparing to Teach

So, in light of all that has been said about teaching, transfusion, and truth, what must you do to prepare yourself to teach by the Spirit with power and authority? Four scriptures come to mind that you should ponder:

There is an inseparable connection between the word of God and the power of God (see Alma 31:5). And, there is a kinship between desire, honest desire, and the acquisition of the Spirit. When all of these elements are combined, according to the Lord's prescription, tongues are loosened and people are led "to do that which [is] just" (Alma 31:5; see also Alma 26:22).

One who attempts to teach before obtaining truth is as powerless as the one who draws string upon a target without an arrow in place.

These words should not be construed by missionaries as an excuse not to teach. They should be interpreted as a command to pray and to obtain the Spirit. If one prayer of faith is not sufficient, then perhaps two or more will bring the desired results.

It is nice to speak another tongue or a second language. But, no tongue or language is more essential to the success of a missionary than the one associated with angels. Those who acquire this tongue become mighty proselyters like Wilford Woodruff, the Apostle Paul, and others.

Those who are diligent are constant and persistent; those who do their full share merit the goodness and grace of God; and those who magnify their callings are forever expending their knowledge, honing their skills, and strengthening their abilities. All of these behaviors build the servants of Christ and enable them to "speak because of the spirit which is in [them]" (see 2 Nephi 25:11).

A Teaching Sequence

Among the many challenges faced by teachers are these: (1) helping people recognize the changes in their lives as they more fully live the gospel, and (2) helping them recognize and respond to the Spirit that is working upon them. Since these two challenges have bearing upon teaching responsibilities, I desire to share a personal experience that may cast light upon the subject at hand.

A few years ago, a missionary companionship referred to me a young couple with two children who were investigating the Church. This family had been taught a number of lessons and had attended Church on several occasions; but, they would not accept the invitation to be baptized and to join the Church.

Prayer

After a brief exchange of niceties and a prayer, I was impressed to ask the husband, "How did you feel about prayer before you met the missionaries?"

"Not much," he replied. "Until recently I seldom prayed."

I inquired, "Do you pray now? Is prayer an essential aspect of your daily living?"

"Oh, yes," he said. "We pray all the time. We bless the food before each meal; we have family prayer each day; and I pray frequently about my work."

I commended the couple for cultivating this sanctifying habit, and I invited the husband to read aloud the words of the Lord contained in 2 Nephi 32:8-9. He read:

And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray.

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul (2 Nephi 32:8-9).

I then asked the man, "According to the word of God, what spirit teaches a man not to pray?"

"The evil spirit," he answered.

"So what spirit have you been listening to?" I pressed.

He answered, "I have been influenced by the good spirit or the Spirit of God."

I thanked the investigator for his simple expression of testimony about the concept of prayer.

Enlightenment

My next questions were also addressed to the man. I said, "How deep was your knowledge of God and his plan of salvation before the missionaries made contact with you?"

He shrugged and admitted, "Our knowledge of God and his purposes were very limited indeed. We knew little about premortal, mortal, or postmortal life."

I asked, "Has your understanding of spiritual things increased in recent weeks?"

"Oh, yes," was the response. "The missionaries have taught us many wonderful truths."

"Let's read again from holy writ a scripture that has bearing upon what you have just said," I added. "Turn to Alma 32:28, 34." This is what he read:

Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me. . . .

And now, behold, is your knowledge perfect? Yea, your knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith is dormant; and this because you know, for ye know that the word hath swelled your souls, and ye also know that it hath sprouted up, that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand (Alma 32:28, 34).

I said, "This reference from the Book of Mormon reminds us that, if the seed or word is good, it will enlarge our souls and enlighten our understandings, providing we do not resist the Spirit of the Lord."

It required little persuasion for the investigator to acknowledge that the "word" or seed shared with him by the missionaries was true and good, and that he had felt the Spirit during the teaching process.

Goodness

The third series of questions was directed to the woman of the house. I began, "Your husband is undoubtedly a good man or you would not have married him. But, how has his role as a husband and father changed since the missionaries came into your life?"

She did not hesitate to say, "He has definitely been more loving and considerate to me and the children as we have studied the restored gospel."

"Thank you for your honesty," I remarked. "Please turn once more to the book we refer to as 'Another Testament of Christ,' the Book of Mormon, and read from Ether 4:11-12." She read:

But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good.

And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world (Ether 4:11-12).

I inquired, "According to the scripture you have just read, what Spirit persuades a person to do good?"

"The Spirit of God," she replied.

"Then," I continued, "what Spirit has been working upon your husband?"

She willingly testified that a new and building spirit had entered their home and that this same spirit had changed her life and her husband's life rather dramatically.

Christ

Finally, I spoke again to the man and asked him about his faith in Christ. He confessed that before his meetings with the missionaries, his faith had wavered and that he had entertained serious doubts concerning the Savior. He stated, however, that the teachings and testimonies of the missionaries had strengthened considerably his faith.

I requested that he read for us the following inspired words from modern scriptures:

Take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil.

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. (Moroni 7:14-16.)

At the close of his reading, I asked, "What Spirit invites us to do good and persuades us to believe in Christ?"

"It is obvious," he answered. "It is the Spirit of Christ given to all men—just as the scripture indicated."

I expressed thanks for what he said and added, "What spirit has been influencing and teaching and edifying your lives these past few weeks?"

Rather solemnly and humbly he responded, "The Spirit of God."

To clinch the conversation, I said to the investigators, "You have testified to me four times about prayer, enlightenment, goodness, and Christ. You have acknowledged that a new and precious spirit has entered your lives. You have rediscovered faith—living faith—and have obtained a new perspective and a fresh purpose for living. You will, therefore, be baptized and do whatever is requisite in joining the Church, won't you?"

The family accepted the invitation and joined with the Saints.

Implications of the Teaching Sequence

A number of lessons can be learned from the above exchange with investigators and the four "Indicators of Truth" mentioned. Here are but a few:

Conclusion

I once knew a missionary who suffered red-faced confusion in his initial teaching experience as a full-time missionary. He was unable to locate a reference in Jeremiah when called upon by his senior companion. He was unable to converse intelligently with the investigators or bear personal testimony. Afterward, he admitted that his failure and embarrassment were related to his lack of humility, ignorance of the scriptures, poor teaching skills, and a "spotty" relationship with the Holy Spirit.

He was, however, driven to his knees and prompted to beg God's forgiveness for being such an unprepared representative. That same day, he pledged to the Lord that he would become a student of the scriptures, strive to master teaching skills, and seek to establish a companionship with the Spirit. In time, the miracle happened. He became one of the most effective missionaries I have ever met, for he learned how to teach by the Spirit and apply the Master's art. He was able to transfuse light and truth into the lives of others, for he spoke by the Spirit of truth, used the tongue of angels, and served diligently.

God bless you. May you do likewise and find added joy and success in your labors.
