Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Fourteen

Coming unto Christ: The Book of Mormon Approach

The Lord's message to all people everywhere is "Come unto me" (Matthew 11:28). This is also the invitation you have been commissioned to extend in behalf of God and his holy cause—to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moroni 10:32).

The Christus

At the entrance of the harbor at Lisbon, Portugal, is an immense statue of Christ. It stands high upon a hill and can be seen from afar. The Savior is depicted with arms outstretched, as if he were hanging upon a cross. His posture is rigid, and his appearance is ominous.

In a chapel in Copenhagen, Denmark, is another statue of Jesus. It is referred to as the Christus. The Savior is shown looking compassionately downward with arms open and extended in a most inviting manner. This inspired depiction by Bertel Thorvaldsen seems to square with several scripture references, including, " . . . that this people had not repented that they might have been clasped in the arms of Jesus" (Mormon 5:11).

Whenever I think of the Savior, I picture him in my mind's eye with a soft smile upon his face and with his "arms of mercy . . . extended towards" all people. And, I can hear him say, "Come unto me and ye shall partake of the fruit of the tree of life; yea, ye shall eat and drink of the bread and the waters of life freely" (Alma 5:33-34).

Throughout the years, Christ's invitation—the divine invitation—has been spoken in various ways. To some he said, "Follow me" (Matthew 4:19); to others he said, "Come and see" (John 1:39); but always and to all people he has entreated, "Come unto [me] and partake of [my] goodness"; and "he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; . . . all are alike unto God." (2 Nephi 26:33).

Jesus is the Christ. Of that fact I do attest. He is our Lord and Savior; he is "the author and the finisher of [our] faith" (Moroni 6:4). He is "the resurrection, and the life" (John 11:25). And, his name is the only name given "whereby salvation can come unto the children of men" (Mosiah 3:17). Hence, that beautiful and divine entreaty: "Come unto me and be ye saved" (3 Nephi 12:20).

The Real Issue

The real issue, therefore, is not whether we should come unto Christ. That is a given and established need. But, rather, the burning issue is: How do we come unto him?

The answer to this question is found in the Book of Mormon, another testament of Christ. Speaking of the latter days and the knowledge that would be given to the Gentiles, Nephi recorded, "They shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be saved" (1 Nephi 15:14). Nephi was referring to the instructions in the Book of Mormon that mark clearly the path leading to Christ.

How to Come unto Christ

These "how to" instructions that will move us closer to the Master and the eternal joy he promises include:

Yes, each time we read the scriptures, repent, obey a commandment, honor a covenant, utter a prayer, do an act of kindness, or bear testimony—each time we exercise our faith in any work of righteousness, we draw one step closer to Christ.

Five Approaches

Much more could be written about the twelve items listed above. Each is worthy of a chapter in and of itself. However, I want to emphasize five actions I feel are most pertinent to a calling in the Church:

Another testament includes this pronouncement of intent: To "persuade men to come unto . . . God . . . and be saved" (1 Nephi 6:4).

The Prophet Joseph Smith promised that we would get nearer to the Lord by reading the Book of Mormon and by abiding by its precepts than by any other book (see the introduction to the Book of Mormon). Little wonder that the Lord exhorted all people to come unto God and to believe in prophesying and in revelations (see Omni 1:25).

When we search the scriptures, we not only learn of Christ and the plan of salvation, but we also can testify that we have heard his voice and know his words (see D&C 18:34-36).

Alma reminds us that a means has been provided for us to come unto Christ, even the word of Christ or recorded scripture. He said: "Behold, it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land" (Alma 37:44).

Therefore, if we have hopes of standing in his holy presence, we must involve ourselves in continuous repentance. By doing so, each purging action or perfecting effort is a step in his direction. Each signifies acceptance of his invitation, "Come unto [me], and be perfected in [me], and deny yourselves of all ungodliness" (Moroni 10:32).

Prayer is conversation with Deity. And, when it is coupled with the humbling process of fasting, our thoughts and spirits ascend ever Godward.

Thoughts generally precede the act, and our thoughts should more often be allowed to precede the word. So, controlling the inner impulses is one of our great challenges. This control can best be developed through quiet meditation and prayer.

I love the words of the hymn "Prayer is the Soul's Sincere Desire":

Prayer is the simplest form of speech . . . Prayer is the Christian's vital breath . . . Prayer, the sublimest strains that reach The Majesty on high. (Hymns, no. 145.)

Such fulness of purpose is signified through covenants and ordinances. We initiate our commitment to God by repenting and receiving the ordinance of baptism. We progress in our climb upward by receiving the Holy Ghost, participating in sacrament services, and receiving other ordinances. Ultimately, we go to the house of the Lord and participate in exalting ordinances and covenants that bridge heaven and earth and prepare us to enter into God's presence.

"I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet" (John 13:14).

"Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant" (Matthew 20:26-27).

A modern revelation contains this important pronouncement: "They [Church members] are . . . to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come unto Christ" (D&C 20:59).

King Benjamin taught, "Behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God" (Mosiah 2:17).

God works through us to accomplish his purposes. We serve as proxies for him in performing his work and in blessing the lives of his children. In this process we become like him and approach the fulness of his stature.

Conclusion

There are those who wonder whether a person can have too much religion or become too righteous. I ask of such people, Can we draw too close to Christ?

There are those who say that the divine invitation applied only to people in the meridian of time. But I ask, "Is not a soul at this time as precious to God as a soul was two thousand years ago?" (see Alma 39:17-19).

Some years ago, a man asked one of our priesthood leaders, "What is your principal work or occupation?" Almost instinctively and without a moment's hesitation, the priesthood leader responded, "Preaching of Christ and him crucified."

"Can you live on that?" the inquirer pressed with a shocked look.

"I can't live without it," was the thrilling reply from one who loves the Lord more than life itself and is immersed in coming to Christ and inviting others to do so.

Some months ago, I was privileged to visit Gethsemane near Jerusalem. It was a lovely day—one that contributed to reflective thought and remembrance of Christ's suffering in our behalf. Among the other things I saw on that occasion was a plaque with this inscription:

Here now the Savior calleth thee in love, God calleth, calleth, calleth; Repent and come back home.

The Savior continues to call people through you, in your calling. You have been commissioned to call people to him.

Some accept the divine invitation and attempt to come unto Christ. Others refuse his entreaty and turn away. But, the day will come when all will stand before Christ, whether they are ready or not, and be judged.

May we prepare for that day of accounting by coming closer to Christ each day we live. May we study the Book of Mormon and follow the plan of salvation outlined by God so that we can say at the appropriate time: "I soon go to the place of my rest, which is with my Redeemer; for I know that in him I shall rest. And I rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on immortality, and shall stand before him; then shall I see his face with pleasure, and he will say unto me: Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared for you in the mansions of my Father. Amen" (Enos 1:27).

More than anything else, I want someday to return home and see his face with pleasure. I know that day will come if my approach to him is steady and consistent with his divine invitation.

I pray that you will come unto Christ each day that you live and serve, and that you will invite others to do the same.
