Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Chapter Fifteen

Understanding and Overcoming Opposition

Those engaged in the work of the Lord will at some point encounter opposition from Satan and those who follow him. The war for the souls of God's children is real. As the Apostle Paul wrote, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Ephesians 6:12).

You must, therefore, be a "good soldier of Jesus Christ" and be prepared to endure "hardness," or opposition (2 Timothy 2:3). Please understand that few, if any, of those called to Church service have escaped exposure to the worldly opposition to the work of the Lord. Sometimes the opposition is light and easily brushed aside like a bothersome fly. At other times, however, the opposition is strong, planned, and very devious. And, if you are not properly prepared to make your stand against distracting influences, the devil and his henchmen can discourage you and limit your effectiveness (see Ephesians 6:11).

A Chinese Fable

On November 1, 1857, Elder George A. Smith delivered a memorable discourse, which included this old Chinese fable:

A man travelling through the country came to a large city, very rich and splendid; he looked at it and said to his guide, "This must be a very righteous people, for I can only see but one little devil in this great city."

The guide replied, "You do not understand, sir. This city is so perfectly given up to wickedness . . . that it requires but one devil to keep them all in subjection."

Travelling on a little further, he came to a rugged path and saw an old man trying to get up the hill side, surrounded by seven great, big, coarse-looking devils.

"Why," says the traveller, "this must be a tremendously wicked old man! Only see how many devils there are around him!"

"This," replied the guide, "is the only righteous man in the country; and there are seven of the biggest devils trying to turn him out of his path, and they all cannot do it."

After relating the fable, Elder Smith added that "the Devil has . . . the whole world . . . so perfectly at his disposal, that it only takes a very few devils to keep them all in subjection" and that "the whole legion of devils have nothing to do but look after the 'Mormons' and stir up the hearts of the children of men to destroy them—to put them out of existence." (Journal of Discourses, 5:363-64.)

Anti-Christs

The evil one has attempted on many occasions in all dispensations to put out of existence, if you will, many of God's children. Sometimes he, himself, has assumed the deluder's role. Other times he has worked through those who have stepped to his side of the line. For instance, in the Book of Mormon, we read of three anti-Christs. Each was deceived, each preached against those who believed in Christ, and each sought openly to destroy the Church of God. Their patterns of deceit were similar. They taught false doctrines, spread lies, referred to prophecies as foolish traditions, accused Church leaders of perverting the right way of God, and baited the people by referring to their faith as a foolish and vain hope (see Jacob 7; Alma 1; and Alma 30).

When we read about the anti-Christs of former days, we marvel at how perverted their thinking became, and we marvel at how successful they were in their deceptions. We also wonder why some of the people were so gullible—so easily misled. And with all this marveling and wondering, we tend to put the anti-Christs in some corner of ancient history and go about our unguarded ways. This is dangerous. It could result in loss of faith; and, in a spiritual sense, it could put us out of existence.

Since the spring of 1820, Lucifer has led a relentless attack against the Latter-day Saints and their leaders. A parade of anti-Christs, anti-Mormons, and apostate groups have appeared on the scene. Many are still among us and have released new floods of lies and false accusations. These faith-killers and testimony-thieves use personal contacts, the printed word, electronic media, and other means of communication to sow doubts and disturb the peace of true believers.

Some time ago I received a tender letter from a bishop. He informed me that he had been involved in the excommunication of a recent convert. The new convert had fallen under the influence of a very dedicated apostate who was successful in destroying the convert's testimony. It seems that, to discredit Joseph Smith and subsequent prophets, the apostate cited changes made in Church publications over the years.

The approach used by the apostate is common among those who are more interested in shadows than in light. Their logic, if followed, would have them burning the New Testament because Luke's account of the gospel is not exactly like Matthew's or because the book of Acts reports two differing versions of Paul's vision on the road to Damascus (see Acts 9:1-9 and 22:4-11). Belief in modern prophets and continuous revelation is absent in the lives of many apostates. They would pin their hopes for salvation upon things other than those related to living prophets and living faith.

A Nine-Step Plan

How do we respond to such malicious and evil designs? Do we strike back? Allow me to suggest a course of action—one that is in harmony with the teachings of the Savior and that, if followed, will be in harmony with the wise counsel of prophets past and present:

I suggest that there are few who know better the reality of Satan and his accomplices than do those who faithfully serve the Lord, for they are exposed to the fiery darts of the adversary, which come whistling overhead as they labor in the front lines in our war against sin. However, I promise you and all who serve that if the nine actions above are followed consistently, victory will be yours and faith and testimony will be preserved.

Assurances

At the same time, I assure you that opposition to our cause testifies of its divinity. Would satanic powers combine against us if we were not posing a threat to such powers?

I assure you that there must be "opposition in all things," just as Lehi taught, to fulfill the purpose of mortality and to draw from us the finest effort (see 2 Nephi 2:11). One writer penned this profound thought:

A ship, like a human being, moves best when it is slightly athwart the wind, when it has to keep its sails tight and attend its course. Ships, like men, do poorly when the wind is directly behind, pushing them sloppily on their way so that no care is required in steering or in the management of sails; the wind seems favorable, for it blows in the direction one is heading, but actually it is destructive because it induces a relaxation in tension and skill. What is needed is a wind slightly opposed to the ship, for then tension can be maintained, and juices can flow and ideas can germinate, for ships, like men, respond to challenge. (James A. Michener, Chesapeake [New York: Random House, 1978], p. 566; see also D&C 123:16.)

I assure you that opposition, if met and overcome, has a refining influence upon our lives. A verse in one of our hymns reads:

When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine. ("How Firm a Foundation," Hymns, no. 85.)

The Savior learned obedience by the things he suffered (see Hebrews 5:8). Joseph Smith's oppositions gave him experience and worked for his good (see D&C 122:7).

I assure you that the waters in which we are wont to swim are but little puddles when compared with the deep rivers of opposition in which the Prophet Joseph and others swam (see D&C 127:2).

I assure you that our cause is just and that it will succeed, regardless of the opposition exerted against us. Earlier Saints were bolstered by these words: "As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33).

President Brigham Young said: "Every time you kick 'Mormonism' you kick it upstairs; you never kick it downstairs. The Lord Almighty so orders it" (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 351).

An Appeal

With all my heart I implore you to walk not on the fringes of our faith but to seek the safety of the center. This can be done best by counseling with your leaders, observing Church guidelines, receiving nourishment from the good word of God, and remaining within the fellowshipping circle of the Saints.

Do not permit faithless people to turn you out of the right way or to put you out of existence (see Moroni 6). Guard against discouragement. Keep your mind riveted upon the sacred calling you have received.

I do pray for those who deal in the highest form of larceny—that of stripping people of their precious testimonies. Such action, if continued, will lead only to the futility and emptiness of the dream of a night vision (see 2 Nephi 27:3; Acts 5:33-39).

May God help you and all of us in our war against sin. Though our numbers may be few and our dominions small, may we go forward with confidence and "armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Nephi 14:14).

Find refuge and reassurance against opposition by meditating often upon these words of the Savior:

Blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

And blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; for ye shall have great joy and be exceedingly glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you. (3 Nephi 12:10-12.)
