Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service ( 1990)

Epilogue "Like unto Angels of God"

In a revelation specified as "embracing the law of the Church," the elders at Kirtland, Ohio, were commanded to preach the gospel in a certain manner. Among other things, they were informed that they should be properly ordained, teach the principles of the gospel found in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, receive the Spirit through the prayer of faith, and build up the Church in every region. But, of all the instructions given in this inspired scripture, none was more illuminating than the injunction that they were to declare the Lord's word "like unto angels of God" (D&C 42, section heading and verse 6).

The Savior used the words "like unto" time and time again as he taught in parables. For example, he said that the kingdom of heaven was "like unto a certain king" (Matthew 22:2); "like unto a treasure" (Matthew 13:44); "like unto a merchant man" (Matthew 13:45); "like unto a net" (Matthew 13:47); and "like unto a man that is an householder" (Matthew 20:1). In each of these instances and more, the analogies drawn by the Master Teacher were vivid and full of hidden meaning to the true believer. Each comparison made between the kingdom of heaven and a person or thing painted a picture in the mind of the listener; yet, each comparison served merely as a working sketch to those who pondered Christ's words and who wanted to brush in further detail or add deeper color.

Angelic Commissions

The detail and color of the expression "like unto angels" begins with the prophet Mormon's instructions concerning the office and calling of angels. Mormon recorded that angels are subject to God and "minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness" (Moroni 7:30). He also stated that the office of an angel's ministry is "[1] to call men unto repentance, and [2] to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, [3] to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him" (Moroni 7:31).

We can readily see that the office and calling of angels is similar to other offices and callings commissioned by the Lord, for nearly any Church service includes crying repentance, fulfilling covenants, preparing the way of the Lord, declaring the word of Christ, and ministering according to God's commands. Hence, we can conclude that those who are called to Church service are given angelic commissions; their office and calling is like unto that of angels.

The Tongue of Angels

Nephi spoke of the power of the tongue or language of angels, which anyone in Church service should learn to use. Said he: "Do ye not remember that I said unto you that after ye had received the Holy Ghost ye could speak with the tongue of angels? And now, how could ye speak with the tongue of angels save it were by the Holy Ghost? Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:2-3).

Of all the best gifts, perhaps none is to be sought more earnestly than the ability to speak with the tongue of angels. Success in many callings depends in large measure upon the convincing power of voice and word. Without the tongue of angels, the servants of God are just ordinary men and women; but, armed with the Spirit and the words of Christ, they become "like unto angels" and teach persuasively and powerfully.

The Faces of Angels

I was told of an incident where two missionaries were stopped by a woman on a city walkway. The woman asked, "Who are you?" Before they could answer, she added, "You look like angels."

This story does not sound farfetched to those who are acquainted with the sanctifying influence of service and who have observed the special look of those who are close to the Spirit of the Lord. There is a glow and aura that seem to surround those who walk uprightly before the Lord, seeking to advance his cause of righteousness.

We are reminded of the scriptural account where the faces of two brothers, Nephi and Lehi, were seen through a cloud of darkness. The record notes, "They did shine exceedingly, even as the faces of angels" (Helaman 5:36).

Those called to the Lord's work are expected to undergo a spiritual rebirth and to receive God's image in their countenances (see Alma 5:14). Such will occur as they experience a change of heart, exercise faith, keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the world, and seek to serve "like unto angels of God" (see Alma 5:13-19).

Treated like Angels

Few scriptural accounts are more inspiring than the experiences of Ammon and the sons of Mosiah, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. They not only served faithfully but did so for a long period among a wicked and perverse people. In due time, however, they won the hearts of the Lamanites, converted many, and eventually referred to their former enemies as their "dearly beloved." This love was apparently reciprocated by the Lamanites, for we read, "They [Ammon and his associates] were treated as though they were angels sent from God to save them from everlasting destruction" (Alma 27:4).

On occasion, the faithful servants of God are mistreated. Generally, however, they are loved and held in high esteem—even like unto angels—by the people they serve. For example, Church members generally shower their love upon the missionaries who serve among them, and some converts almost worship the missionaries who were instrumental in bringing them the gospel and its saving ordinances.

Conclusion

Other scriptural references could be cited and discussed relating to angels and those called to Church service. The list is long and colorful, since the two groups have a common commission and mutual interests. And, it would be well to study this subject in greater detail. Suffice it to say that we are expected to live, speak, and serve in an angelic fashion. We must "arouse the faculties of [our] souls" and become men and women of Christ, else we will fall short of our sacred and holy commissions (see Jacob 3:11).

With all my heart I pray that the contents of this book will enable you and others to do the Lord's work "like unto angels of God." At the same time, I hope that the advice given will stir a desire within the hearts of more than a few to feel as Alma felt when he cried: "O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people! Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth" (Alma 29:1-2).

May God bless you and all others who have been called to the Lord's work to serve the Lord and your fellowmen properly. May you retain in your heart this wonderful promise: "Whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).
