M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Introduction

Spiritual Synergism

In my introduction to the book Our Search for Happiness, I asked readers to consider for a moment the word understanding. "It's a simple word, really—one that most of us use every day," I wrote. "But it means something that is quite remarkable. With understanding we can strengthen relationships, revitalize neighborhoods, unify nations, and even bring peace to a troubled world. Without it chaos, intolerance, hate, and war are often the result.

"In other words, misunderstanding" (Ballard, Our Search for Happiness, 1).

As with that previous volume, my primary objective in writing this book is to facilitate understanding. In this case, I'm writing primarily to Church members who have been called to serve on one of the many different kinds of councils that exist in the Church, such as stake presidencies, bishoprics, ward and stake councils, and auxiliary presidencies. In addition, many adult members preside over family councils. It is my sincere hope that those who read these pages will have a better sense of what a Church council is, how it should function, and how members can magnify their contribution to the process of counseling through our councils.

In other words, understanding. Several years ago I was assigned to attend a stake conference in Europe. When I arrived at the stake center, I met the stake Relief Society president, who was busy preparing some refreshments for the stake presidency and me. I took occasion to visit with her privately to thank her for her faithful service. While we were talking, I asked her how she was feeling about her calling in the Church.

"Elder Ballard," she said, her voice edged with exasperation, "will the brethren of the Church ever understand that the sisters want to make a contribution to the real issues facing the Church and its members?"

As you might expect, I was a little surprised at her answer and the palpable frustration that clearly had prompted it. So I asked her to elaborate.

"Sometimes I feel like the hired help at the council table," she said. "I'm there to serve, but not to contribute. When they talk about ways to accomplish the mission of the Church, my opinion is never sought, and when they refer to the decisions of stake leaders, they never acknowledge me as a leader who can make a contribution to the spiritual growth and development of stake members. Sometimes they even talk about ways to meet the needs of the sisters in our stake without inviting me to participate. I'm given assignments, and I do what I'm told. But I never feel that I am asked to counsel. Is that the way it's supposed to work?"

My first thought was: "How can this be? She is a member of the stake council and the leader of the Relief Society in her stake. How can she feel that she is not a part of things?" I assured her that it was not the Lord's program to ignore the magnificent spiritual capabilities of those who have been called through inspiration to preside over stake and ward Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary organizations. Indeed, God has inspired the creation of a council system that is intended to harness the insight and experience of all who have been called to serve in key leadership positions in the ward and stake. But my conversation with this good sister made me wonder: How many of our Relief Society presidents feel that way? How many Primary presidents? How many Young Women presidents? How many of our elders quorum presidents, high priests group leaders, high councilors, and other organizational leaders feel unrepresented around the council table or within the ward or stake community they serve? How well do we understand the council system? Do we appreciate the power, vitality, and strength it can add to our respective ministries among God's children in these latter days?

This experience and others like it prompted me to address the subject in general conference. In fact, for two consecutive general conferences I stood at the pulpit in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Temple Square and spoke about the importance of the council system in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I attempted to teach about the great spiritual power and inspired direction that come from properly conducted family, ward, and stake councils. I promised parents that their families will be greatly blessed if they will counsel with one another. I also promised ward and stake leaders that their service will be more effective if they will learn to harness the collective wisdom, experience, faith, and testimony of all the members of Church councils.

After my first conference address on the subject, I was anxious to learn whether my remarks had been understood, particularly by our wonderful bishops. Perhaps it's just my business background, but I'm always anxious to see results. So during training sessions I conducted in various locations around the world, I focused a great deal of attention on the ward council. As part of the training I would assemble a simulated ward council from among those attending the meeting. A bishop in attendance was assigned to lead the council, and to him I would give a theoretical problem involving a less-active family. I then asked the bishop to use the ward council to develop a plan to activate this family.

Without exception, the "bishop" would take charge of the situation and say, "Here's the problem, and here's what I think we should do to solve it." Then he would make assignments to the respective ward council members. This was a good exercise in delegation, I suppose, but it didn't even begin to utilize the experience and wisdom of council members in addressing the problem. Eventually I would suggest to the bishop that he try again, only this time asking for some ideas and recommendations from the members of his council before making any decisions. I especially encouraged him to ask the sisters for their ideas. I tried to teach the concept that although men and women shoulder different responsibilities, they bring to their Church service varying backgrounds, talents, experiences, and points of view. It is no secret that men and women tend to see things from their own unique perspectives—both of which are equally valid and equally useful and necessary in the work of our councils. Not coincidentally, when the bishop opened up the meeting and invited council members to counsel together during the training session, it was like opening the floodgates of heaven: a reservoir of insight and inspiration suddenly began to flow between council members as they planned for the fellowshipping of a less active family.

As I watched this same scenario played out before me time after time, I decided that it would not be out of order for me to write in some detail about the importance of councils, because there is a great need in the Church for leaders, particularly stake presidents, bishops, and parents, to understand and harvest the spiritual power of the council system. There is no problem in the family, ward, or stake that cannot be solved if we look for solutions in the Lord's way by counseling—really counseling—with one another.

Before we proceed, however, it would probably be helpful if we take a moment to consider a definition of the word council, just to be sure we're approaching the subject from the same perspective. After all, if you look up the word in an unabridged dictionary, you will find many definitions. For the purposes of our discussion, however, I would like to offer this succinct definition of Church councils from an article in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism:

The concept of a council in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints embodies both a philosophy of administrative behavior and an organizational body or unit. There are formally constituted councils, such as the Council of [the] Twelve Apostles, . . . stake high councils, and councils consisting of priesthood quorum and auxiliary officers who work together as ward councils or stake councils. To these councils concerned representatives (athletic, single adult, etc.) are sometimes added. Church councils coordinate and schedule activities, gather information, plan future programs or events, and make decisions and resolve problems for their units. . . .

The philosophy of a council is what sociologist Thomas O'Dea called a "democracy of participation" in Mormon culture (The Mormons [Chicago, 1964], p. 165). At periodic council meetings both individual and organizational needs are considered. Recognizing the unique circumstances surrounding a particular unit, geographical area, or set of individuals, the council identifies the programs and activities that need to be planned and correlated. (The council does not have final decision-making power; this resides with the unit leader, such as the stake president or bishop.)

Councils are more than operational coordinating mechanisms. They also serve as vehicles for family, ward, stake, region, area, or general Church teaching and development. As members participate in councils, they learn about larger organizational issues. They see leadership in action, learning how to plan, analyze problems, make decisions, and coordinate across subunit boundaries. Participation in councils helps prepare members for future leadership responsibilities. ("Priesthood Councils," in Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 3:1141-42)

I believe that the day has come when we cannot hope to build the Church and to bring the hearts and souls of our members to Christ without using every resource the Lord has given us to help us take advantage of our opportunities and address the obstacles standing in our way. For example, leaders throughout the Church are greatly concerned about the spiritual maturity of many members. We worry about the inactivity of so many new members of the Church. I believe that the answer to these concerns lies in the proper understanding and use of our councils, particularly the ward council. Is it too much to believe that the bishops and branch presidents of the Church can harness their collective resources and stop this unnecessary loss of so many of our Heavenly Father's children?

If the ward mission leader understood that the auxiliaries are a resource to assist in missionary work, he could suggest to the Relief Society presidency that they visit the home of an investigator family during the time that the missionaries are teaching them the discussions and invite the mother of the family to attend a Relief Society activity or meeting. No extra meetings are required—just an alert ward mission leader who wants to enlist the help of the ward council to work with the missionaries in fellowshipping a family into the Church. Similarly, Young Men, Young Women, and Primary leaders could get involved with members of the family who fall within their respective areas of responsibility. Can you see how comfortable and appropriate it would be to launch a fellowshipping process that could contribute to the conversion and retention of any man, woman, teenager, or child who is investigating the Church? If in council meetings each council member is concerned about supporting the missionaries, I believe many more of our converts would be fully fellowshipped into the Church.

The same concept applies to almost any concern facing a branch, ward, stake, or family. For example, we worry about the less-active members of the Church. We spend many hours in various meetings talking about them and planning how we can bless their lives. Can you see the potential power of the priesthood and auxiliaries working together to systematically reach out to families and individuals? I believe that the answers to the activity problems facing our wards and stakes can be found in the priesthood and auxiliary councils. I also believe that Satan does not want us to figure out how to effectively use the council system.

The Brethren have worried for years about the heavy load our bishops and branch presidents carry. To me, the very best way for them to ease some of their burden is to counsel with their councils.

For most of my life before I was called as a General Authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I was involved in the automobile business, as was my father before me. Through the years I learned to appreciate the sound and performance of a well-tuned engine. As far as I'm concerned, it's almost musical—from the gentle purring of an idling motor to the vibrant roar of a throttle fully open. And the power that sound represents is even more exciting. There's nothing quite like sitting behind the wheel of a fine automobile when all of the pistons are firing as they should and all of the assembled parts are pulling together.

On the other hand, there's nothing more exasperating than a car that isn't functioning properly. No matter how beautifully it is painted or how comfortably it is furnished inside, a car with an engine that isn't fully functional is just a shell of unrealized potential. While it is possible for an automobile to run on only a few cylinders, it will never go as far or as fast, nor will the ride be as smooth and pleasant, as when it is properly tuned. And when a few cylinders carry a load designed to be borne by more, the quality of performance deteriorates.

Unfortunately, there are too many stakes, wards, and families in the Church that are hitting on only a few cylinders—including some that are trying to make do with only one. The one-cylinder ward is one in which the bishop handles all the problems, makes all the decisions, follows through on all the assignments, and faces every challenge. Then, like any other overworked cylinder, he starts to sputter and behave erratically. Eventually, he burns out altogether.

I remember speaking to a young bishop one day. As he lovingly spoke of his ministry, he shared one overwhelming anxiety. "The biggest frustration," he said, "is that there just isn't enough time in the day to do everything that needs to be done."

How well I remembered that feeling from my own days as a bishop. So I tried to keep a straight face as I said, "You know, I think you're the first bishop in the entire history of the Church who's ever felt that way!"

Obviously, the demands upon our bishops are great. There are certain priesthood keys that they—and they alone—hold, and certain roles in the ward that only they can fulfill. But they are not called to be all things to all people. They are called to preside and to lead and to extend God's love to His children. But no one, least of all our Heavenly Father, expects them to do it all themselves.

The same can be said of our stake presidents, quorum presidents, auxiliary presidents, and mothers and fathers in their families. All face responsibilities that require much of their time, talent, and energy. But none are left to do it alone. God, the Master Organizer, has inspired the creation of a system of committees and councils. If understood and carefully implemented and utilized, that system will lessen the burden on any one individual leader and extend the reach and impact of his or her ministry by bringing together the judgment, talents, and wisdom of many leaders who are entitled to the guidance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit. The council system also acts as a safeguard to the Church, providing support and strength where individual leaders may be weak.

As a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, I serve on a number of general Church councils and committees. It is one of the great blessings of my life to work and serve with dedicated men and women whose greatest wish is to do their Heavenly Father's will. We have had some marvelous experiences as we have counseled together, sometimes for hours at a time, formulating plans, programs, and policies to bless and strengthen the entire membership of the Church during these difficult and challenging times.

Although I consider such service a rare and wonderful opportunity, I don't mind telling you that our task isn't always as easy as it may sound. With the rich diversity of languages, cultures, and environments that currently exist within the Church, all of our planning and preparation on a general level has to be both broad and narrow: broad enough to meet the varying needs of millions of members in dozens of different nations, and narrow enough to reach the one. To this end, priesthood and auxiliary leaders regularly seek the Lord on bended knee and plead for His guidance and direction. And we have been edified and uplifted by the spirit of inspiration—and yes, revelation—as it has come.

In many ways, our general Church councils function much the same as local Church and family councils should function. Under the direction of the priesthood and the influence of the Holy Spirit, these councils should feature free and open discussion and clear, concise communication. Our mutual goals and objectives should always be clearly understood. Everything we do, everything we teach, every plan we make should be focused on helping God's children enjoy the full blessings of the gospel. In this effort, councils should support families, striving never to be in competition with them.

Therefore, our council meetings are about duties and responsibilities, not turf. They provide an opportunity for the priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations of the Church to come together in a spirit of loving cooperation to assist Heavenly Father in accomplishing His very work and glory: "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). The same is true of our family councils, only there it is a matter of parents and children joining forces in an energetic and dynamic way to ensure that there are no empty places at our eternal family tables.

And if ever there was a time when such cooperative effort between family members and the men and women leaders in the Church was needed in behalf of Heavenly Father's children, this is the time. These are perilous days, and they require absolute vigilance on the part of all who have been entrusted with watch care in the kingdom. Our individual responsibilities are great, but just as important is the responsibility we share with others at home and in the Church to come together in a united effort to bless the lives of our family members and all of our eternal brothers and sisters.

Spiritual Synergism

Scientists call this process synergism, defined as a "united action of different agents or organisms producing a greater effect than the sum of the various individual actions" (Thorndike-Barnhardt Dictionary, s.v. "synergism"). The ancient moralist Aesop used to illustrate the concept by holding up a stick and asking for a volunteer among his listeners who thought he could break it. Of course the volunteer was able to break the stick easily. Then Aesop would put two sticks of the same size together and would ask the same volunteer to break them both at the same time. It was more difficult, but usually it could be done without too much trouble. The process was repeated, with another stick being added to the bundle each time, until the volunteer was unable to break the bundle of sticks. The moral to Aesop's illustration was simple: individually we are weak, but together we are strong.

It has never been God's intention that His children stand alone in important decisions and responsibilities. During our premortal existence, He himself called for a grand council to present His glorious plan for our eternal welfare. His Church is organized with councils at every level, beginning with the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and extending right on through to our stake, ward, and family councils. The Apostle Paul taught that the organization of the Church, complete with apostles, prophets, and other officers and teachers, was given by the Savior "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith" (Ephesians 4:11-13).

In his first letter to the Corinthian Saints, Paul compared the members of the Church and their various responsibilities to the operation of the physical body:

For the body is not one member, but many. . . . But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. And if they were all one member, where were the body? But now are they many members, yet but one body. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. . . . That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it. (1 Corinthians 12:14, 18-21, 25-26)

The scriptures make it clear that though our respective roles may be different and may change from time to time, all are equally important to the successful functioning of the Church. We need the priesthood quorums to assert themselves and fulfill their divinely mandated responsibilities, just as we need the Relief Society, the Primary, the Young Women, the Sunday School, and the activities committees to perform their vital functions. And we need all of those inspired organizations to work together in council, assisting each other as needed, for the benefit of individuals and families.

Just a few years ago, Sherry, a single mother of two beautiful daughters, moved into a new ward. It had been a long time since she had been active in the Church, but lately she had been feeling some strong spiritual yearnings. So she was pleased when the elders quorum presidency showed up to help her move in, and she accepted their invitation to attend a quorum social later in the week.

The very next night the Relief Society presidency dropped in, followed by one daughter's Young Women adviser and the other daughter's Primary teacher. By the time the bishopric got there later in the evening, Sherry was feeling like she already knew everyone in the ward. Each visit had been warm and friendly, and by the time Sunday rolled around Sherry and her daughters were ready and eager to attend Church.

"None of these people had ever met me before," Sherry said later, "and yet they made me feel like I was coming home." And in a very real way, she was. The outpouring of affection and interest gave her the courage she needed to make significant changes in her life. Within a week she had a calling in the ward, and her daughters were involved in their respective class activities and projects.

As Sherry embraced her new ward and was welcomed and accepted by the members there, she became open and receptive to the Spirit of the Lord as it moved upon her. Her testimony was revitalized and her faith restored. A little more than a year after she moved into the ward, many of her new friends and neighbors joined her in the temple, where she made sacred covenants that she is faithfully keeping to this day.

Not too long ago I had a chance to talk with Sherry's bishop about the experience. "I wish I could tell you that it always happens that way," he told me. "Sometimes things work out better than at other times. But when the entire program of the Church comes together in council like that to focus on the specific needs of one family or individual, miracles can and do happen."

It is my testimony that such miracles can happen only to the extent that we are prepared to work together—the men and women who serve in the quorums and auxiliaries of the Church—to make them happen. This is not men's work or women's work in which we are involved; it is all God's work. We are on His errand, and we serve at His will and pleasure.

President Ezra Taft Benson once said:

There is a principle cited in the Doctrine and Covenants which, though directed specifically to the leading quorums of the Church, applies to all councils in Church government. I quote from section 107: . . . "The decisions of these quorums [or councils] . . . are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity" [D&C 107:30]. . . . This seems to me to be the pattern by which the Lord would have us operate through priesthood councils at all levels of Church government. We must be one in all aspects of this work . . . for all things are spiritual to Him whom we acknowledge as Master. ("Church Government through Councils," 88-89)

It has been my experience that where leaders make wise use of committees and councils, lives are blessed. Like a carefully manufactured automobile operating at peak efficiency, such Church organizations move the work of the Lord faster and farther. They are unified, and together they experience a much more pleasant ride along the highway of Church service.

One important way to increase the unity and effectiveness of our ward and stake councils is to remember that all council members have a dual responsibility: not only do they represent the needs and perspectives of the individual organizations they have been called to lead, but each one also serves as a member of the council, sharing equally with the others a sense of stewardship for the success of the Lord's work in that area. Thus when a subject that pertains to all ward or stake members is discussed, full consideration should be given to the views and recommendations of all council members, both the brethren and the sisters. Such an approach will result in wiser decisions and will generate greater commitment as these decisions are carried out.

When Church leaders allow those whom the Lord has called to serve with them to become part of a problem-solving team, wonderful things begin to happen. We broaden our base of experience and understanding, which can't help but expose us to better and more insightful solutions. We energize individuals by giving them a chance to have input and to be heard. We prepare future leaders by allowing them to participate and learn. And when more people feel ownership of the problem, more people are willing to become part of the solution, which greatly enhances the possibility of success.

Once the appropriate councils are in place and energized, leaders can begin to look beyond maintenance and meeting the needs of individuals and can find ways to make the world a better place in which to live. There's no reason why ward council agendas could not include such subjects as gang violence, urban blight, unemployment, or abuse of any kind. Bishops could ask ward councils, "How can we make a difference in our community and in our families in these important areas?" Such broad thinking and involvement in our communities would not only be exciting and fulfilling; it would also have the benefit of being the right thing for us to do as Latter-day Saints and as Christians.

In other words, one of the great strengths of the council system is the flexibility it provides to develop and implement local solutions to local problems. And as the needs and circumstances of individuals, families, and communities change over time, ward and stake councils—operating under priesthood direction and established Church guidelines—can focus their collective wisdom and the inspiration of heaven on such needs, thus blessing and lifting all who come within their influence.

The Power of Councils

Throughout my years of service in the Church, I have seen extraordinary examples of the power of counseling with our councils. Some years ago when I was serving as a bishop, a large family in our ward experienced a crisis when the father lost his job. I was concerned about their well-being during this difficult time, and I visited their home to counsel with them and to offer the support and assistance of the Church. Interestingly, they were reluctant to respond to my offer of temporary assistance, and so I took the matter to my ward welfare committee and to the ward council. In a spirit of loving confidentiality, I shared with them my concern for this wonderful family and asked for their ideas as to how we could bless the lives of our brothers and sisters who lived in that home. Our Relief Society president volunteered to visit with the mother of the family to ascertain their temporal needs and to work with them in obtaining any commodities they needed—all of which, of course, was her responsibility according to the program of the Church. Within a couple of days, she was able to accomplish what I had been unable to accomplish, and the family humbly and gratefully accepted commodity assistance. The elders quorum president counseled with the father of the family—which, of course, was his right and duty—and worked with him on ways to improve his employment situation. Our Young Men president noticed that the family's house was in desperate need of a coat of paint, and he arranged for his priests to work with the high priests group to paint the house.

During the course of my conversations with the parents, I discovered that they were heavily in debt and were in arrears on their mortgage. Following approved welfare guidelines, I inquired about the ability of their extended family to help through this challenging period in their lives, but I received little information. Our Relief Society president, however, was able to learn that the mother had a brother who was very wealthy.

"There's no reason to contact him," the mother said. "We haven't even spoken in years. I can't go to him after all these years and say, 'Hi! Remember me? I'm your sister. Can you lend me some money?'"

I understood her dilemma, and yet I felt it was important to follow the order of the Church. And so I counseled with her and eventually received her permission to contact her brother, who lived in a distant city. I called him and explained the difficult circumstances in which his younger sister was living. Within three days he arrived in Salt Lake City and helped get his sister's financial affairs in order. Meanwhile, our elders quorum president was helping her husband to find a steady job with a good income. Suddenly, the family was more secure than they had ever been.

More important, however, was that they were closer and more united as a family. I don't think I'll ever forget that tender moment of reunion between the mother and her brother after years of estrangement. Although her brother had become alienated from the Church, there was an immediate spirit-to-spirit bonding that can be understood only from within a gospel context. So it probably won't surprise you to learn that as a result of this experience, the brother eventually returned to full activity in the Church and renewed his relationship with all of his living family members. And all of this happened because of the inspired work of a faithful ward council, functioning according to the program that God has outlined for His children through His servants.

Through years of such experiences, I have come to believe with all my heart that the council system of the Church has been divinely structured to bless the lives of our Heavenly Father's children. And to be perfectly candid, I sometimes have a difficult time understanding why so many of our leaders fail to see the vision of how working through councils can enhance their ability to accomplish all that the Lord expects of them in their respective stewardships.

For example, one great challenge facing the Church today is the need to fellowship and retain the ever-growing number of new converts. In some parts of the world, where the equivalent of a new ward is baptized every year, this is a truly daunting task. It would be difficult, if not impossible, for a bishop or branch president to even consider accomplishing this critical assignment without the ongoing efforts of hard-working councils in which the members are equally yoked together for the benefit of all of God's children in their ward or branch.

Similarly, the ward council that regularly discusses how the quorums and auxiliaries can provide fellowshipping opportunities for all who are investigating the Church will do much to cultivate a sense of belonging and compatibility throughout the ward. For example, if the Primary sisters would invite children who are prospective new members to attend Primary, these children would meet new friends and would feel that the Church really cares about them. Surely this would help the missionaries in the conversion of their families. All members of the council should watch for opportunities to give investigators a chance to develop a relationship with someone besides the missionaries. The ward mission leader can coordinate this work through the priesthood executive committee and directly with the leaders of the auxiliaries. Remember, the ward mission leader meets every week with the full-time missionaries to review the families they are teaching and to coordinate their work.

In a very real sense, the ward council is the "receiving arm" of the Church. If ward councils are functioning as they should, every new convert will be fellowshipped, will have home teachers and visiting teachers, and will receive an appropriate calling within days after baptism. Also, the less active will receive callings that assure them that they are needed and loved by the ward members.

Since 1985 I have served as a member of a council composed of twelve men. We come from different backgrounds, and we bring to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles a diverse assortment of experiences in the Church and in the world. Be assured that in our meetings, we don't just sit around and wait for the President of our Quorum to tell us what to do. We counsel with each other, and we listen to each other with profound respect for the diverse abilities our Brethren bring to the Quorum. We discuss a wide variety of issues, from Church administration to world events, and we do so frankly and openly. Sometimes issues are discussed for weeks, months, and occasionally even years before a decision is made. We don't always agree during the initial course of our discussions. Once a decision is made, however, we are always united.

Of course, even in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, we never forget the important guiding principle of revelation through those who hold priesthood keys of leadership and authority. While counseling through councils is essential to successful gospel governance, those who serve in Church councils must be careful not to misunderstand their role in the process. The council is not a democratic forum. There are no veto overrides, and there is no majority rule. As necessary as council input is to the operation of Church units everywhere, it never supersedes the direction of the Holy Spirit as it manifests itself through revelation to those who hold priesthood keys.

President David O. McKay once told of a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in which a question of grave importance came up. He and the other Apostles felt strongly about a certain course of action that should be taken, and they were prepared to share their feelings in a meeting with the First Presidency later that morning. But to their surprise, President Joseph F. Smith didn't ask for their opinion in the matter, as was his custom. Rather, he arose and said, "'This is what the Lord wants.'

"While it was not wholly in harmony with what [we] had decided," President McKay wrote, "President Francis M. Lyman, the President of the Twelve, was the first on his feet to say, 'Brethren, I move that that becomes the opinion and judgment of this Council.'

"'Second the motion,' said another, and it was unanimous. Six months did not pass before the wisdom of that leader was demonstrated" (Gospel Ideals, 264).

Thank goodness for the principle of revelation in the Church! But let us not underestimate the worth of input from council members in the deliberation process. This is part of the miracle of Church councils. By listening to each other and to the Spirit, council members can advance the work of the Lord in meaningful ways. And as we support one another and participate in Church councils, we begin to understand how God can take ordinary men and women and make of them extraordinary leaders. For the best leaders are not those who work themselves to death trying to do everything single-handedly; the best leaders are those who follow God's plan and counsel with their councils.

The Lord said in an earlier dispensation through the prophet Isaiah, "Come now, and let us reason together" (Isaiah 1:18). And in this dispensation He repeated that admonition: "Let us reason together, that ye may understand" (D&C 50:10). This book will attempt to outline in some detail the Lord's plan for "reasoning together" through family, ward, and stake councils. We'll explore the doctrinal foundations of the council system, discuss the functions and purposes of a wide variety of councils, and offer some practical suggestions for council leaders and members. The world we now live in requires from members and leaders of the Church our very best thinking and the wisest use of every resource our Heavenly Father has given to us to build and protect His children and His Church.

All of the examples and experiences I will share are real, but I have chosen not to use any actual names or locations in order to protect the privacy of those who have shared their stories with me. Many of these real-life experiences have been submitted in writing to me by stake presidents, stake and ward auxiliary officers, bishops, and others who have seen firsthand the wonderful, positive power of counseling with our councils.

But before we get to those experiences, we'll take a look at the spiritual history of councils, beginning with a most important gathering—one that none of us can really remember—the great premortal Council in Heaven.
