M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 1

The Grand Council

My maternal grandfather, Hyrum Mack Smith, was the eldest son of President Joseph F. Smith, the sixth President of the Church. When my grandfather unexpectedly died in 1918, just two months shy of his forty-sixth birthday, it was a great sadness to all who knew and loved him—including his father, the prophet. As any parent would feel anguish at the passing of a beloved child, President Smith spent a great deal of time in earnest prayer and spiritual contemplation, looking for comfort in the days that followed his son's death. Especially he pondered over God's eternal plan of salvation and its personal implications for each of us in this life and the next.

On October 3, 1918, just a few months after Hyrum's death, President Smith was sitting in his room "pondering over the scriptures" (D&C 138:1) when a marvelous vision was opened to him. President Smith was given the unique opportunity to look beyond the veil and see some of what transpired in the spirit world before this life as well as what will take place in the life that awaits us beyond this one.

What he learned during this incredible experience was extraordinary. For example, he was given to understand this significant concept regarding early Church leaders such as his father and uncle, Hyrum and Joseph Smith, as well as Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and others: "Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men" (D&C 138:56).

One of the key lessons Heavenly Father taught us in that "world of spirits" was the important role of councils and counseling together in gospel governance. From the very beginning, God has done His work through a system of organized councils.

The first council of which we are aware occurred before the world on which we live was created, in a place all of us have been but none of us can remember. God, our Heavenly Father, was the presiding authority at this most significant gathering. At His side was His firstborn, Jehovah, whom we now know as Jesus Christ. We don't know exactly how this Council in Heaven was conducted or the procedure that was followed. Although we speak of the Council in Heaven as a single council, there may have been a number of council meetings where the gospel was taught, where prophets and others were foreordained, and where other assignments were made to individuals. President Joseph Fielding Smith made the following statement about councils in premortal life: "When the time arrived for us to be advanced in the scale of our existence and pass through this mundane probation, councils were held and the spirit children were instructed in matters pertaining to conditions in mortal life, and the reason for such an existence" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:57).

We know that at one point in the proceedings, Heavenly Father's plan for our eternal progress and joy was announced to His spirit sons and daughters. As participants, we had the privilege of accepting or rejecting the plan as it was proposed, and so I'm sure we paid careful attention to discussions of the Creation of the world, the Fall of Adam and Eve, the Atonement, the Resurrection, and the Final Judgment (see "Council in Heaven," in Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 1:328-29). We "shouted for joy" (Job 38:7) at the prospect of mortality and its promise and potential, although we may have felt some concern about the possibility of failure.

We know that Satan sought to amend the plan in order to exalt himself above God (see Moses 4:1; Isaiah 14:12-14). Because the issue of agency was crucial to our Father's plan (see D&C 29:35; Moses 4:1, 3) and because He chose His Beloved Son who had volunteered to be the Redeemer (Moses 4:2), Lucifer rebelled and became Satan and persuaded a third of the hosts of heaven to follow him. There followed what is referred to as a War in Heaven, resulting in these rebellious spirits being cast out (Moses 4:3-4; Abraham 3:28).

Of course, we don't know everything that happened during that premortal council. But based on what we do know, Heavenly Father's administration of the Grand Council profoundly illustrates several key principles in decision making through councils.

An Effective Leader Has a Sense of Vision

First, as council leader, God came to the council with a plan. While it is true that our earthly councils can be effectively used to actually formulate plans of action, it is also true that the leader must come to the council with, at the very least, a sense of vision. That vision doesn't necessarily have to include every detail of what we want to do. But if the council is going to arrive at any meaningful decisions, the leader needs to know where we want to go and what we want to have happen. Without that leadership and sense of vision, how will the council ever know when an appropriate decision has been made?

When a leader in the Church inspires council members with vision, he helps them focus on their real mission so that they are ministering to people rather than merely administering programs. At the same time, this focus builds a strong team spirit that improves working relationships among all members of the council.

Vision makes all the difference in the world. Why was Nephi's reaction to his father's willingness to follow the Lord's direction and lead his family into the wilderness so different from that of his elder brothers, Laman and Lemuel? Could it be because Nephi went to the Lord privately and asked for his own witness or vision of the Lord's directive to his father? "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceedingly young, nevertheless being large in stature, and also having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father; wherefore, I did not rebel against him like unto my brothers" (1 Nephi 2:16). Nephi sought his own vision, and the result was that his heart was softened. He had a clearer view of where his family was headed, and he was able to commit to follow the Lord. As Solomon explained, "Where there is no vision, the people perish" (Proverbs 29:18).

Almost universally, people become motivated when they feel a sense of purpose and feel as if they are part of a greater cause. It is the privilege and responsibility of leaders to provide those whom they lead with a clear and overpowering sense of vision.

An Effective Leader Encourages Free Expression

Second, the Grand Council allowed different plans to be heard. What Satan proposed to those assembled was far different from Heavenly Father's plan. Obviously Satan's arguments were persuasive, because many of our spirit brothers and sisters chose to follow him. Similarly, our councils should always allow time for discussion and consideration of differing points of view. We may not always agree with everything others say, but we will all grow from having the opportunity to express ourselves and to consider opinions or approaches to a problem that may vary greatly from our own.

Such experiences, however, underscore the need for leaders to be prepared—mentally, emotionally, and spiritually—and to have carefully and prayerfully considered the matter at hand so that they can establish the vision mentioned previously. A significant aspect of the mantle of leadership, particularly as it applies to the presiding authority, is the privilege and responsibility of marking the course for the larger group, of clearly indicating where the council needs to go.

An Effective Leader Respects the Gift of Agency

Another important principle we observe in the Grand Council in Heaven is that all of the council members had the precious gift of agency. This was not an exercise in compulsion, nor was it a study in domination—even though a case could certainly be made that if ever there was a council that was led by a leader worthy to wield absolute authority, this was the one. Rather, it was an exercise in agency. By making this most significant of all eternal decisions through council, Heavenly Father provided the ultimate illustration of how free and open expression coupled with visionary leadership generally encourages good decision making. Although freedom always brings with it certain risks, challenges, and responsibilities, it also brings real power to those who choose to exercise it wisely. And it gives to all who are so endowed a degree of ownership for council decisions, which experience has shown to be a key element in the successfully functioning council. None could complain that they did not understand or have the opportunity to participate.

If the Grand Council provides us with an excellent illustration of gospel governance through large councils (such as ward councils and stake high councils), another premortal council teaches important lessons about working with smaller, more intimate groups (such as presidencies and bishoprics). In the Pearl of Great Price we learn that a council of Gods, operating under the direction of God our Heavenly Father, worked together to physically create the world on which we live: "And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth" (Abraham 4:1).

Throughout the entire creative period this council worked closely together, receiving specific instructions from God, carefully carrying out these instructions, and then returning and reporting their progress while awaiting further instructions. When the time came to create man, Abraham tells us, "the Gods took counsel among themselves" about how this was to be done. They determined to "go down and form man in our image, after our likeness; and we will give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth" (Abraham 4:26).

We'll reserve most of our discussion about presidencies, bishoprics, and other small councils for chapter 6. But we need to consider in this chapter several principles illustrated by the Creation council, because these principles apply to Church leaders and councils at all levels.

An Effective Leader Gives Clear, Precise Instructions

The Creation story offers important lessons for those who serve in bishoprics and other councils of presidency. For presiding officers such as presidents and bishops, the Creation outlines three great leadership keys for accomplishment through council. First, notice how Heavenly Father issued clear, precise instructions. He sent His chosen representatives out with clearly defined expectations and then let them decide how best to accomplish the details.

One stake president I know learned the hard way about the importance of issuing such instructions. During a stake presidency meeting he mentioned to his second counselor that he thought it was about time to reorganize the stake Primary presidency. The counselor agreed and awaited further discussion or instruction. When none was forthcoming, the counselor assumed that meant the president wanted him to proceed. At the next stake presidency meeting, the counselor reported that a new stake Primary president had been called and was currently considering counselor options.

The stake president was stunned. "I didn't want the Primary president released," he said. "I just felt that it was time to change her counselors and maybe a few board members!"

If he had simply taken the time to communicate clearly with his counselor, this good stake president could have avoided an extraordinarily uncomfortable situation. Further, the second counselor should have clarified his assignment with his file leader instead of acting upon an assumption when it came to such an important issue. At least in that matter, this presidency's pattern of communication left something to be desired.

An Effective Leader Works Step by Step

The second leadership lesson of the Creation for presidents, bishops, group leaders, and parents has to do with the breadth and the pace of the instructions God issued. He did not say to His council members, "Go out and create a world." Although He had the full vision of what He wanted to have happen, He took His council through the process one step at a time, providing plenty of opportunity for reporting, counsel, and follow-up instruction along the way.

One bishop I know understood immediately upon his calling that his biggest challenge was going to be the ward Aaronic Priesthood program. Not only was that his most pressing responsibility according to divine mandate, but it was an especially vexing concern in his ward, where the Aaronic Priesthood was facing some unusual challenges. As he sat with his counselors for their first bishopric meeting, considerable anguish was expressed over the situation.

"I'm afraid we've already lost a few of these boys," one counselor observed.

"And those who are coming to church will probably resent it if we try to get them to do anything more than what they have been doing on activity night," the other counselor added.

The bishop had been prayerfully considering this most important responsibility ever since his new calling had been extended, and he had a pretty clear vision of what needed to be done. But he also understood that it couldn't happen all at once. Instead, the new bishopric moved through the process one step at a time.

"Who's the strongest priesthood leader in the ward at working with young men?" the bishop asked.

Both counselors immediately named a man who was serving in a stake calling at the time. The bishop considered the man thoughtfully for a few moments. Yes, it felt right.

"Don't you think he would be a great deacons quorum adviser?" the bishop asked.

"Of course," his first counselor said. "He'd be great at anything you called him to. But assuming you can get him from the stake, don't you think it would be better to make him Young Men president so he could control the entire program?"

"Brethren," the bishop said, "we are the Aaronic Priesthood presidency of this ward. If anyone is going to 'control' the program, it's going to be us. But if we are going to rebuild the program, we need to do it from the ground up. And it seems to me that means starting out with the strongest deacons quorum we can possibly create."

The counselors felt the wisdom of what their bishop was saying. The stake president agreed to release the brother to serve in the ward, and before too long the ward had an excellent deacons quorum. Its success eventually carried over to the teachers and priests quorums. By the time the bishop was released, every Aaronic Priesthood holder was ready to serve a mission, and the ward had one of the finest Aaronic Priesthood programs in the stake, if not in the entire Church. This happened in part because the bishop understood the process of working through council one step at a time. It's interesting to note that the entire stake Aaronic Priesthood program improved because of the example of this outstanding deacons quorum.

An Effective Leader Delegates

The third lesson that presidents, bishops, group leaders, and parents can learn from the Creation council is that Heavenly Father didn't do all of the work Himself—even though He certainly could have. As God, He had all of the authority and power He needed to create the world, and He clearly was the one who had the full vision of the project. Still He chose to delegate responsibilities, always asking for a follow-up report to make sure that the work had been done correctly.

Why would He do such a thing, especially when it probably would have been faster and more efficient for Him to simply do it Himself? In my view, one reason He did it was to establish a pattern for us to follow. By delegating so important a work as the creation of the earth, He left us precious little room to justify our own feelings of self-importance when we are unwilling to delegate in our Church callings and offices.

I heard recently about a new ward Relief Society president who decided she needed to visit sisters in the ward personally on their birthdays. Then she decided she should take a birthday greeting, so she wrote a quick note to each sister to take with her when she visited. Then she decided the note should be attached to a fresh loaf of homemade bread, which she would make herself. Then she decided that the bread and the note should be wrapped in a clever linen cloth, which she would quickly sew herself. Then she decided that the bundle needed a jar of her homemade preserves to go along with it.

After making her birthday deliveries for a few months, this sister dragged herself into the bishop's office and asked to be released.

"It's too much work," she said. "I just can't do it."

It didn't take long for the bishop to cut through to the core of the problem. "The birthday greeting is a fine idea," he said, "but maybe you need a little help." The bishop explained that there were certain tasks she alone should handle; all others could be delegated. Counseling together, they came up with a way to give several sisters a chance to participate in a toned-down version of the birthday project, opening opportunities of fellowship and service to some women who were in desperate need of such involvement. Through delegation, the president's vision was accomplished without completely draining her of time and energy.

Presidents and bishops should give their highest priority and attention to matters that they alone have the authority to handle, leaving for others—counselors and council members—those tasks that can reasonably be accomplished by someone else. Any leader who becomes bogged down in an endless array of details runs the risk of undermining the effectiveness of his or her own ministry.

There is another reason to delegate, and that is to empower and prepare leaders for future service. One of the most important evidences of effective leadership is the number of well-prepared brothers and sisters who are in place to carry on the work.

The biblical patriarch Jethro gave wise counsel to his son-in-law, Moses, when the elder man visited his daughter's family and saw the constant demands being made by the people upon their prophet. "The thing that thou doest is not good," Jethro said. "Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone" (Exodus 18:17-18).

Jethro went on to gently teach his son-in-law how to delegate a portion of his responsibilities to others. Not only would such delegation make things easier for Moses, Jethro said, but it would also be a blessing for those who served with him, for "they shall bear the burden with thee" (Exodus 18:22). When you personally shoulder a burden, it becomes more real, more fervent. It is hard to care about issues for which you have no responsibility or which don't touch your life in a meaningful way. And so Jethro's counsel to Moses is excellent advice for today's leaders, too.

An Effective Leader Sets an Example of Hard Work

There are also lessons in the Creation council for those who serve as counselors—lessons on the importance of listening, of carefully following instructions, and of "returning and reporting." But perhaps the most basic principle illustrated by those who carried out Heavenly Father's instructions during the Creation was the principle of "Let us go and do."

When Jehovah was instructed by God to perform certain creative tasks, He did not respond by saying, "Let us see" or "Let us try" or "Let us look for time in our busy schedule." Rather, He simply and powerfully said, "Let us go . . ." (Abraham 4:1). His attitude indicated that He was anxious to do His Father's will, not to sit around and talk about it. "I can of mine own self do nothing," the Savior said, " . . . because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30).

The Savior typified that attitude throughout His mortal life. Even as a child He understood the importance of "going" and "doing." When He was missing from the family entourage during a trip from Jerusalem to Nazareth, His parents finally found Him at the temple, "sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.

"And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.

"And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.

"And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:46-49).

Throughout His ministry Jesus taught His followers the importance of doing. At the conclusion of the parable of the good Samaritan, in which the value of doing was emphasized over pious beliefs and promises, the Savior asked His listener, "Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?

"And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise" (Luke 10:36-37; emphasis added).

On another occasion, He reminded His followers that "not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven" (Matthew 7:21; emphasis added). And even as He contemplated the painful end of His sojourn in mortality, He underscored His message of eternal commitment to God's will with this humble statement of obedience: "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42).

Our latter-day prophets are well known for such phrases as "Let's get going," "Do it," "Do it now." I have heard President Gordon B. Hinckley say that the only way he knows to get things done is to first get on his knees and pray, and then to get on his feet and go do the work. That driving desire to "go" and "do" the Lord's will has been the hallmark of our prophet-presidents all of their lives.

Of course, "going and doing" isn't always easy or comfortable. Occasionally it requires some sacrifice on our part—of time, energy, or personal will. But it is almost always worth whatever effort we make, especially if it has to do with following the instructions of inspired council leaders in seeking to bring souls to Christ.

An Effective Leader Teaches by Precept and Example

That Jesus is committed to the council concept cannot be questioned. Twice in ancient times He personally organized His Church on the earth, and both times He established it with governing councils. In both the Holy Land of the New Testament and the promised land of the Book of Mormon, He spent considerable time teaching and instructing and training His councils and council leaders, and then He sent them forth to share what they had learned with others. Although the circumstances surrounding the two experiences were different, they both share at least two key similarities that illustrate the Savior's exemplary administration of councils.

First, He taught His ancient councils carefully—by precept and by example. He instructed them how to pray, and then He prayed with them and for them. He taught them how to conduct the sacred sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and then He blessed bread and wine and gave it to them. He told them how to use their priesthood authority to bless the lives of others, and then He used His priesthood authority to work miracles among them.

Near the end of His mortal ministry, Jesus celebrated the Feast of the Passover with His beloved disciples. Although He was facing the final, climactic moments of His life, with their attendant pain and suffering, His attention was focused on those who followed Him. After the feast was over,

he riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.

After that he poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.

Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?

Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. . . .

So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?

Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.

If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet.

For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. (John 13:4-9, 12-17)

Oh, that all council leaders could understand the value of service one to another as taught in this powerful example of the Savior!

An Effective Leader Serves with Love

Second, He loved those with whom He served in council. "As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you," He told His Apostles (John 15:9). Then He added, "This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you" (John 15:12).

"A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34-35).

How critical it is that all who serve together in God's kingdom do so from a foundation of love: love for the Lord, love for the work, and love for each other. No matter how intense our effort or how carefully we follow the handbooks and guidelines, if we don't truly love each other we can't possibly hope to convey the full power of the gospel of love. And I can't help but believe that members are more likely to seek counsel from leaders from whom they feel sincere love emanating. Miracles seem to follow after Church leaders who are motivated by a keen feeling of loving devotion to those over whom they preside.

As I travel throughout the Church, I've noticed that stake congregations tend to reflect the attitudes and relationships of their leaders. Whenever I sense a spirit of loving brotherhood and cooperation among members of the stake presidency, that same spirit inevitably seems to permeate every stake meeting I attend. Unfortunately, the opposite is also true.

"Beloved," wrote the Apostle John, "let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.

"He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.

"In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

"Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

"Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another" (1 John 4:7-11).

A ward with which I'm familiar experienced a dramatic increase in attendance by less-active members when a new bishop used ten minutes of each ward council meeting to discuss ways council members could reach out to those in need—spiritually and temporally. Under the direction of this easy-going, compassionate bishop, fellowshipping assignments were made, pairing people with common interests. During the course of a three-year period, as council members showed love and consideration for those with whom they labored, nearly a dozen families were reactivated.

Making a Difference

And so, from the very beginning, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16). From those premortal councils came our opportunity to come to earth to work out our own salvation through the grace and love of the Lord Jesus Christ.

With the love of Christ reflecting from all Church councils and radiating throughout an entire quorum, auxiliary, ward, or stake, a significant difference can be made in our lives and in the lives of our family members as well as all of our Heavenly Father's children. And making a difference in people's lives is, after all, the great mission of Church councils, which had their beginning in the heavenly councils we saw and experienced in our premortal lives.
