M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 2

General Councils in the Church

Sometime late in June 1829, an important transition took place in the history of the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. With the translation of the Book of Mormon completed, Joseph Smith invited his family to join him at the home of Peter Whitmer in Fayette, New York, where they would be allowed for the first time to read the work that had been a consuming focus for many months.

As soon as they arrived in Fayette, a small group that included Joseph, his parents, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer began reading the manuscript. "We rejoiced exceedingly," wrote Joseph's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, of the occasion. "It then appeared to those of us who did not realize the magnitude of the work, as if the greatest difficulty was then surmounted" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, 151).

Although Joseph was just beginning the long and arduous process of the Restoration, he was ready for some help. Though there were many who believed in him and supported his work, sometimes at great personal risk and expense, there were none called to share the burden of the significant stewardship that had been placed upon him. For the previous nine years, he had stood mostly alone in his work and testimony.

And so it must have been with joyful anticipation that Joseph approached Martin during the group's morning devotional services the day after his arrival in Fayette and said, "Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer."

Lucy Mack Smith, who was present that morning, said those words were spoken "with a solemnity that thrills through my veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection" (ibid., 152).

According to revelation, the Lord commanded Joseph to extend the call to Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer to serve as special witnesses of the Book of Mormon

that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work.

And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has seen them, and it is because he had faith.

And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true.

Wherefore, you have received the same power, and the same faith, and the same gift like unto him;

And if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given you, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; for my grace is sufficient for you, and you shall be lifted up at the last day.

And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it unto you, that I might bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men. Amen. (D&C 17:4-9)

Soon after the call to witness was extended, the four men retired to a nearby grove of trees to receive the promised revelation. Later that afternoon they returned to the Whitmer home, where Joseph exclaimed, "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am: the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, 152). Less than a year later, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was officially organized with Joseph Smith as "the first elder of this church" and Oliver Cowdery as "the second elder of this church" (D&C 20:2, 3). At the same time, the Lord revealed His instructions to the Apostles, elders, priests, teachers, deacons, and members of the Church, outlining specific duties and responsibilities for each as they accepted their share of stewardship within Joseph's ministry. Eventually the Church was organized into quorums and councils, with various presidencies appointed "to administer in spiritual things" (D&C 107:8).

According to revelation, "the decisions of these quorums . . . are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" (D&C 107:30-31).

"Wherefore," the Lord continued, "now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand" (D&C 107:99-100).

Having experienced the spiritual loneliness of his early ministry and having subsequently been tutored of the Lord, Joseph Smith had profound appreciation for the important work of councils in the Church of Jesus Christ. Soon after the first high council was organized, the Prophet

laid [his] hands upon the twelve Councilors, and commanded a blessing to rest upon them, that they might have wisdom and power to counsel in righteousness, upon all subjects that might be laid before them. I also prayed that they might be delivered from those evils to which they were most exposed, and that their lives might be prolonged on the earth. . . .

I then gave the assistant Presidents a solemn charge to do their duty in righteousness, and in the fear of God; I also charged the twelve Councilors in a similar manner, all in the name of Jesus Christ.

We all raised our hands to heaven in token of the everlasting covenant, and the Lord blessed us with His Spirit. I then declared the council organized according to the ancient order, and also according to the mind of the Lord. (History of the Church, 2:32-33)

As committed as they were to God's service, however, Joseph Smith's followers occasionally struggled with the council concept. The Prophet recorded:

At a council of the High Priests and Elders . . . at my house in Kirtland, on the evening of the 12th of February [1834], I remarked that I should endeavor to set before the council the dignity of the office which had been conferred on me by the ministering of the angel of God, by His own voice, and by the voice of this Church; that I had never set before any council in all the order in which it ought to be conducted, which, perhaps, has deprived the councils of some or many blessings.

And I continued and said, no man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure; and that we are frequently so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions.

But to return to the subject of order; in ancient days councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the council by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time. It was understood in ancient days, that if one man could stay in council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep; one praying, another not; one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking on something else.

Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, and if we should fail to judge right and injure our fellow-beings, they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force, beyond anything which I am able to express. Ask yourselves, brethren, how much you have exercised yourselves in prayer since you heard of this council; and if you are now prepared to sit in council upon the soul of your brother. (History of the Church, 2:25-26)

One year later, almost to the day, the Lord revealed additional information to Joseph Smith about how council governance could help relieve some of the pressure he was feeling as leader of the Church:

On the 8th day of February, in the year of our Lord 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith called Elders Brigham and Joseph Young to the chamber of his residence, in Kirtland, Ohio, it being on the Sabbath day. After they were seated and he had made some preliminaries, he proceeded to relate a vision to these brethren, of the state and condition of those men who died in Zion's Camp, in Missouri. He said, "Brethren, I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more." At this revelation he wept, and for some time could not speak. When he had relieved himself of his feelings, in describing the vision, he resumed the conversation, and addressed himself to Brother Brigham Young. He said to him, "I wish you to notify all the brethren living in the branches, within a reasonable distance from this place, to meet at a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve Special Witnesses, to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you," said he (speaking to Brother Brigham), "will be one of them." He then proceeded to enlarge upon the duties of their calling. The interest that was taken on the occasion of this announcement, produced in the minds of the two Elders present a great sensation and many reflections; having previously notified Brother Brigham Young that he would be one of the Witnesses, but said nothing to Joseph, until he had exhausted much of his feelings in regard to the Twelve, which took up some little time. He then turned to Elder Joseph Young with quite an earnestness, as though the vision of his mind was extended still further, and addressing him, said, "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies." They had heard of Moses and seventy Elders of Israel, and of Jesus appointing "other Seventies," but had never heard of Twelve Apostles and of Seventies being called in this Church before. It was a strange saying, "The Lord has made you President of the Seventies," as though it had already taken place, and it caused these brethren to marvel. The Prophet did not say that any others would be called to be the bearers of this message abroad, but the inference might be clearly drawn, that this was his meaning, from the language he used at the time. Agreeable to his request to Elder Brigham Young, the branches were all notified, and a meeting of the brethren in general conference was held in Kirtland, in the new school house under the printing office, on the following Saturday, February 14th, when the Twelve were appointed and ordained, and the conference adjourned for two weeks. (Joseph Young, Sr., "History of the Organization of the Seventies" [1878], 1-2; quoted in History of the Church, 2:181)

General Church Councils

Through the years, the forms and formats of Church governance and administration have been adjusted to meet changing needs and times. But they have always been characterized by reliance upon councils for ongoing solidarity and strength. President Stephen L Richards said in 1953:

I don't know that it is possible for any organization to succeed in the Church . . . without adopting the genius of our Church government. What is that? As I conceive it, the genius of our Church government is government through councils. The Council of the Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, the Council of the Stake Presidency, or quorum, if you choose to use that word, the Council of the Bishopric, and the quorum [or] Council of the Quorum Presidency. I have had enough experience to know the value of councils. Hardly a day passes but that I see the wisdom, God's wisdom, in creating councils . . . to govern his Kingdom. In the spirit under which we labor, men can get together with seemingly divergent views and far different backgrounds, and under the operation of that spirit, by counseling together, they can arrive at an accord, and that accord . . . represents the wisdom of the council, acting under the Spirit. (In Conference Report, Oct. 1953, 86; emphasis in original)

As it was in Joseph Smith's day, the presiding council of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today is the First Presidency. It consists of the President of the Church and his two Counselors. According to scriptural mandate, "the keys of the kingdom . . . belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2). The members of this council are sustained by the entire body of the Church as "prophets, seers, and revelators," those to whom it is given "to receive the oracles for the whole church" (D&C 124:126), and they "have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church" (D&C 107:9).

During my term of service in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, I have had the privilege of watching the First Presidency function in a wide variety of situations and circumstances. While I have always been impressed by the strengths and abilities of the individual men who compose the Presidency, I have been inspired almost to the point of being overwhelmed by the powerful way they work as an exemplary council and continue to do so even when not all members of the council are fully able to function.

Next in Church authority to the First Presidency is the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the council to which I belong. According to scripture, the Apostles are called as "especial witnesses" of the name of Christ (D&C 27:12) with the specific mission "to declare my gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew" (D&C 18:26). As a council "they form a quorum, equal in authority and power" to the First Presidency (D&C 107:24). As President Joseph Fielding Smith explained, this means that the Twelve "have power to assume control of the affairs of the Church when the Presidency is dissolved by the death of the President" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:255). Indeed, when the President of the Church dies, the First Presidency is immediately suspended, the President's Counselors return to their respective places in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the Quorum presides over the Church until a new President is appointed. In my twelve years of service in the Quorum of the Twelve, I have participated in this process three times, witnessing the formation of a new First Presidency under each of three modern-day prophets: Presidents Ezra Taft Benson, Howard W. Hunter, and Gordon B. Hinckley. Except for brief interim periods after the death of a President of the Church, the Quorum of the Twelve functions in its scriptural stewardship to "teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the church" (D&C 20:42).

The development of "The Family: A Proclamation to the World" is a good example of how the council process works. During the course of our regular meetings, the concept of the proclamation was agreed to by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles because of the great need that exists in the Church as well as in the entire world to understand the divinely ordained role of the home and family. The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is composed of a diverse group of men who possess extraordinary spiritual capabilities, and we drew upon all of that sensitivity in drafting the document. It required numerous revisions and adjustments, which were attended to in our council meetings, before the First Presidency approved it to be sent forth to the whole world. Every member of the Church should read and understand this most important proclamation.

We recognize that it is no small thing for the world to receive such a proclamation and warning from the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Our task was accomplished by drawing upon the diversity of backgrounds, abilities, and spiritual gifts of the members of the Quorum and by utilizing the Lord's inspired program of counseling with our councils.

Speaking of both the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, the Lord said that "the decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" (D&C 107:30-31).

That is a promise that is vitally important to all who serve in these important Church councils.

Elder Rulon G. Craven, a former member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy, once described the decision-making process that is followed in meetings of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles:

It has been my privilege as Executive Secretary to the Quorum of the Twelve to sit in some of the leading councils of the Church and witness the communication processes that take place in conducting the business of the Church. From these experiences, I have witnessed that the business of the Church is carried out under the influence of the Spirit. I know that the righteousness of the individuals who sit in those councils contributes much to the inspiration and the effectiveness of the council meetings.

It has been interesting for me to watch the Brethren work from an agenda that contains many items, and see them handle each item efficiently and effectively. I have noticed that each of the Brethren is not so much concerned with expressing his own point of view as he is with listening to the point of view of others and striving to create a proper climate in the Council meetings. They are sensitive to one another's thoughts and rarely interrupt one another during their conversations. During discussion they do not push their own ideas but try to determine from the discussion what would be best for the kingdom.

Let me share with you a typical experience in a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve. They always work from an agenda. The agenda is distributed to each member of the Twelve the night before the meeting so that they have an opportunity to read, ponder, and consider each item in preparation for the meeting. When they meet together they usually express love and concern for one another. After an opening prayer, in which a request is made for the Spirit to be in the meeting, the President of the Twelve addresses each item on the agenda one by one. He may make some short preparatory comments that he feels necessary concerning the item, and then he presents the item or asks one of the Twelve to present the item for discussion.

The Brethren express their thoughts and feelings. They are men of strong character, men from different backgrounds—they are certainly not "yes" men. They speak as they are moved by the Spirit. They strive to feel the manifestations of the Spirit concerning the item being discussed, which may necessitate a change in their own feelings and thoughts in order to be in harmony with the entire Council. When the President of the Twelve senses a unity taking place concerning the item on the agenda, he may ask for a recommendation, or one of the Twelve may present a recommendation to the Twelve. The recommendation remarkably summarizes the feelings of the total Council. The President will then state, "We have before us a recommendation. Is there any further discussion?" Each member of the Twelve will have an opportunity again to express himself. They don't repeat what has already been said; rather, there is an unusual economy of expression in order to ascertain the total views of the Council. After all who have a desire to speak have done so, the recommendation may be modified. The recommendation is then presented in the form of a motion by a member of the Twelve, and is seconded by another. The President of the Twelve then asks for the vote of the Quorum; thus, the Twelve make decisions in harmony, unity, and faith, with the combined judgment of each member and in harmony with the Spirit. (Called to the Work, 111-13)

As President Gordon B. Hinckley has explained, it is through the council meetings of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, held each week in the Salt Lake Temple, that the Church is governed by revelation:

Any major questions of policy, procedures, programs, or doctrine are considered deliberately and prayerfully by the First Presidency and the Twelve together. These two quorums, the Quorum of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, meeting together, with every man having total freedom to express himself, consider every major question.

And now I quote . . . from the word of the Lord: "And every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions, in order to make their decisions of the same power or validity one with the other" (D&C 107:27).

No decision emanates from the deliberations of the First Presidency and the Twelve without total unanimity among all concerned. At the outset in considering matters, there may be differences of opinion. These are to be expected. These men come from different backgrounds. They are men who think for themselves. But before a final decision is reached, there comes a unanimity of mind and voice. . . .

I add by way of personal testimony that during the twenty years I served as a member of the Council of the Twelve and during the . . . years that I have served in the First Presidency, there has never been a major action taken where this procedure was not observed. I have seen differences of opinion presented in these deliberations. Out of this very process of men speaking their minds has come a sifting and winnowing of ideas and concepts. But I have never observed serious discord or personal enmity among my Brethren. I have, rather, observed a beautiful and remarkable thing—the coming together, under the directing influence of the Holy Spirit and under the power of revelation, of divergent views until there is total harmony and full agreement. Only then is implementation made. That, I testify, represents the spirit of revelation manifested again and again in directing this the Lord's work. ("God Is at the Helm," 54, 59)

There are other examples of authoritative quorums and councils that function on behalf of the entire Church: the Presidency of the Seventy, the Quorums of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric, and the general auxiliary presidencies (Relief Society, Young Women, Young Men, Sunday School, and Primary) and their respective boards. There are also a variety of committees that function as councils under General Authority direction as they administer specific areas of responsibility. Although the specific assignments and respective areas of focus may shift from time to time, the successful application of council concepts is absolutely essential to their effectiveness in the overall gospel plan.

Similar councils operate throughout the world in the various areas, stakes, missions, districts, wards, and branches of the Church. We'll consider these councils in more detail in later chapters. But there is one critical issue that needs to be explored first because it has significant application to many Church councils.

The Role of Women in Church Councils

As you consider the numerous councils and committees that exist throughout the Church organization, you will notice that they are priesthood-directed. There is a good reason for that. As President John Taylor once said, the priesthood is "the government of God, whether on the earth or in the heavens, for it is by that power, agency, or principle that all things are governed on the earth and in the heavens, and by that power that all things are upheld and sustained. It governs all things—it directs all things—it sustains all things—and has to do with all things that God and truth are associated with" (Millennial Star, 1 Nov. 1847, 321; quoted in Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 129).

At the same time, it must be remembered by all who hold priesthood authority that "the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36).

And what are those "principles of righteousness" through which one can control—or at least draw upon—"the powers of heaven"? The Lord taught Joseph Smith that priesthood power or influence is maintained through such traits as "persuasion . . . long-suffering . . . gentleness . . . meekness . . . love un-feigned . . . kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile" (D&C 121:41-42). As I consider the traits and characteristics through which God empowers His people, I find them to be consistent with the sensitive attributes that are part of the rich tradition of spirituality, gentleness, meekness, love, and kindness found among many of the women of the Church. And I am aware that there is much of persuasion, long-suffering, and pure knowledge, and little of hypocrisy and guile, among the women who typically serve in the Church councils to which they are assigned, either generally or locally.

In an address to Regional Representatives in 1989, Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said:

We . . . recognize the significance and virtues of the strong supporting work of the auxiliaries, especially those headed by our women—the Primary, the Young Women, and the Relief Society. As both the quorums and the auxiliaries are strengthened and begin to fulfill their responsibility in accomplishing the mission of the Church, the singular burden currently carried by the bishops in so many areas will be relieved. . . . We are not unmindful of the women of the Church. The work of our wonderful women is vital. . . . It is extremely important for stake and ward councils and committees to consistently concern themselves with the issues that affect the families, women, youth, and children. These issues should be a regular part of the agenda of these meetings, and our women leaders should take part in the discussions. Our women are companion-leaders to help all of our members receive the benefits of the Church and the watch care, development, and refuge from the world that the Church provides. Please do not overlook the great strength that can and does come from our women. (Address at Regional Representatives' seminar, 31 Mar. 1989, 2)

Consider also this statement from President Gordon B. Hinckley:

What a resource are the women of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. You love this Church, you accept its doctrine, you honor your place in its organization, you bring luster and strength and beauty to its congregations. How thankful we are to you. How much you are loved, respected, and honored. . . .

You bring a measure of wholeness to us. You have great strength. With dignity and tremendous ability, you carry forward the remarkable programs of the Relief Society, the Young Women, and the Primary. You teach Sunday School. We walk at your side as your companions and your brethren with respect and love, with honor and great admiration. It was the Lord who designated that men in His Church should hold the priesthood. It was He who has given you your capabilities to round out this great and marvelous organization, which is the Church and kingdom of God. I bear testimony before the entire world of your worth, of your grace and goodness, of your remarkable abilities and tremendous contributions. ("Women of the Church," 70)

This wise counsel of the President of the Church conveys the spirit of the role of women as they participate in the stake and ward councils of the Church. Stronger testimonies and deeper commitment are needed, and sister leaders can assist the priesthood in finding solutions and in teaching, strengthening, and preparing mothers, young women, and children to have a greater love for and dedication to the Lord Jesus Christ and His Church.

Therefore, I would urge the priesthood brethren who preside over ward and stake councils to draw upon the great power, insight, and wisdom that women can bring with them to these council meetings. Our sisters can contribute the power of faith, through which "the worlds were framed by the word of God" (Hebrews 11:3). They can bring the power of purity, through which "we may be purified even as [the Lord] is pure" (Moroni 7:48). And they generally possess the power of love, that which the Apostle Paul called charity, the greatest of all godly virtues (see 1 Corinthians 13:13). It is a short-sighted priesthood leader who does not see the value of calling upon the sisters to share the understanding and inspiration they possess.

One general Church auxiliary leader told me about a marvelous experience she had with her bishop when she was serving as a ward Relief Society president. "I had been serving for only a short time when this new bishop was called," she said. "One of the first things he did after he was ordained and set apart to his new calling was to ask me to come to his office to visit with him. He said, 'I want you to know that it is impossible for me to fulfill my calling and to fulfill my responsibilities to the Lord without your input. I want you to let me know the concerns of the sisters, and I want you to know that when you come to ward council, whatever you have to tell us, we will be listening.' That put my respect for my calling on a whole different plane, because I knew that I was needed."

The sisters of the Church are needed. Whether you are eighteen or eighty, are married or single, speak English or Portuguese, live on an island or in the mountains, have children or simply love children, have an advanced degree or little formal education, have a husband who is not active or are married to a stake president, you belong here! You and your talents, strengths, and insights are urgently needed in the Church. As Eliza R. Snow, the second general president of the Relief Society, said, "There is no sister so isolated, and her sphere so narrow but what she can do a great deal towards establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth" (address at a Relief Society meeting, 14 Aug. 1873; quoted in Woman's Exponent, 15 Sept. 1873, 62).

Our Father in Heaven loves all of His children equally, perfectly, and infinitely. His love is no different for His daughters than for His sons. Our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, also loves men and women equally. His Atonement and His gospel are for all of God's children. During His earthly ministry Jesus served men and women alike: He healed both men and women, and He taught both men and women.

The gospel of Jesus Christ sanctifies both men and women in the same way and by identical principles. For example, the principles of faith and repentance, the ordinance of baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost apply equally to all of God's children, regardless of gender. The same is true of temple covenants and blessings; men and women alike must receive all of the ordinances of salvation. Our Father's work and glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of His children. He loves us all equally, and His greatest gift, the gift of eternal life, is available to all.

Even though men and women are equal before God in their eternal opportunities, they do have different duties in His eternal plan—and yet these differing roles and duties are equally significant. We must understand that God views all of His children with infinite wisdom and perfect fairness. Consequently, He can acknowledge and even encourage our differences while providing equal opportunities for growth and development.

While we lived with Him as His spirit sons and daughters, Heavenly Father assigned different responsibilities in mortality to men and women. To His sons He gave the priesthood and the responsibilities of fatherhood, and to His daughters He gave the responsibilities of motherhood, each with its attendant functions. The Creation of the world, the Atonement of Jesus Christ, and the Restoration of the gospel in the latter days through the Prophet Joseph Smith all have one unifying purpose: to enable all of the spirit children of our Eternal Father to obtain mortal bodies, and then, through the gift of moral agency, to follow the plan of redemption made possible by the Savior's Atonement. God prepared all of this for us that we might return to our heavenly home, clothed in immortality and eternal life, to live with Him as families.

A family can live with Him only after a man and a woman are sealed in marriage for eternity by the power of the holy priesthood. We acknowledge that many in the Church desire this great blessing but have little hope of its fulfillment in this life. Nevertheless, the promise of exaltation remains an attainable goal for each one of us. The prophets have stated clearly that no blessing will be withheld from any of God's sons or daughters if they love Him, have faith in Him, keep His commandments, and endure faithfully to the end.

Most of what men and women must do to qualify for an exalted family life together is based on shared responsibilities and objectives. Many of the requirements are exactly the same for men and women. For example, obedience to the laws of God is required equally of men and women. Requirements for entrance into the temple are the same for both, and all who enter those sacred edifices are eligible to be clothed with power and to find therein a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of God. Men and women should pray in the same way. They both have the same privilege of receiving answers to their prayers and thereby obtaining personal revelation for their own spiritual benefit.

Both men and women are to serve their families and others, but the specific ways in which they do so are sometimes different. For example, God has revealed through His prophets that men are to receive the priesthood, to become fathers, and with gentleness and pure, unfeigned love to lead and nurture their families in righteousness, taking for their pattern the way the Savior leads the Church. Men have also been given the primary responsibility for providing for the temporal and physical needs of the family. Women have the ability to bring children into the world and have been given the primary role and opportunity to lead, nurture, and teach their little ones in a loving, safe, and spiritual environment. In this divinely sanctioned partnership, husbands and wives work together, each bringing his or her unique contribution to the family. Such a couple provide the children born to their union a home where they can be fully nurtured by both a mother and a father. By appointing different accountabilities to men and women, Heavenly Father provides the greatest opportunity for growth, service, and progress.

Why this pattern is the approved pattern is not entirely clear. The Lord has chosen to reveal only His will on the matter, not His reasoning. Indeed, the reasons are unimportant as far as we are concerned, because the issue is not open to debate. Consensus and public opinion are irrelevant to a discussion of the doctrine of God, because it is mandated through revelation, not legislation or negotiation. For us, the only thing that matters is whether or not we choose to accept the doctrine of the priesthood and abide by its precepts. It is an issue of faith—nothing more, nothing less.

Of course, sometimes our faith is tested. It is easy to understand why many sisters are frustrated when they sit in council with priesthood leaders and are not invited to make substantive contributions to the council. They have much to offer in finding real solutions to the problems facing priesthood leaders. Perhaps the Lord had in mind the arrogant priesthood leader who would ignore or dismiss the wisdom of any council member when He gave this warning to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "When we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man" (D&C 121:37).

In other words, one who lays claim to special privilege through the priesthood doesn't understand the nature of his authority. Priesthood is about service, not servitude; compassion, not compulsion; caring, not control. Those who think otherwise are operating outside the parameters of their authority and are gravely mistaken.

With that said, we are prepared to move ahead with our discussion of local Church councils. As we do so, we invoke the challenge of President Joseph F. Smith, who looked forward to the day "when every council of the Priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will understand its duty; will assume its own responsibility, will magnify its calling, and fill its place in the Church, to the uttermost, according to the intelligence and ability possessed by it. . . . When they become thoroughly awakened to the requirements made of them, they will fulfil their duties more faithfully, and the work of the Lord will be all the stronger and more powerful and influential in the world" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1906, 3).
