M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 3

Local Presiding Councils

In view of the accelerating growth of the Church and the ever-faster unraveling of society's moral and spiritual fabric throughout the world, it is increasingly imperative to empower leaders of stakes, wards, and homes to do whatever it takes, in harmony with gospel principles, to bring people to Christ. Every person and situation is unique in some way. While principles are universally applicable, practices are not. As every parent knows who has tried to rear the second child exactly like the first, what works in one situation may fail in another.

The central activity of leadership is teaching—first by example, second by precept. After that, leaders become a source of help as their empowered stewards assume the responsibility and exercise the initiative to do whatever is necessary, consistent with the principles taught, to fulfill the shared vision.

The most advanced, universal, and practical leadership philosophy ever put forth was given in this simple statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "I teach the people correct principles and they govern themselves" (quoted by John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 10:57-58). Area Presidencies are to teach stake presidencies the overall vision, direction, purpose, and correct principles of the Church, and then they are to let stake presidencies govern or manage their stakes. A similar pattern applies to bishops and their wards and to parents and their families. "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence" (D&C 107:99).

This empowerment process requires leaders to exercise great patience while modeling Christlike behavior; building caring, trusting relationships; setting up clear role and goal expectations; identifying sources of help; and requiring accountability. Generally, Church leaders teach principles, not practices. Inspired stake, ward, and family council members learn to convert principles into appropriate practices through the whisperings of the Holy Ghost. For example, after teaching the principle of daily family prayer, a father may ask, "How and when should our family hold family prayer?" The family may determine to hold family prayer just before the children go to school. This may become a family practice for many years. Later, the family may find it more practical to hold family prayer in conjunction with the evening meal or at bedtime. Practices may change, but fundamental principles and purposes do not change.

As leaders work with their councils, careful attention should be given to this admonition from the Lord: "For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves" (D&C 58:26-28; emphasis added). When so empowered, council members will become amazingly creative and willing to take the initiative in doing whatever is necessary to accomplish worthy purposes within the guidelines of well-understood principles.

In addition to teaching purposes and principles, it is important that leaders explicitly teach what not to do, as the Lord did in several of the Ten Commandments. This leaves open every appropriate path to the creativeness of the council so that they can feel responsible and successfully achieve results rather than thinking, "Well, we did what we were told to do and it didn't work. Now what do they want us to do?"

Unanimity in Council

One of the important principles governing leadership councils in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the principle of unanimity. Generally speaking, issues considered by presiding councils should be discussed and evaluated until a course of action is unanimously approved. In the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, for example, decisions that lack unanimity are always held over for further thought, prayer, and discussion. Even though we have a President whom we respect and revere, and we are organized with a clear line of successive authority, we seek consensus in all that we do. As a result, there have been times when an issue has remained under consideration for a period of time while our decision was deliberated and fine-tuned. Eventually, consensus is achieved, and the result of our deliberation is a better and more complete decision.

Of course, it isn't always possible to take that kind of time with the decisions that face presidencies and bishoprics. Some issues require a quick response; and sometimes, even after an open discussion during which all ideas and perspectives are given a thorough airing, divergent and disparate views exist. At such times, it is the responsibility of the president or bishop to make a final decision based on the feelings and impressions that come through priesthood keys or the mantle of leadership. And it is the responsibility of all members of the presiding council to support and sustain the decision of the council leader as if it were a unanimous council decision.

President James E. Faust, speaking several years ago in the priesthood session of a general conference, emphasized the vital importance of this principle:

There is a constant need for unity within the priesthood. We must be loyal to the leadership who have been called to preside over us and hold the keys of the priesthood. The words of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., still ring loudly in our ears: "Brethren, let us be united." He explained:

"An essential part of unity is loyalty. . . . Loyalty is a pretty difficult quality to possess. It requires the ability to put away selfishness, greed, ambition and all of the baser qualities of the human mind. You cannot be loyal unless you are willing to surrender. . . . [A person's] own preferences and desires must be put away, and he must see only the great purpose which lies out ahead" (Immortality and Eternal Life, Melchizedek Priesthood Course of Study, 1968-69, p. 163). . . .

In some legislative assemblies of the world, there are some groups termed the "loyal opposition." I find no such principle in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Savior gave us this solemn warning: "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). The Lord made it clear that in the presiding quorums every decision "must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions" (D&C 107:27). This means that after frank and open discussion, decisions are reached in council under the direction of the presiding officer, who has the ultimate authority to decide. That decision is then sustained, because our unity comes from full agreement with righteous principles and general response to the operation of the Spirit of God. ("Keeping Covenants and Honoring the Priesthood," 36-38)

Soon after I was called to be a bishop, all of the bishops in our stake met with the stake presidency in what was then called a stake bishops' council. Back in those days, the bishops of the stake were asked to help create the stake's annual welfare budget, and we had been involved in that process for several meetings, giving our input and recommendations. Finally, the presidency presented to us a final budget proposal for our sustaining vote, and I was a little surprised when two of the bishops voted negatively due to some budgeted items with which they did not agree.

"Why don't you brethren give the matter some thought and prayer," our stake president suggested gently. "We'll take another vote in our next meeting."

At the next stake bishops' council meeting, another vote was taken to sustain the stake welfare budget. Once again, the two bishops voted in the negative. This time our stake president wasn't quite so gentle.

"Brethren, this is the welfare budget that we as your stake presidency feel comfortable with," he said firmly but gently. "We have listened to your recommendations and have done the best we could to implement your suggestions. And now we've reached a decision, one that we feel has been validated by the Spirit.

"The way I see it," the president continued, "either God is working through us or we are fallen leaders. That means that your choice here is simple: sustain us and this budget, or write a letter to the First Presidency and ask that we be released. Now, all in favor of sustaining the proposed stake welfare budget, please show it by the usual sign."

This time, every bishop in the council raised his hand in approval. Within a few months every bishop in that council could see the wisdom and inspiration behind the stake presidency's recommended budget.

The same principle holds true for smaller councils, including bishoprics and stake and ward auxiliary presidencies. Unanimity should always be sought through free and open discussion. When there is a difference of opinion and an immediate decision is not required, it is sometimes helpful to allow some time to pass to give council members a chance to think about the decision and perhaps come to a state of unanimity naturally. But when the time comes that a decision has to be made and a variance of opinion still exists, the council leader has to rely upon the Spirit and make the decision that he or she feels is best. At such times it is particularly important for all council members to support and sustain the decision of the council leader—even if it isn't a decision with which they personally agree—and have faith in the spirit of revelation as it moves upon the bishop or president. If we can't find unanimity in the specific decision, we can at least find unanimity in our support of our sustained leader and our desire to see the work of the Lord go forward in a positive, cooperative way. Although we have different viewpoints and opinions, when we emerge from counseling as a council we are one, and we support the final decision of the council as if it were our own, personal decision.

"Be of one mind," the Apostle Paul urged early Christian leaders in Corinth (2 Corinthians 13:11). And to the Saints at Philippi he wrote, "Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ . . . that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel" (Philippians 1:27). Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord counseled his latter-day followers to "be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). In every council of the Church, but especially in stakes and wards, this divine counsel is profoundly important. If we are one in purpose, spirit, principle, and faith, then it doesn't really matter if we are always of the same opinion. Opinions change and can be easily altered by time, experience, and circumstance. But principles, purposes, spirituality, and faith are enduring values that can bind us as one despite disagreement or dispute.

Confidentiality in Council

Another important principle governing presiding councils in the Church is the principle of confidentiality. It would be difficult to exaggerate the importance of keeping council proceedings confidential. The Prophet Joseph Smith once said: "The reason we do not have the secrets of the Lord revealed unto us, is because we do not keep them but reveal them; we do not keep our own secrets, but reveal our difficulties to the world, even to our enemies, then how would we keep the secrets of the Lord? I can keep a secret till Doomsday" (History of the Church, 4:479).

One bishop learned firsthand how destructive it can be when council members are not careful to safeguard the things that are discussed in meetings. A council member inadvertently left a copy of the council agenda on a church bench. On the agenda were penciled notes about a family who had been targeted for the special attention of the council. It was found there by a teenage member of the family.

Imagine the effect such a careless thing had on the family members. Offended that they had been the subject of discussion by the leaders of the ward, the parents had their feelings hurt. Though the bishop and the members of the council had intended only to help, the damage that was done through carelessness made it difficult to break through the resulting family resentment and embarrassment.

Each council member is obligated to keep confidential the matters he or she discusses and hears. Members of presidencies and bishoprics are often entrusted with extremely sensitive matters, and they compromise their position of trust when they share such information inappropriately. Such breaches can have enormously destructive repercussions. One stake president made it a policy that high council members weren't to discuss council business outside of the council meeting—even among themselves. There is never any reason for council members to share with others (including their spouses) details of the business of the council, particularly with regard to individual needs or differences of opinion. If we are to bless people's lives and avoid hurting them, we simply must learn to keep confidential things confidential.

The Value of Listening in Council

The presidents and bishops who utilize Church councils most effectively are those who do a lot of listening in council meetings. If you're the presiding officer, that doesn't mean that you just sit there quietly. It means that you really listen to what your counselors and other council members are saying and feeling, and that you ask meaningful, penetrating questions when you don't understand their perspective. While it is true that final decisions and directions rest with the person who has been called to preside, there is little reason to have council members with unique insights, experiences, and abilities if you're not going to pay attention to what they have to say. Let your council members know that you value their input and that you expect them to express themselves. Since the presiding officer sets the tone in each meeting, it is up to you to make sure that those who serve under your direction feel that their participation is welcome. It is usually helpful to hear other opinions before offering your own. Too often, when a leader expresses his or her opinion first, the discussions conclude prematurely.

"Let not all be spokesmen at once," the Lord said, "but let one speak at a time and let all listen unto his sayings, that when all have spoken that all may be edified of all, and that every man may have an equal privilege" (D&C 88:122).

At the same time, one who is called to serve on a Church council should remember that his or her participation on the council is a privilege. And with that privilege comes responsibility—responsibility to work within the parameters of the organization, to be prepared, to share, to advocate vigorously the position he or she believes to be right. But just as important is the responsibility to support and sustain the final decision of the council leader.

Furthermore, each council member has a responsibility to be spiritually in tune when taking part in council meetings so that he or she can make a positive contribution to the issues being discussed. For example, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "every man, before he makes an objection to any item that is brought before a council for consideration, should be sure that he can throw light upon the subject rather than spread darkness, and that his objection be founded in righteousness, which may be done by men applying themselves closely to study the mind and will of the Lord, whose Spirit always makes manifest and demonstrates the truth to the understanding of all who are in possession of the Spirit" (History of the Church, 2:370). As we do this, our councils will be conducted in a spirit of love and compassion and will follow the example of the Lord, who "counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy" (Jacob 4:10).

By listening to council members, presidents and bishops can share with other leaders the burdens they have been called to bear. We have already noted the counsel of a good, righteous father in Israel named Jethro to his son-in-law, Moses. When Jethro visited Moses, he watched as he

sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.

And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?

And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God:

When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them know the statues of God, and his laws.

And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good.

Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.

Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God:

And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.

Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:

And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace. (Exodus 18:13-23)

Not only is this a great lesson for all of us on the importance of delegation of priesthood authority, but it also illustrates the need for presidents and bishops to allow their counselors, auxiliary leaders, and other associates to "bear the burden with thee." Remember, presidents and bishops, that the callings of your associates are just as divinely inspired as is yours, and they are therefore entitled to inspiration in their specific responsibilities. Lean upon them. Learn from them. Love them. Listen to them.

Council Leadership

I would also offer this suggestion to presidents and bishops: Never forget that as the council leader, you are ultimately responsible for all decisions. Now, that may seem contradictory to our previous discussion on the importance of listening to the counsel of other council members. But it isn't—not at all. Rather, it is a natural extension of the flow of council leadership in the Church. The ideal model is straightforward and simple: call good people to serve with you, listen carefully to their counsel and consider their input, and then listen to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit as it leads you to make good decisions. Functioning successfully as a council doesn't mean making group decisions. It simply means the council leader draws from the various abilities, insights, experiences, and inspiration of council members to help make good decisions under the influence of the Spirit. While we seek unanimity, the final decision is always up to the council leader.

One bishop told me of a time soon after his call to the bishopric when a new Young Women president was needed in his ward. "There was a clear impression in my mind who the new president should be," the bishop said. "But when I spoke with my counselors about the call, they had another name in mind, and they made a good and compelling case for the second woman to serve in this important position.

"I was a brand-new bishop, and I had tremendous respect for these two good men who were serving as my counselors," the bishop continued. "I guess I had more confidence in them than I did in my own spiritual sensitivity, because I chose to ignore what I was personally feeling and to accept their recommendation as the decision of the council."

The bishop was unable to issue the call before he had to leave town for an extended business trip, so he asked his first counselor to extend the call to the second woman. When he called a couple of days later to ask his counselor how things were going, he was told that there had been a problem. The woman, a faithful and devoted young sister, felt uncomfortable with the calling and asked for a day or two to reconcile her feelings.

"It just doesn't feel right," she said after a couple of prayerful days. "I've never declined a calling in my life, and I won't decline this one. But I feel that I need to ask you to ask the bishop if he's really sure that this is what the Lord wants for the young women of the ward right now. If it is, then I'll assume that the problem here is mine and I'll willingly accept the assignment."

"Of course she feels uncomfortable," the bishop said when his counselor explained the situation. "This isn't what the Lord wants. He let me know who the new Young Women president is supposed to be, and I've been ignoring Him."

The bishop instructed his counselor to let the sister know that there was nothing wrong with her spiritual sensitivity. Then he was to go ahead and extend the calling to the sister the bishop had been originally impressed to call.

Her response was validating: "I've had the impression for two weeks that this calling was coming."

"The experience didn't teach me to ignore my counselors," the bishop said. "Their input was important—the woman they suggested was called to serve as a Young Women adviser, and she did a wonderful job there. But I did learn that of all the voices I was to listen to as bishop, the most important one was the voice of the Spirit as it guided my thoughts, my words, and my actions."

It is important that all council members understand the significant and very distinct role of the council leader and learn to not be offended when the decision is different from the course they would have chosen. Decision making isn't the primary responsibility of counselors. Counselors are called to do just that—to provide counsel—as well as to assist, strengthen, and support. Their role is to participate—actively and candidly—in the decision-making process, to support and sustain all council decisions, and to execute their implementation through their respective organizations.

Using Councils to Accomplish the Mission of the Church

Of course, the fundamental guiding principle of every Church council is to accomplish the mission of the Church. Everything discussed, every plan made, every activity coordinated should have as its central focus bringing souls to Christ by either proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, or redeeming the dead—or a combination of the three. If an agenda item can't logically and naturally be linked to one of those great and wonderful eternal pursuits—without having to be stretched beyond recognition in order to fit—then perhaps it does not belong on the agenda.

From time to time, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles will place special emphasis on the fundamental principles of the gospel to help train leaders in accomplishing the mission of the Church. All Church councils need to be aware of and ready to support any new point of emphasis from the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve. My guess is that many council leaders and members will be surprised to discover how much more focused their work will become when they examine it through the lens of saving souls through the mission of the Church.

One young bishop I know was taught this important concept by a good stake president. "I had been serving as bishop for about a year," he told me. "I had great counselors, and we all were working hard and expending a lot of time and energy in our callings. We had lots of great activities, and our meetings were always well planned and executed. We were doing all of the things that we thought we were supposed to be doing, but we didn't seem to be accomplishing anything of real, lasting significance in the lives of the members of our ward. We were so busy being busy that we never had time to focus on things that really mattered. Very few less-active members' lives were being touched, no prospective elders were being advanced to the Melchizedek Priesthood, our young men were not going on missions, and no one could remember when we had last baptized a convert into the Church in our ward."

Sound familiar? Most of us have been there. Church callings are demanding, particularly if you're serving in a presidency or a bishopric. There is much to do, and there are many details to arrange. Sometimes we get so focused on bringing people to the meetinghouse that we forget we are supposed to be bringing them to Christ. Too often, our council meetings reflect that lack of focus. We find ourselves spending all of our precious time during council meetings coordinating events and correlating schedules. Instead of doing the Lord's business—which almost always has to do with touching the lives of individuals and families—we allow ourselves to get bogged down in administrative busyness. Reports are submitted and assignments are made and the meeting is considered a success, even though there has been no serious discussion of how to move the organization forward in proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead—each of which involves touching and influencing people.

It's no wonder, then, that many presidents and bishops presiding over such organizations feel overwhelmed and unfulfilled, as my young friend did. If your calling has become simply a long list of things that need to be done—activities that need to be planned, lessons that need to be prepared, assignments that need to be filled, meetings that need to be held—it can be daunting. It is only when we get beyond the administrative details of our callings and focus our attention on the principles of ministering to God's children and bringing the blessings of the gospel into their lives that our Church offices take on their full meaning, and we experience the fulfilling joy and satisfaction to be found in rendering significant service in the kingdom.

For example, a carefully planned sacrament meeting should be a spiritual feast in which we worship and learn of our Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Surely once each week our members should feel the power of the Spirit in their lives. Sacrament meeting should provide such an opportunity. Bishops who are bogged down in details often find themselves spending more time on insignificant matters and less time on ensuring that sacrament meetings are a banquet of spiritual nourishment. At such times, it would be wise to invite suggestions from counselors and ward council members on ways to make every sacrament meeting a more reverent, spiritual experience. Let the councils also help teach our members that the chapel is a special place in our buildings where we come in a spirit of respect for God and reverence for His Holy Son. I am sure that if invited by the bishop, the auxiliary presidents could teach in their meetings the need to improve reverence in sacrament meeting. The sisters can teach each other and their families that the chapel is a special place, the only place where we can worship and honor the Lord Jesus Christ by partaking of the sacrament and renewing our covenants with Him. All leaders can help the quiet, peaceful promptings of the Holy Spirit abide in our worship services, causing spiritual enlightenment and nourishment to flow into our lives. By focusing attention on such issues that stem directly from our efforts to accomplish the mission of the Church, presiding councils shift their vision from administration to ministration, and the council members experience the joy that comes from making a meaningful difference in people's lives.

Fortunately, that well-intentioned-but-frustrated-and-slightly-harried bishop we mentioned earlier had an insightful stake president who understood that principle.

"Do you have a copy of one of your bishopric meeting agendas?" the president asked during one of their regular personal priesthood interviews. When the agenda was produced, the president studied it for a moment, then put it down on his desk. "When do you talk about the spiritual needs of your people?" he asked.

My friend was surprised by the question. "Well," he said, "we talk about that all the time."

The stake president glanced at the agenda. "I don't see it on here," he observed.

"Maybe it isn't an agenda item, but we do talk about it," the bishop said.

"Give me an example," the president pressed.

Now it was my friend's turn to study the agenda. "Right here," he said at last, pointing to an agenda item labeled New Callings. "We talked about calling some new teachers in Primary and Relief Society." The bishop paused uncomfortably, then added: "I remember we talked about how important it was to call good teachers."

"Well, that's fine," the stake president said. "But I'm still curious to know why you don't talk specifically about the spiritual needs of your members. Remember, Bishop, proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead are guidelines to help us lift our people spiritually and, in doing so, strengthen the Church."

"Yes, President, I know," the bishop said. "And we do talk about them. We just don't have them on our agenda."

"I see that," the president said, "and I guess I'm wondering why. What I do see on your agenda are a lot of maintenance tasks: new callings, stake announcements, interview lists, activities reports, calendaring. With everything you've got to go through here, any discussion of items related to meeting spiritual needs would be purely incidental, or would be left until late in the meeting when there isn't time to explore those issues in the depth they deserve."

The bishop looked down at his agenda again. He noticed the last item on the agenda—Activation—and recalled how often they hadn't had time to hold that important discussion. "I think I see your point, President," he said. "But I'm not exactly sure what to do about it. I mean, those maintenance items do need to be handled."

"Of course they do," the president said. "But they don't have to be the central focus of your bishopric meeting." He paused to pull a form out of his desk. "Here," he said, "look at our last stake presidency meeting agenda." The bishop saw that following the opening prayer and scriptural thought, the minutes, and reports on assignments, the agenda was then divided into three sections—Proclaiming the Gospel, Perfecting the Saints, and Redeeming the Dead—with specific items for discussion listed under each heading. Upon closer inspection, he noticed that there were a number of specific names listed on the agenda, and not a lot of detail management.

"How do you do that?" he asked. "The stake seems to run smoothly and efficiently. How do you keep things going without spending time working through details and plans?"

"We do," the president responded. "But we handle those matters quickly during a reporting period at the beginning of the meeting. And we do a lot of maintenance outside of presidency meeting. Our objective is to focus as much time as possible in our meetings on the things that really matter. And the things that really matter almost always have to do with people—their needs, their concerns, their faith, and how they relate to the spiritual strength of the Church."

My young friend caught the vision of his stake president's wise counsel and began reshaping his bishopric meeting agendas according to the spiritual and personal needs of ward members. "At first," he said, "it felt a little funny to spend so much time talking about people's needs and other weighty issues, and we weren't as organized as we used to be. But now, we've figured out how to conduct the business of the ward without spending all of our time in bishopric meeting talking about it. And we find that we're much more intimately involved in people's lives, and better able to make a difference through applying fundamental principles of the gospel in the lives of our people to help lift them spiritually."

What he learned through that experience applies to every bishopric, every presidency, and every council in the Church. Maintaining that critical focus in meetings and in ministering to the needs of the people is one of the most important things a president or bishop can do. As the presiding authority of the council, he or she sets the ministerial tone that others throughout the organization will follow. Presidency or bishopric meeting is the perfect place to establish a clear focus on the principal thing that should matter most to all Church councils: bringing souls to Christ and securing them with spiritual witness and testimony.

Every council must choose between the things that really matter and the things that don't. It is the responsibility of counselors and other council members to help the president or bishop or auxiliary leader stay focused on the things that matter: the spiritual progress of every person living within that unit of the Church. If we spend all of our time talking about trivia, then our work will be trivial. But this is God's work, and it is anything but trivial. If we stay focused and keep our objectives clear, we can work through our councils to move forward the mission of the Church in our stakes, wards, quorums, and auxiliaries.

Leadership Training Emphasis

To help priesthood and auxiliary leaders focus their efforts on accomplishing the mission of the Church, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have issued a document entitled "Leadership Training Emphasis," which contains the following guidelines:

Families: Teach the preeminence of the home and family as the basic organizational unit of the Church. Encourage each family member, parents and children, to study the scriptures, pray regularly, and follow the example of the Savior in all things.

Adults: Encourage each adult to be worthy to receive the ordinances of the temple. Teach all adults to identify their ancestors and perform sacred temple ordinances for them.

Youth: Help prepare each young man to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, to receive the ordinances of the temple, and to be worthy to serve a full-time mission. Help prepare each young woman to be worthy to make and keep sacred covenants and receive the ordinances of the temple.

All Members: Leaders, members, and stake and full-time missionaries work cooperatively in a balanced effort to help convert, retain, and activate our Heavenly Father's children. Teach members to provide for themselves, their families, and the poor and needy in the Lord's way.

These are the things that matter. These are the things that will make a positive difference in people's lives. And these are the things that should be the focus and objective of every presiding council in the Church as we seek to join the Lord in His work and His glory—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).
