M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 4

Stake and District Councils

A friend whom I'll call Brent was a little discouraged with his new Church calling. For most of the previous year he had held what he referred to as "the best calling in the Church": Sunday School teacher for a group of inquisitive, enthusiastic, and well-behaved sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds. They had enjoyed wonderful times together, filled with some rather unique gospel insights, lots of laughter, and occasional tears. The group had bonded in a meaningful way, and when the Sunday School president told Brent that they didn't want to stop the spiritual momentum that was building with the class and were going to keep him with the group for the next year, he was thrilled.

That's why he was a little concerned when the new bishop in his ward asked Brent and his wife to come for an interview. Since his wife was already serving as Relief Society president, they figured it was not going to be a new calling for her. So Brent wasn't too surprised when the bishop extended a new calling to him: Young Men president.

"I was disappointed at first," Brent admitted. "I didn't want to leave that class. But since the Young Men president is also the priests quorum adviser, I would still be with all of the young men who were in the Sunday School class, and I'd be able to associate with the young women at Mutual, so it didn't take long for me to get used to the idea. In fact, I was pretty excited about it by the time stake conference rolled around the next week."

Ah, yes, stake conference—in this case, a special stake conference in which Brent's stake was divided and a lot of reorganization took place. By the end of the conference, Brent's one-week stint as ward Young Men president was over and he was a member of a new stake high council. And that's where his discouragement came in.

"It isn't the quick change that bothers me—I understand that things like that happen in a growing, dynamic Church," Brent told me. "It's just . . . you know, a stake assignment."

I understood what he was trying to say. We had talked about it before, when he had served as a member of another high council. When I first met Brent he was a bishop, and he loved serving at the ward level because of its proximity to people and the opportunity it gave him to get involved in a meaningful way in their lives.

"You can really minister to people in a ward assignment—you can make a difference in their lives," he said. "Stake assignments are just . . . well, administrative. You shuffle papers. You handle details. You go to meetings—lots of meetings. But you don't really do anything. I mean, when was the last time you heard someone say that their life was changed by a high council speaker?"

Many who have served in stake assignments can probably relate to what my friend Brent was saying. The impact of effective service tends to be more immediate, more clearly seen, and more personally felt in ward callings than in stake callings. In ward callings, we minister to people; in stake callings, we teach and minister to those who minister. But that ministry can be just as important—and, in the long term, just as profound—if we take our stake assignments seriously and bring to them the same determination and dedication that we would bring to a ward assignment. The stake Young Women leader who can help her ward counterpart better understand the program and be more effective in her service, who can give her a vision of the impact of her calling, is blessing the lives of young women just as surely as the ward leader is; she's just doing it indirectly. To help a teacher or adviser be more effective in reaching the youth in the ward is truly a great service. Similarly, the high councilor who devotes his time to providing excellent training and instruction in stake training meetings is rendering a valuable service to those whose lives are enriched as a result of that training. While it is sometimes more difficult to see the long-term results of our work in stake assignments, the service can be every bit as satisfying and joyful for those who understand and see the necessity of ministering to those who minister.

The aims and objectives of stake councils are slightly different from those of the equivalent ward councils (where such equivalency exists), but the principles that should govern these councils are identical. It is just as important to focus on gospel fundamentals and on people (rather than programs) in stake councils as it is in ward councils, and it is just as important that those who participate in stake councils be able to do so in a spirit of free and open discussion. The principles of counseling with our councils are true whether we are talking about a stake council or a ward council, and the results of doing so effectively can be just as significant in the lives of individuals and families.

While there can be any number of ad hoc stake councils and committees, for the purposes of our discussion we will focus our attention on three standing councils at the stake level.

The stake priesthood executive committee consists of the stake presidency and the high council. The stake priesthood executive committee meeting, often called "high council meeting," is held at least twice monthly (where feasible) to consider stake priesthood and auxiliary matters. The stake president presides and conducts; the stake executive secretary and the stake clerk also attend this meeting. The stake Melchizedek Priesthood committee and the stake Aaronic Priesthood committee are subcommittees of the stake priesthood executive committee.

The stake welfare committee is formed by adding the stake Relief Society presidency and the chairman of the stake bishops' welfare council to the stake priesthood executive committee. This committee meets at least quarterly to coordinate stake welfare services and activities.

The stake council includes stake priesthood executive committee members, the stake mission president, and the presidents of the stake auxiliaries. The stake president may also invite others to attend as needed. Although some stakes continue to refer to this body as the "stake correlation council," it is correctly referred to as the stake council, for its scope and vision should extend far beyond mere correlation and coordination of activities. While planning and coordinating are key functions of stake council members, this group should also consider key issues, needs, and concerns confronting those who live within stake boundaries.

Blessing Lives through Stake Councils

In one stake, such an issue was temple attendance by stake members. Stake leaders were concerned because they believed that members were not taking full advantage of the opportunity to have the blessings of temple worship in their lives. The stake presidency spoke about their shared concern at length, and they tried to communicate it through meetings and conferences. But they had not put the issue before the stake council.

"Our stake council meetings had never been very useful," the stake president admitted. "They were more calendaring get-togethers than anything else. We scheduled only two stake council meetings each year, mostly because the handbook said we should hold regular council meetings. Two seemed like more than enough as far as we were concerned."

But after watching a training video about stake and ward councils and hearing some strong counsel from general Church leaders about how to effectively counsel with our councils, the stake presidency decided to use a different approach with their stake council. "At our next council meeting we showed part of the training video and then discussed the purpose of holding this particular meeting," the stake president said. "We made it clear that this was not a calendaring meeting, but a meeting that would help the stake move forward in accomplishing the mission of the Church: to proclaim the gospel, to perfect the Saints, and to redeem the dead."

Then the stake presidency presented their concern about temple attendance to the stake council and asked for their comments and suggestions. "The Spirit was with us, and the ideas just flowed," the stake president said. "The sisters who were present were particularly helpful in offering suggestions about how to make temple attendance more convenient for working women and mothers with small children at home."

"It was a positive time for everyone attending," he continued. "There was a great deal of participation, because all council members felt that they were being listened to and that their suggestions were being considered."

The council meeting generated a lengthy list of ideas, some of which eventually became the stake's plan for increasing temple attendance. "But the really exceptional outcome was that everyone said we should hold stake council meetings more often," the stake president said. "Now that we've figured out how to take advantage of the collective expertise of our stake council, we're scheduling stake council meetings quarterly, with provisions to meet more often if needed. We need what the stake council can do for us—now that we know how to use it."

A similar experience occurred in another stake, where stake council meetings had been eliminated altogether and replaced by regular meetings between the stake presidency and individual stake auxiliary presidencies. As a result of counsel from Church leaders, the stake president and his counselors decided to reconstitute and reschedule the stake council.

"In the first of these meetings we discussed the outlines of both ward and stake conferences, among other items," the stake president said. "The comments and suggestions from stake council members were critical in shaping our ward and stake conference agendas. And as it turned out, our ward and stake conferences were among the most successful we've ever had. Comments from our members on the last two stake conferences have been extremely positive, and in both cases attendance has been up."

"We also found that in revising our format for ward conferences, we were coming much closer to meeting the needs of both the leadership and the individual members," the stake president continued. "Further, we increased the involvement of the sisters in the ward conferences, and this has been met with a very positive response."

Another stake president learned in an area priesthood training meeting how strongly the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles felt about the bearing of testimony and the teaching of pure doctrine in all Church meetings to elevate the spirituality of individual members. The Area Presidency explained the "Leadership Training Emphasis" document (see Chapter 3) and asked the stake presidents to focus on preparing all of their people to receive the blessings of the temple. The stake president returned to his stake determined to find a way to emphasize the message in each of the wards. First he counseled with his counselors, and together they determined that the principles taught in the "Leadership Training Emphasis" document needed to be understood and taught in their stake. Then he held an expanded stake council meeting, adding all of the ward bishops, in which he and his counselors presented the information. In this meeting, the council members discussed ways to implement the instruction from the Brethren throughout the stake.

Each bishop met with his ward council to determine how to act upon the stake presidency's message. The stake auxiliary presidents counseled with their respective organizations as well. For example, the stake Relief Society presidency came up with a plan that included teaching these principles to ward Relief Society presidents at stake leadership meetings, incorporating the theme into the annual stake women's conference, encouraging Relief Society teachers to more effectively teach doctrine and bear testimony, doing further training with ward presidents on a one-on-one basis, and suggesting ways to incorporate the message in meaningful homemaking activities.

"For the first time, we felt that we were part of the stake leadership team," said the stake Relief Society president. "It was exhilarating to be regarded as spiritual leaders who could help contribute to the overall spirituality of our stake."

Making Stake Councils Work

Do you see a pattern in these examples of effective stake councils? It seems that there are three keys to making stake councils work in the way they were designed and intended to work. First, beginning with the stake presidency, stake leadership must be committed to the council concept and to doing everything in their power to see that the councils are formed and operating as they should. Second, they must empower their councils; that is, give council members meaningful work to do. And finally, they have to get out of the way and allow the stake council to function.

A stake president tells of discussing an upcoming temple preparation seminar with his stake priesthood executive committee. "As a stake presidency, we went into the meeting and told the brethren how the seminar should be handled. They just sat there, listening to us, without any expressions of support or excitement."

The presidency was concerned, and in their next presidency meeting they counseled together on how the stake priesthood executive committee could be improved. "It occurred to us that we had the habit of telling the high council how we were going to do things, as opposed to counseling with them and receiving their ideas and input," the stake president said. "At our next priesthood executive committee meeting we approached the temple preparation seminar in a different way. We asked for their suggestions and recommendations, and then we sat back and waited for them to respond. At first they were hesitant—this was a new way of doing things. But soon momentum began to build and the ideas began to flow. There was a good spirit there, and some great ideas were presented that improved our temple preparation seminar plans.

"After the meeting, one of the brethren came up to me and said, 'This is one of the most productive meetings I have ever attended. It felt good to be here. Thank you.'"

Too often in the Church we take productive priesthood leaders and put them on high councils where their perceived role is simply to give rubber-stamp approval to stake presidency plans and programs and to run ecclesiastical errands for the presiding brethren. Under such conditions, high councilors quickly become "dry" councilors; without the spiritual nourishment of meaningful service, they lose enthusiasm, energy, and commitment to the work. Similarly, talented and spiritually gifted women called as auxiliary leaders are too often treated by priesthood leaders as though their only function is to take in casseroles and arrange for stake and ward activities. The fact is that they are spiritual leaders who should be encouraged to actively contribute, under the direction of the priesthood, to the spiritual leadership of the ward, stake, or home. When stake presidencies allow stake councils to feel some ownership of the program, they are more likely to become a dynamic part of the solution to the problems facing the stake.

Inspired Leadership by a High Councilor

I had an experience some time ago in Idaho when I attended a stake conference there. The stake president mentioned he had a surprise for me and asked, "Will you trust me?" I responded, "Well, we trust all of our stake presidents; I trust you if you are right." He said, "Well, I think you will enjoy what is going to happen tomorrow in the general session of the conference."

Here is what happened. In the Sunday morning session, he called upon a little girl who was about ten years of age to come up to the pulpit and bear her testimony about being a "Primary missionary." What had happened was that the stake president had authorized the high council adviser to the Primary to implement an idea that children can also be missionaries. This high councilor went to the ward Primaries to teach the little children that they were missionaries too. This sweet little girl, whom we shall call Katie, learned from the high councilor that she could be a missionary. She came home to her father, who was the bishop of one of the wards, and said, "Daddy, I'm a Primary missionary, and I want to share the gospel with somebody." The bishop said, "Well, sweetheart, that's a wonderful thing, but we have only one or two nonmember families in our whole ward, so it might be a little difficult." But this little girl asked, "Who are they?" The bishop named the nonmember families, and his daughter promptly responded, "Let's you and me go visit them, and we'll invite them to come to our home for family home evening." Those of you who are fathers of little girls know how easily you succumb when a sweet daughter looks at you imploringly out of innocent, trusting eyes. And that's what happened to the bishop. So he and Katie went and knocked on the door of one nonmember family. When the mother of the family answered the door, little Katie said, "I am a Primary missionary, and we want you to come to our house for family home evening." This wonderful mother, I guess, had the same problem with those big, innocent eyes, and she agreed to bring her family to home evening. They came; they had a nice evening; they were not converted.

About two weeks later, Katie came home just as her mother was taking some banana bread out of the oven. Katie asked, "Can I have a loaf of that bread?" Her mother said, "Yes sweetheart, but what do you want it for?"

"I want to take it to Mrs. Johnson," she replied.

When Mrs. Johnson came to the door, Katie said, "I have something for you that I would like to give you, but I can only give it to you on one condition." When Mrs. Johnson asked what the condition was, Katie responded, "That you let the missionaries teach you the gospel." Mrs. Johnson smiled and said, "If that's the only condition for us to have the banana bread, then I'll agree that we will let the missionaries teach us the gospel."

The missionaries taught the gospel to the Johnsons, and they were baptized.

After Katie finished her testimony at the conference, Sister Johnson was the next to speak. I shall never forget what I felt when she thanked a little ten-year-old Primary missionary who had had the courage to invite her family to learn about the gospel.

When it was my turn to speak, I invited the bishop and his family, including Katie, to come up and stand by me, and then I invited the Johnson family to come up—mother, father, and three children. I said to them, "You have had a wonderful experience together. Bishop, you and Katie have shared with your neighbor the most precious thing in life, the gospel of Jesus Christ. But I want to tell you that if you think your heart is filled with joy today, wait till that day one year from now when the Johnson family kneels at the altar in the Idaho Falls Temple to be sealed for time and all eternity. That will be a moment in mortality that you will never, ever forget."

One year later, I performed their sealing. When I walked into the temple, there in the waiting room was Katie, now age eleven, the Primary missionary. She was not able to go to the sealing room because she wasn't old enough, but she was there waiting for her convert family to be sealed. The sealing room was filled with members of the ward. When the three Johnson children knelt around that altar and I sealed them to their parents, it was a bit of heaven on earth—all made possible because a little girl took seriously an assignment from an inspired and motivated high councilor who had the idea that children could be missionaries too and who taught little Katie that she could share the gospel with others.

Specialized Task Committees

Some of the best and most interesting council work being done in stakes and wards is performed by special task committees created to deal with specific issues and concerns. For example, one stake presidency was faced with a dilemma: of the sixty or so young single adults who lived within the stake boundaries, only about forty wanted to attend the stake's young single adult branch. Some were hopping from ward to ward with no accountability anywhere. The rest were attending other singles units in a large metropolitan area.

"In some cases, we weren't exactly sure where they were attending," the stake president said. "That was the problem. We wanted to make sure no one was falling through the cracks, and we wanted to provide a meaningful program for those who did not wish to attend the branch."

So, under the direction of the stake council, a special task committee was formed, composed of the stake Relief Society, Young Women, and Young Men presidents; four high councilors (whose respective responsibilities included the stake Young Men, Young Women, singles, and Relief Society organizations); the branch president and the elders quorum and Relief Society presidents from the young single adult branch; and the stake presidency. During their first meeting, the problem was outlined and all task committee members were asked to share their thoughts, impressions, and observations about the branch. The group also discussed current branch membership, potential branch membership, and the names of the young people who would be eligible to join the branch during the next four years.

"I was impressed that there was information being shared in that group that had never been discussed before," the stake president said. "There were situations and insights discussed that the task committee members had never been given an opportunity to express—especially among the sisters who were present. We knew we had a problem, but we had no idea of its shape or size until we convened that special committee. Immediately it became clear to us that our ward Relief Society organizations didn't know how to serve eighteen-year-old sisters who were out of high school but were too young to attend the singles branch. We had parents who were frustrated because they were watching as their young adults were losing interest in the Church, and they felt powerless to stop the trend. We had bishops who were pushing young adults out of their home wards, whether they wanted to attend the singles branch or not. And we had young people who weren't interested in the singles branch and really wanted to attend their home wards, but didn't feel there was anything for them there."

As a result of the discussion, assignments were made to begin responding to some of the stake's greatest needs. First, all task committee members were asked to review the Church's official program for single adults to determine whether the stake was out of alignment with the Church. All of the bishops and ward Relief Society presidents were surveyed to find out what they were doing in their respective wards with regard to the young single adults. The information compiled by the task committee was presented to the stake council, where more candid and open dialogue led to the formation of a plan that was completely in line with the Church singles program.

"By returning to the Church program, we had to change some of our own long-entrenched ways of doing things, and that was painful to a degree," the stake president said. "I met again with the singles branch president and reviewed with him what we felt the Lord would have us do. We resolved his concerns and knelt in prayer, and within days there was complete support from him."

The proposed plan was then presented to the stake bishops' council for their sustaining vote. Concerns and reservations were voiced and then resolved as they counseled together, and the bishops sustained the stake presidency and began to implement the approved program.

The stake president said, "In our case, the task committee and stake council recommended that the single adults attend their home wards for Sunday meetings. Home ward bishops were committed to finding meaningful callings for every single adult. The stake would accelerate single adult activities and would encourage some multistake activities. All young single adults were also encouraged to attend institute classes. Each task committee and stake council member who participated in the process now has a personal commitment to the singles program and is anxious to see that it succeeds. We aren't doing this because the stake president decided that this is the way it should be; we're doing it because all who struggled with the challenges involved received his or her own testimony that in our stake this is what the Lord would have us do."

Using Councils to Address Stake Needs

Try as I might, I can't think of any problem or concern faced by any stake of Zion that couldn't be similarly addressed through counseling with stake councils. When the presidency of one stake decided there was a need to improve respect for Church buildings and to increase reverence in meetings, the stake president and his counselors presented the matter to their stake council. "The meeting became a brainstorming session, and the ideas flowed," the stake president said. Among the suggestions that came from that first council meeting were the following: a theme, "Respect for Our Buildings"; sacrament meeting talks by high councilors on the subject; specific counsel to parents of young children, urging them to be selective in choosing the foods they bring into Church buildings for their little ones and asking them to teach their children the concepts of reverence and respect; messages for ward bulletins; and instructions to bishops to focus on reverence and respect in their wards in other ways.

Assignments were made, and stake council members went to work. High councilors began to prepare their messages. The stake executive secretary informed bishops of the important role they would play in emphasizing reverence and respect in their respective wards. A high councilor contacted all ward bulletin editors to carry reminders of respect and reverence in their programs. The stake Young Men president approached Aaronic Priesthood advisers and asked them to encourage their Young Men to accept responsibility for keeping the buildings clean on Sunday. The stake Primary president encouraged ward Primary leaders to teach reverence and respect in Primary sharing times. Young Women and Relief Society presidencies were also asked to work with their sisters in developing a greater understanding of what reverence really means.

"The results of the stake council's work have been very gratifying," the stake president said. "Reverence has increased. Respect for our buildings is highly visible. Members, both children and adults, are responding to the council's efforts to teach reverence and respect."

In another stake, the stake Melchizedek Priesthood committee played a pivotal role in updating the stake's emergency preparedness plan and broadening the scope of the plan to encourage greater community involvement, including those from other faiths. Committee members conducted training sessions, coordinated certification of volunteers through the local fire department's Community Emergency Response Team, and initiated contact with other area churches and organizations to solicit their involvement and support.

"The ideas, direction, and energy behind these efforts have been the result of the group synergy and inspiration that has occurred in the council meetings of our Melchizedek Priesthood committee," said the stake president. "This has been, for us, a very effective tool in accomplishing a number of objectives in our stake."

This is exactly what every stake council could be and should be—an effective tool in the hands of those who "minister to those who minister" in accomplishing the objectives of the stake and the mission of the Church.

Involving All Council Members, Both Men and Women

A wise stake president or bishop will see his auxiliary presidents as spiritual leaders rather than as organizers and party planners. Too many women leaders are underutilized and unappreciated, at times because priesthood leaders don't have a clear understanding or an enlightened view of the significant contribution the sisters can make. They too bear the mantle of presidency, and they have been set apart and blessed to assist the priesthood in bringing women and their families to Christ. In addition, faithful and devoted women are typically very receptive to the Spirit and can play unparalleled roles in helping foster spirituality among women, children, and youth.

President Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, speaking several years ago in a general conference, emphasized the need for faithful and inspired women to make their influence felt within the Church:

We need women who will applaud decency and quality in everything from the fashion of clothing to crucial social issues. We need women who are organized and women who can organize. We need women with executive ability who can plan and direct and administer; women who can teach, women who can speak out. There is a great need for women who can receive inspiration to guide them personally in their teaching and in their leadership responsibilities. We need women with the gift of discernment who can view the trends in the world and detect those that, however popular, are shallow or dangerous. We need women who can discern those positions that may not be popular at all, but are right. ("Relief Society," 8)

Brethren, remember that the purpose of having women involved in our councils is to get their input on the weightier matters of the Church. And remember that they are eager to support and assist you in accomplishing the Lord's work. I believe their feelings are well represented in this comment from a former stake Relief Society president: "If auxiliary leaders feel that they are heard and that they are seen as legitimate spiritual leaders, they will move heaven and earth for the priesthood leaders under whose direction they serve."

In a general Church council meeting I attended several years ago with the presidencies of the women's auxiliaries, the sisters told me that very few women in the Church express any interest in wanting to hold the priesthood. But they do want to be heard and valued, and they want to make meaningful contributions to the stakes and wards in which they live. They want to serve the members and the Lord and to help accomplish the mission of the Church.

An illustration of the importance of a woman's perspective came in one such meeting when we were talking about the worthiness of youth to serve missions. President Elaine Jack, then serving as the Relief Society general president, said, "You know, Elder Ballard, the sisters of the Church may have some good suggestions on how to better prepare the youth for missions if they were just asked. After all, you know, we are their mothers!" The sisters' suggestions can help equally regarding temple attendance and a host of other matters with which priesthood leaders may be struggling.

Again, brethren, please be sure you are seeking the vital input of the sisters in your council meetings. Encourage all council members to share their suggestions and ideas about how the stake or ward can be more effective in proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead.

To be most effective, women need to learn to work effectively with and under the direction of the priesthood. Sisters, be prepared both mentally and spiritually to discuss the needs of those who fall within your stewardship. Be bold. Be assertive. Feel confident about raising weighty issues and concerns. You have as much right to input and inspiration as any other council member. The priesthood leader to whom you report will be strengthened more than you can imagine if he hears what you have to say. You will in many cases view the needs and concerns of women, youth, children, and families with greater empathy and insight than will your priesthood leaders. Prayerfully identify concerns and suggest solutions. Then, with other leaders, be willing to follow and support the counsel of those who hold the priesthood keys of administration in your area. Everyone prospers, at all levels of Church government, by following and supporting those who hold the keys. Both the sisters and the brethren need to understand and practice good judgment and balance in counseling with our councils.

President Howard W. Hunter often spoke about the strength and power that results when men and women combine their strengths, faith, and testimony, and when they work together for the benefit of those whom they serve. He said that "we, his servants all across the Church, need you, the women of the Church, to stand with us and for us in stemming the tide of evil that threatens to engulf us" ("To the Women of the Church," 96).

Perhaps we might look at the respective contributions of men and women in this way: You have no doubt visited the ophthalmologist for an eye exam. In the process of determining a patient's correct vision, the doctor will typically test the patient's eyesight by asking him or her to look through a variety of settings on a machine, some of which are blurry. Not infrequently, the doctor will find that the patient has one eye that is weaker than the other. Only when he can determine the exact prescription for both eyes can a patient's vision be corrected precisely.

In much the same way, men and women express themselves differently and tend to have different skills, talents, and points of view. When either viewpoint is taken in isolation, the resulting image may be blurry, one-dimensional, or otherwise distorted. It is only when both perspectives come together that the picture is balanced and complete. Men and women are equally valuable in the ongoing work of the gospel kingdom.
