M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 5

Ward and Branch Councils

A few years ago Fawn and her mother moved into a new ward. Fawn was a loving, faithful woman who had done a magnificent job rearing a righteous family as a single mother. But now she faced an uphill struggle against an enemy that she probably couldn't defeat: cancer. At the time she moved into her new ward, she could do very little for herself. Her mother tried to care for her, but age and health prevented her from doing everything that needed to be done. Help was needed, but their financial resources were limited. As Fawn's condition progressively deteriorated, the family's situation became critical.

About the time Fawn and her mother moved in, members of the ward council in her new ward were in the process of reevaluating their effectiveness as a council. "We realized that we had been spending most of our time on correlating activities, calendaring, and receiving home teaching and visiting teaching reports," said their bishop. "We realized that we needed to spend more time discussing how we could bring the blessings of the gospel into the lives of our members."

As the ward council became aware of Fawn and the issues confronting her, the Spirit moved upon council members collectively and individually. "This seemed to be a perfect opportunity to put into practice the things we had been learning about ministering through councils," the bishop said. "Instead of being mentioned in passing, Fawn's situation became a primary focus of council discussions. We felt as a ward council that we could offer the assistance that was needed to help her as she faced the daily challenges of living with cancer."

During their meetings, council members occasionally referred to the Savior's teachings in the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew:

When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:

And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats:

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:

For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. (Matthew 25:31-40)

As a result of counseling with one another, members of the ward council decided that the ward would reach out to Fawn and her mother in significant ways. The Relief Society regularly took meals to the two women. The Young Women wrote cards and notes, and from time to time they cleaned the house and took fresh flowers to them. The Young Men cared for their yard. Priesthood quorums, working in concert with Fawn's home teachers, offered assistance in lifting things around the house, administering the sacrament, and giving blessings.

"This went on for several months, and during that time many of our ward members came to me to express gratitude for the great blessing of helping these two good sisters," the bishop said. "Through them, we all felt the joy that comes from giving compassionate service in the Lord's kingdom."

When Fawn passed away, her mother spoke with great emotion and appreciation of the kind and generous service of ward leaders and members. Among the last thoughts Fawn expressed to the bishop was that she had never been in a ward that had loved her in such a special way—the Lord's way.

The bishop said, "As council members, we were all impressed by the wonderful way the Lord's plan of ministering provides for his children. Under the direction of the Spirit, the council made recommendations on what steps might be taken in order to provide loving service to Fawn. After experiencing the joyful satisfaction that comes from counseling together in such a meaningful way, I don't think any of us who sat in that ward council could ever go back to the calendaring-and-correlating type of council meetings we used to have."

During the past few years, I have become aware of that same scenario being played out over and over again as bishops and ward council members catch the vision of counseling with their councils. There is literally no problem in the family, ward, or stake that cannot be better understood and helped by Church leaders looking for solutions in the Lord's way. When they make wise use of committees and councils, lives are blessed. This is particularly true on the ward or branch level, where leaders are in a position to have daily hands-on influence on the eternal well-being of families and individuals. The auxiliaries are sleeping giants in the great task of perfecting the Saints—particularly when it comes to strengthening the home. While parents have the preeminent responsibility for family leadership and can never be replaced in that role, Church auxiliaries and programs should do much to sustain and strengthen families.

As I mentioned earlier, I served as a bishop twice. In writing this book I have repeatedly reflected back to those days. My ward council members were a real source of help to me. The sisters that led the Relief Society, the Young Women, and the Primary made a lasting impact in the lives of the women, young women, and boys and girls in the ward because of their spiritual strength and deep love for the gospel.

It would be impossible for me to recount the many quiet acts of service these dear sisters rendered to members of the ward. It was not unusual for my counselors and me to visit a sick member of the ward only to learn that the Relief Society had just been there and left the evening meal for the family. Besides the thousands of meals given, I cannot count the number of families who benefited from wise counsel or who were spiritually strengthened by the sisters who just wanted to help. The wonderful work of the women of the Church is vital. Thousands of young people have had testimonies strengthened and encouragement extended by faithful women leaders. For example, I suppose many of us can remember that special Primary teacher or leader who helped us memorize the Articles of Faith. We must appreciate and never overlook the great contribution that comes from the women of the Church, just as we should work always to sustain the priesthood leadership in our wards and stakes.

For the purposes of our discussion, I will briefly review some of the committees and councils that should function at the ward level.

The ward priesthood executive committee, commonly referred to as the "PEC," consists of the bishopric, the high priests group leader, the elders quorum president, the ward mission leader, and the Young Men president. The bishop presides and conducts meetings of the committee, and the ward executive secretary and the ward clerk also attend. Please note the absence of the Relief Society president and other sisters from this listing. Although many bishops have been inclined to invite the ward Relief Society president to attend PEC meetings because she is often the best-informed leader in the ward about what's going on in the lives of ward members, this is simply not appropriate. The priesthood executive committee is just that, a committee composed of priesthood leaders.

When the Church correlation program was introduced in 1963, Elder Harold B. Lee explained in general conference that emphasis was to be placed on "the responsibilities of the entire priesthood to 'watch over the Church' as commanded in the early revelations—to be concerned with the whole family as a group and as individuals." He also announced that a "ward Home Teaching committee" was to be established in each ward of the Church, and that its members would "constitute the core of those who now will go out to 'watch over the Church'" ("The Correlation Program," 504-5). This committee later became known as the ward priesthood executive committee (Priesthood Home Teaching Handbook, 7).

Because priesthood leaders have a mandate from the Lord to care for all of our Father's children who come under their supervision, it is necessary for them to meet regularly in order to fulfill their special callings. Priesthood leaders need to work to become as informed as the Relief Society sisters are about the critical personal issues affecting ward and quorum members. The PEC meets weekly under the direction of the bishop to consider the spiritual needs of all who reside within ward boundaries. Frequently, delicate matters are discussed that require confidentiality. As with all councils, PEC members should do all they can to protect privacy when giving reports and making assignments.

The ward welfare committee includes all of the members of the priesthood executive committee plus the Relief Society presidency. The addition of the Relief Society president is especially important to this committee, as she carries weighty responsibility in visiting members, assessing their needs, and finding ways to resolve those needs as assigned by the bishop.

This committee meets at least monthly under the bishop's direction to consider the temporal needs of ward members. While the bishop alone is responsible for the allocation of welfare funds, the committee plays a significant role in caring for the poor and needy by planning and coordinating the use of other ward resources, including the time, talents, skills, materials, and compassionate service of ward members. Through the priesthood quorums and the Relief Society, the ward welfare committee builds faith and teaches members to live providently, to provide for themselves and their families, and to care for others. Committee members should assist the bishop in administering welfare assistance, ensuring that families understand and are able to apply welfare principles, and helping to find solutions to long-term welfare needs.

The bishopric youth committee is to meet on a monthly basis. It consists of the bishopric, an assistant to the priests quorum president, the teachers and deacons quorum presidents, the Young Women class presidents, the Young Men and Young Women presidents, and the chairman of the ward activities committee. While the primary purpose of this committee is to plan and coordinate youth programs, emphasis should remain focused on activation and opportunities for youth to experience service and spiritual growth.

The ward council is made up of the priesthood executive committee; the ward Relief Society, Sunday School, Young Men, Young Women, and Primary presidents; and the activities committee chairman. The bishop may invite others to attend as needed. The ward council usually meets monthly, but may meet more often when there are special needs, to review ward progress on a broad range of issues that impact ward members and the community. Any extra meetings should not supersede or displace meetings of the bishopric or the ward priesthood executive committee.

In my view, the ward council meeting is one of the most important meetings in the Church, because priesthood quorum and auxiliary leaders can discuss and plan with the bishopric the work that is to be done during the coming month. Leaders can then personally interface with one another as often as necessary to assist in the accomplishment of the council's goals and objectives. Of all the councils and committees in the Church, I believe that the ward council can have the greatest impact in helping our Father's children. If this book can help bishops and branch presidents understand the power of the ward or branch council and properly use their councils to accomplish the Lord's work, then my efforts in writing the book will have been more than worthwhile.

Responsibilities of Ward Council Members

The critical role of the ward council in helping a ward successfully accomplish the mission of the Church cannot be overstated. Just look around the council table; you'll see two leaders who hold priesthood keys (the bishop and the elders quorum president) and others who are called with the responsibility of presidency over their respective organizations. And when you consider the aims and objectives of those organizations, you begin to get a glimpse of the ward council's potential for powerful influence.

The Primary president, for example, brings a very specific focus to the council table. Insofar as her Church service is concerned, her every thought and prayer is on behalf of the children of the ward. The Primary general presidency of the Church has stated: "The purpose of Primary is to teach children the gospel of Jesus Christ and help them learn to live it. The objectives of Primary are to teach children that they are children of God and that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ love them; help children learn to love Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ; help children prepare to be baptized, to receive the Holy Ghost, and to keep their baptismal covenants; help children grow in their understanding of the gospel plan and provide opportunities for them to live gospel principles; help boys prepare to receive the priesthood and be worthy to use this power to bless and serve others; [and] help girls prepare to be righteous young women, understand the blessings of the priesthood and the temple, and serve others" (Instructions for Priesthood and Auxiliary Leaders on Primary, 1). It is easy to see how that focused perspective could be beneficial to the ward council when its members are asked to consider an issue that would impact the children of the ward, or even a specific child or family of children living within the ward, whether member or nonmember.

Others around the ward council table are similarly focused. The Relief Society president is involved and acquainted with every woman in the ward over the age of eighteen. According to the Relief Society general presidency, she represents an organization that has as its purpose "to help women and families come unto Christ and to assist the priesthood quorums in achieving the mission of the Church." Through training and personal revelation, the ward Relief Society president is dedicated to doing all she can to help the sisters build personal testimony, develop and exercise charity, strengthen their families, enjoy a unified sisterhood, and participate fully in the blessings of the temple while working to bless and lift the lives of the individual women in the ward.

The ward Young Women president concentrates her prayerful attention on the young women ages twelve through eighteen. According to the Young Women general presidency, it is her responsibility to "help prepare each young woman to be worthy to make and keep sacred covenants and receive the ordinances of the temple." The powerful and inspiring words of the Young Women theme provide an excellent outline of the perspective the Young Women president brings to the council table: "We are daughters of our Heavenly Father who loves us, and we love him. We will 'stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places . . .' as we strive to live the Young Women Values, which are: faith, divine nature, individual worth, knowledge, choice and accountability, good works, and integrity. We believe as we come to accept and act upon these values, we will be prepared to make and keep sacred covenants, receive the ordinances of the temple, and enjoy the blessings of exaltation" (Young Women Leadership Handbook, 4).

Across the ward council table is the Young Men president, whose Church-service attention is focused on the ward's young men ages twelve through eighteen. He and his counselors assist the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood in the ward (that is, the bishopric) to administer the ward's Aaronic Priesthood program. They also give leadership to the Scouting program. The mission of the Aaronic Priesthood is "to help each young man become converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ and live by its teachings; magnify priesthood callings; give meaningful service; prepare to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood; commit to, worthily prepare for, and serve an honorable full-time mission; [and] live worthy to receive temple covenants and prepare to become a worthy husband and father" (Aaronic Priesthood Leadership Handbook, 6).

The Melchizedek Priesthood leaders who belong to the ward council—the high priests group leader and the elders quorum president—are responsible for the spiritual and temporal welfare of the men over whom they preside. Much of the work among the families of the ward that is currently being done by our bishops could appropriately be performed by quorum and group leaders, who are charged to "follow the Savior's example of righteous leadership. . . . When priesthood leaders lead as the Savior did, they should help members develop greater love for God the Father and His Son; develop greater love for others; share the gospel, do temple and family history work, serve without thought of reward, assist the poor and needy, and minister to the lonely and distressed; receive ordinances and make covenants with the Lord that will lead to eternal life; obey the commandments; become more humble, repentant, and forgiving; pray and study the scriptures daily; attend church meetings regularly and partake of the sacrament worthily; achieve spiritual, emotional, and temporal self-reliance; [and] attend the temple regularly" (Melchizedek Priesthood Leadership Handbook, 1-2).

Also seated at the council table is the ward mission leader, whose concentration rests on the nonmembers living within the ward boundaries and who has the sacred duty to help ward members fulfill their missionary responsibilities. He coordinates the work with the full-time missionaries and watches over the fellowshipping of new converts. Two other council members are the Sunday School president, who is responsible for all gospel instruction during the Sunday School portion of the consolidated meeting schedule, and the ward activities committee chairman, charged with planning meaningful social activities that are designed to build faith and fellowship among ward members.

Together with the bishopric, these leaders on the ward council are an inspired collection of men and women with a mandate to bless the lives of every person—man or woman, parent or child, member or nonmember—who lives within the ward boundaries. As a result of their individual callings, they are each entitled to divine direction within their respective areas of responsibility. And as fathers and mothers, neighbors and friends, they each have unique insights into the particular needs of the ward and its members.

Using Ward Councils to Bless Individuals and Families

When ward leaders fully utilize the inspired council system and focus the efforts of the quorums and auxiliaries on improving the spiritual and temporal well-being of ward members, miracles happen in the lives of families and individuals. But those miracles can happen only to the extent that we—the men and women who serve in the quorums and auxiliaries of the Church—are prepared to work together to make them happen. We are on the Lord's errand as we serve His children. To that end, I have three specific suggestions that, if followed, can help us all function more effectively as members of Church councils at both the ward and stake levels.

First, focus on fundamentals. Make sure that the doctrine is pure. Remain true to the approved curriculum. Follow the prescribed handbooks, and study and ponder the scriptures individually and as families. In a world that is filled with conflict and confusion, there is peace and safety in revealed truth. One stake presidency of which I'm aware became known for instructing the leaders throughout their stake to use the scriptures as their basic gospel text. They themselves practiced what they preached, always using the scriptures as a basis for their training and teaching. One year as they prepared for ward conferences, they invited the adult members in each ward to submit gospel questions in advance. In the Gospel Doctrine class held during the Sunday School portion of each ward conference, they then led the members through an exercise of locating scriptural passages that answered each question, demonstrating the power of finding answers to personal problems in the revealed word of God.

A bishop I know was concerned about an escalating lack of reverence in his ward, particularly just before sacrament meeting. When a general conference speaker suggested that reverence might be an appropriate topic for a ward council to consider, the bishop was surprised—and enlightened.

"I don't know why, but it had never occurred to me to take this kind of a problem to my ward council," the bishop said. "Hearing this suggestion sort of clicked a light on in my mind."

The bishop read in his copy of the Church's General Handbook of Instructions that "sacrament meeting is held for members to partake of the sacrament, worship reverently, and receive gospel instruction" and that bishoprics should "plan all sacrament meetings and conduct them in a reverent and dignified manner" (sec. 2, 5). The handbook also indicated that the ward council is to "review progress" and to counsel together regarding "all ward programs and activities" (sec. 2, 4). As he considered the quality of sacrament meetings in his ward, it was clear to him that reverence in the meetinghouse was an issue that needed some "progress"—and that any plan for improvement would have to include "all ward programs and activities." So on his next ward council meeting agenda, "Reverence" was prominently listed for discussion.

"I quickly discovered that other members of the council shared my concern, and they had some excellent suggestions for improvement," the bishop said. Several of those suggestions became part of the ward's effort to achieve a greater level of reverence, including decisions to provide prelude music played softly by various talented ward members (including youth) for ten minutes prior to the start of sacrament meeting, to have the entire bishopric seated on the stand several minutes before the meeting began, and to assign ushers at the doors to remind members to be reverent as they entered the chapel.

"I am delighted to report that our reverence has greatly improved," the bishop said. "Following the inspired counsel of Church leaders and implementing handbook procedures has made a difference in our ward."

Another bishop asked the members of his ward council for their suggestions on improving reverence in ward meetings. Hesitantly, the Primary president raised her hand. "Well," she said, "one person consistently does a lot of enthusiastic visiting in the chapel just before and after sacrament meeting. It can be pretty distracting."

The bishop hadn't noticed anyone being especially noisy in the chapel, but he said he would talk to the offending party. He asked the sister who it was.

She took a deep breath. "It's you, Bishop," she said. "I know you're just reaching out to people, and we all appreciate your desire to greet everyone who comes to the meeting. But when others see you moving around the chapel talking to people during the prelude music, they figure it's okay for them to do the same thing."

When others in the ward council nodded in agreement, the bishop thanked her and asked for recommendations. The council soon decided that the bishopric, including the bishop, should be in their places on the stand five minutes before sacrament meeting to set an example of reverence in the chapel. During a follow-up discussion, the council members indicated unanimously that the simple plan had worked and that reverence in sacrament meeting had improved significantly.

In still another ward, the bishopric was concerned about the sudden increase of gang-related activity in their community. In particular, some of the young people in the ward were being approached by persuasive gang leaders. Parents and leaders were alarmed about a social issue which, up to that time, was something they had only heard about on the nightly news. When the topic was raised during a ward council meeting, a healthy and energetic discussion ensued. Over a period of several weeks—during which the Young Men and Young Women leaders fulfilled assignments to learn more about the issue—the council developed a plan of action that included holding special youth firesides, providing training for parents, scheduling interviews with the youth, and implementing a ward-wide effort to better prepare their young people to deal with gang pressure. Though there was no quick fix to the problem, over time all of the youth who had flirted with gang involvement returned to full fellowship in the ward.

Second, focus on people, not programs. While there is a time and place for program coordination and calendaring, too many council meetings begin and end there. Rather than hearing a litany of organizational plans and reports, the council should spend most of its time pursuing such agenda items as the integration of new members, activation of the less active, concerns of the youth, the economic plight of individual members, and the needs of single mothers and widows. When organizational reports are given, they ought to be measured in terms of meeting those kinds of people-related goals.

One bishop reported to me that "the primary focus of our ward council meeting is people. At any given time, we concentrate on a few families that could benefit from a little extra attention, with every organization taking part in the effort."

One family that was part of this effort consisted of two parents, three teenagers (two girls and a boy), and two Primary-age children. Both parents were members of the Church, but the entire family had been less active since they moved into the area seven years earlier. As a result of the ward council's focus on this family, specific initiatives were undertaken in their behalf by the Primary, the Young Women, the Young Men, the Relief Society, the elders quorum, and the bishopric, including visits, telephone calls, special invitations to activities, and a special joint activity for the Young Men and Young Women that was specifically designed around the interests of the two young women in the family and their mother.

"This process continued for about seven months, when the family moved," the bishop told me. "At the time they moved, the father was much more interested in the Church and was preparing himself to baptize his younger children. Both of the young women were active, and one of them was serving in the Beehive class presidency. The family had achieved considerable momentum toward increased Church activity, and I found it a real pleasure to advise their new bishop of the progress they had made."

As a result of these kinds of experiences, the bishop said, "the ward council is continually focused on helping people. The council meeting itself becomes very much a ministering meeting, as opposed to an administrative meeting. All of the ward leaders see their callings, and their relationships to one another, in a different light. They realize that they are servants of the Lord, and that their ministry is something they share and coordinate with other members of the council."

Another bishop shared the following experience, which beautifully illustrates the importance of focusing the ward council's attention on people:

Not too long ago, our stake president asked us to concentrate our efforts as a ward council on at least three families. We were to focus extra attention on those families and to remember them specifically in our prayers. Within a month of our beginning to pray for the families we had selected, the mother of one of the families called and asked for an appointment to talk with me.

That night she came to the bishop's office in the ward building. She was very nervous, and she began to explain that about three weeks earlier she had felt impressed to begin reading the Book of Mormon again. She had joined the Church when she was nineteen, and she and her husband became inactive shortly thereafter. For her to begin reading the Book of Mormon after so many years was an event in and of itself. She wasn't very talkative. I asked her if she knew why she had come to my office.

"I don't know," she replied.

I explained that the reason she was there was that our ward council had been praying for her family consistently for the past month.

"I have felt it," she said softly.

We spoke of her husband, who was not receptive to the Church, and we considered some things we could do to help. The Spirit bore witness to us both that the Lord's hand was in this.

After that interview, things began to happen. There were two children in the family, an eleven-year-old girl and a fourteen-year-old boy, and neither of them had been baptized. We met as a ward council and outlined what the priesthood quorum and each auxiliary organization could do to help the family return to activity. The ward mission leader visited the family and invited them to take the missionary lessons, which they did. The Primary presidency visited the daughter and invited her to Primary, and the Young Men presidency invited the son to attend Young Men activities and classes. The Relief Society and elders quorum presidencies and the bishopric all made visits to the family and invited them to participate, as did their new home and visiting teachers. The parents also met with the stake presidency. Through all of these correlated efforts, the family had a series of spiritual experiences that led them back to full activity in the Church.

The culmination of our shared experience with this family occurred in the Arizona Temple, where they were sealed as an eternal family unit. Many members of our ward council were present for this sacred event, and many humble tears of appreciation were shed by council members who saw firsthand what following the Lord's program could mean in the lives of His children.

The bishop concluded that "focusing on this family's needs as a ward council accomplished, in my estimation, two things: it opened their hearts to receive the gospel into their lives once more, and it also opened our hearts to receive them. When they started coming back to church, ward council members made special efforts to fellowship them because they felt that their prayers were at least in part responsible for the family's return."

Third, councils are for counsel and the exchange of ideas, not just reports and lectures. Free and open discussion is critical if we are going to take advantage of the experiences, insights, and inspiration of each individual council member. Leaders should work to establish a climate conducive to such openness, where every person and group is important and every opinion is valuable. And don't forget: in our council meetings, the presiding officers should listen at least as much as they speak—and sometimes more.

When a single mother approached her bishop about the possibility of providing a "big brother" for her seven-year-old son, the bishop took the request to the ward council.

"The boy is very energetic," the bishop explained in the council meeting. "He is a challenge for his Primary teacher and for his teacher at school. His mother thinks it would be good for him to have an adult male in his life who could spend time with him in order to do 'boy' things with him and to be a positive male influence."

After the bishop turned the matter over to the ward council for discussion, he silently considered the things that were being said. Some good ideas were expressed, but the meeting turned around when a counselor in the elders quorum presidency, who was attending the meeting as a substitute because the elders quorum president was out of town, raised his hand to speak.

"I was once in the same position that boy is in now," the counselor said. "My mother was a single parent when I was young, and she wanted me to have a 'big brother.'" He then explained that his best experiences occurred when one of those "big brothers" brought along a young son or another boy who was his age, and he urged the council to find for the young man in their ward a "big brother" situation that could include a "little brother" as well.

"What a blessing it was for our ward council to have that insight from this good man," the bishop said. "We concluded that portion of the council meeting with some assignments that reflected the counselor's recommendations. An appropriate big brother-little brother combination was found. How grateful I was that our ward council was functioning in the way that we have been encouraged to function, with free and open discussion of all relevant issues by all of those attending."

A letter which President Gordon B. Hinckley received from a single mother and shared in the October 1996 general conference reflects the positive results of ward leaders working together to care for families and individuals:

Although I have been raising our four boys as a single parent, . . . I am not alone. I have a wonderful 'ward family' that has rallied around us. . . .

My Relief Society president has been there for me through my greatest hardships, encouraging my spiritual growth, personal prayer, and temple attendance.

Our bishop has been generous in providing needed food and clothing and has helped send two of the boys to camp. He has had interviews with all of us and given each of us blessings and needed encouragement. He has helped me to budget and do what I can to help my family.

Our home teachers have come regularly and even gave the boys blessings as they started the new school year.

Our stake president and his counselors have checked in on us on a regular basis by taking time to visit with us at church, on the phone, or visiting our home.

This Church is true, and my boys and I are living proof that God loves us and that a 'ward family' can make all the difference.

Our priesthood leaders have been instrumental in keeping the boys active in church and in the Scouting program. [One] is an Eagle Scout and is receiving his fourth palm this week. [Another] is an Eagle with three palms. [A third] has just turned in his Eagle papers this week. The youngest is a Webelos and loves Cub Scouts.

We are always met with loving hearts and warm handshakes. The Christlike attitude of the stake and our ward has helped us through trials we never imagined possible.

Life has been hard, . . . but we put on the whole armor of God as we kneel in family prayer . . . , asking for help and guidance and sharing thanks for the blessings we have received. I pray daily for the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost to guide me as I raise these boys to be missionaries and encourage them to be true to the gospel and the priesthood they hold.

I am proud to say I am a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I know this Church is true. I sustain my Church leaders. We are doing well, and I thank everyone for their love, and prayers, and acceptance.

President Hinckley went on to say: "What a great letter that is! How much it says about the way this Church functions and should function throughout the world. I hope that every woman who finds herself in the kind of circumstances in which this woman lives is similarly blessed with an understanding and helpful bishop, with a Relief Society president who knows how to assist her, with home teachers who know where their duty lies and how to fulfill it, and with a host of ward members who are helpful without being intrusive" ("Women of the Church," 68-69).

Of course, the function of councils need not be limited by time and place. Sometimes the most powerful ministering happens outside the office and at times other than the regularly scheduled meeting time. In one ward, the ward welfare committee felt a need to teach preparedness among ward members. So the council planned and executed an elaborate "preparedness fair," including a variety of presentations and workshops, and followed it with ongoing monthly training. Another ward welfare committee pooled their individual expertise to help a family through a financial crisis. They gathered information, studied details of the family's situation, taught principles of self-reliance, and offered a host of suggestions and options that eventually led the family out of financial bondage. In both of these cases, council members extended themselves beyond their scheduled meetings to bless lives.

As mentioned earlier, the sister leaders can bring to the ward council special insights and impressions that will help solve many of the challenges facing the bishop and members of the ward. The Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary meetings and programs will often be the most effective place to begin the fellowshipping process for members of the ward.

Most stake and ward leaders would be willing to make the concentrated effort needed in their callings as council members if only they knew and understood these important concepts. That is why they must be taught, and this instruction must be ongoing. Implementation of these principles must be emphasized repeatedly, modeled consistently, and monitored closely. But once they become internalized by the members of our Church councils and committees, we will begin to harness the extraordinary power the Lord has promised to those who serve together in His way to accomplish His latter-day work.
