M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 6

Presidencies and Other Small Councils

When Ronald Black was called as a bishop, he felt the blessing of the Lord in two immediate ways. While driving home from the stake president's office, where the call had been extended, he felt a profound sense of love for the people he was being called to serve.

"It was incredible," Bishop Black said. "As soon as I drove into our ward boundaries I felt an overwhelming outpouring of love for everyone in the neighborhood—even people I had never met. I think God was giving me a peek at the extent and power of His love for these good people, and it was a remarkable feeling. And the best part of it was, that feeling has stayed with me throughout my ministry here. I find myself driven to do the things I should do as bishop because I truly love the people I serve, and I acknowledge the hand of God in blessing me with that revelation."

According to Bishop Black, the second great blessing from the Lord was the inspiration that led to the calling of his counselors.

"Although I had been a counselor to the previous bishop, I had no idea how important these two good men would be to me," he said. "Not only do I depend on their advice and support; I have learned that it is difficult for me to function without them. While I hold the spiritual keys in our ward organization, it is clear that the ward operates at its best when the bishopric is 'equally yoked together,' pulling together, working as a team. Whenever I try to go out on my own, the work suffers."

Working Together in Leadership

I can relate to Bishop Black's perspective. When I was called to be a bishop the first time, I was only twenty-nine years old. I had been a counselor to the previous bishop, and we had shared some wonderful experiences together. But I was still quite young and had much to learn. I am thankful that God sent to me two counselors who had much to teach me. They were both considerably older than I and had experienced much more of life. I can't even begin to tell you how much I learned from these great and good men as we counseled together during the course of our shared ministry in the bishopric.

And that's just as it should be. A call to serve in a bishopric or presidency is a call to serve in one of the most important councils in the Church. This is where the tone is set for the entire organization over which the council presides. When Christlike love is evident in bishoprics and presidencies, it has a captivating, engaging, healing effect on the entire organization. Almost without exception, bishoprics, stake presidencies, and auxiliary presidencies who clearly love and respect one another have an almost magnetic effect on those within their reach. Love is contagious; acceptance is balm to the soul. And when warmth and camaraderie are obvious among members of a presidency, similar feelings typically ripple through the entire congregation. Similarly, when bishoprics and presidencies focus on moving forward the mission of the Church, other Church councils in the various organizations follow their lead in working to proclaim the gospel, perfect the Saints, and redeem the dead.

Great things can happen when members of bishoprics and presidencies work together in a meaningful way. Not too long ago I heard about a Beehive class presidency in a small Midwestern ward that became discouraged and concerned because so many girls in their age group had moved away. With the help of their teacher and the encouragement of the second counselor in the bishopric, they decided to take action. They invited their class to devote their fast the next fast Sunday to asking the Lord to send new families with Beehive-age girls to their ward.

Everyone in the class participated. Just two weeks later, a girl who was soon to turn twelve moved into the ward. She had been apprehensive about finding new friends in the ward, and she was greatly relieved to find a group of girls who were ready to welcome her with open arms because they saw her coming as an answer to their prayers. A few weeks later, another girl of Beehive age moved in, and the following month, a third. At an early age these wonderful young women experienced the power that comes when both the leaders and the members of a Church organization focus their faith and prayers toward a common goal. And as this story demonstrates, it is the presidency of the organization that establishes the vision for others to follow.

To some, it may sound unusual or even incorrect to refer to a presidency or bishopric as a council. But that's really what it is—or at least that's what it ought to be. Although the stake president, elders quorum president, or bishop holds priesthood keys and is clearly identified as the person who should make the final decision in all matters, that doesn't mean that he has to have all of the ideas. The same is true of auxiliary presidents, who don't hold priesthood keys but who assume a similar responsibility of leadership within their respective organizations. Wise presidents or bishops will invite their counselors to participate and speak openly. Wise counselors will understand that there are times when they must speak and times when they must support the presidential mantle, which is distinct from any other. Under the direction of the bishop or president, bishopric and presidency meetings (or, in the case of high priests groups, group leadership meetings) should be characterized by free and open discussion of important issues facing the organization. The input of counselors should also be solicited and should be carefully and prayerfully considered before final decisions are made.

Calling Strong Counselors

To bishops and presidents who have a sincere desire to lead their organizations in righteously accomplishing the spiritual and temporal purposes of the Lord, I would offer this suggestion: whenever you are prayerfully considering the call of a new counselor, make sure you look for people who are strong where you feel you are weak. This means you need to have a pretty good understanding of your own strengths and weaknesses as well as the relative abilities—and inabilities—of those whom you are considering to serve with you. A president who is a marvelous motivator but a weak administrator should look for counselors who have strong administrative skills. Similarly, a bishop who is great with Primary children may need a little help from counselors who are more effective than he is at working with the Aaronic Priesthood quorums and the Young Women or in working through administrative details. The Apostle Paul wrote to the Saints in Corinth:

Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.

And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.

And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.

But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues:

But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. (1 Corinthians 12:4-11)

Wise presidents and bishops will recognize and appreciate such diversities of gifts. They will seek to enlarge the capacity of their presidencies, bishoprics, and other councils by involving those who bring gifts and abilities that are not already found therein. As noted earlier, Paul went on to compare the organization of the Church (or, in our context, the Church council) to our physical bodies, stressing the importance of each part to the successful operation of the whole:

But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. . . .

And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary. . . .

Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles?

Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?

But covet earnestly the best gifts. (1 Corinthians 12:18, 21-22; 27-31)

Bishops and presidents would do well to "covet earnestly the best gifts" among those whom they call to serve at their side. Don't be intimidated by those whose native talents and capabilities may be more visible—and may therefore seem more valuable—than your own. Every person has a significant contribution to make. Every person.

When I was called to serve as president of the Canada Toronto Mission, I was overwhelmed by the exciting challenge that lay before me. Still, I was absolutely confident that God could make me equal to the task—except in one respect. When I first entered Canada, I really knew very little about Toronto, and even less about the Church in Ontario. I didn't know where things were, I didn't know where the Church was strong or weak, and I had no idea about the people who could be of most help to me in my ministry there. I am grateful that the Lord inspired me to call as my counselors two extraordinary men who were both mature priesthood leaders with a keen sense of the people and the history that is so important to Latter-day Saints in the Toronto area. These two counselors and their insights and knowledge were invaluable to me and to the work we were performing in Canada. They knew things that I could never have known, and they helped me in ways that I appreciate more with each passing year because they brought into our mission presidency background and experience that I lacked. As a result, our presidency—and, not coincidentally, my ministry as a mission president—was better, fuller, and more complete.

My experiences as a bishop and as a mission president taught me that the role of counselors is vital to the success of any presidency or bishopric. Once again, Moses provides a meaningful illustration of the principle we're discussing. During a great battle between the people of Amalek and the children of Israel, Moses stood on a hill with the rod of God in his hand. "And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun" (Exodus 17:11-12).

In a very real sense, counselors to priesthood and auxiliary leaders serve the same function as Aaron and Hur did for Moses: they support, they sustain, and they keep things steady.

Holding Effective Presidency and Bishopric Meetings

To help bishoprics and presidencies accomplish the mission of the Church through their executive meetings, I would offer several suggestions. First, as we noted in Chapter 3, stay focused on the things that matter most. It's easy to get sidetracked by administrative details, but Church leaders will be much more effective if they will give their primary emphasis to meeting the needs of individuals and families. Specifically, presidencies and bishoprics should concentrate on bringing souls to Christ through the ordinances and covenants of the gospel. President Boyd K. Packer has said:

We urge you now to concentrate on the mission of the Church rather than to merely manage organizations and programs. . . .

You may wonder how to proceed to implement the mission of the Church in the lives of your members. Where should you focus your attention and energy? . . .

We are to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man by concentrating on ordinances and on the covenants associated with them. . . .

If we will set . . . our mind to the words ordinance and covenant, and then look up, light will come through. Then you will know how to fix your position and plot your course. . . .

A good and useful and true test of every major decision made by a leader in the Church is whether a given course leads toward or away from the making and keeping of covenants. . . .

We would do well to see that in administering the organizations of the Church, all roads lead to the temple. For it is there that we are prepared in all things to qualify us to enter the presence of the Lord. (Address at Regional Representatives' seminar, 3 Apr. 1987, 3-5; emphasis added)

To accomplish that, you should see that the written agenda for each executive meeting, especially on the ward or quorum level, focuses mainly on people rather than programs—and then make sure that you follow your agenda. The purposes of the meeting should be clear, and it should start and end on time. If you are the presiding officer, allow sufficient time to discuss people's needs. As you consider each name on the agenda, invite your counselors to suggest ideas and recommendations for helping the person advance through the ordinances and covenants of the gospel. After listening carefully and sincerely to these recommendations, make a decision or assignment that will result in a specific, measurable course of action. It's important to make such decisions prayerfully, and it's also important that you and your counselors are in agreement on the action to be taken.

Of course, it's not enough to simply talk about what should be done. We must also do it. Thus all decisions and assignments should be recorded and should be communicated to those who need to be involved in carrying them out. One member of the bishopric or presidency should be asked to take responsibility for each assignment, and he or she should be asked to "return and report" on an agreed-upon date. (An ongoing assignment list, maintained by your secretary or executive secretary, will enable you to call for a brief accounting on all assignments as their due dates are reached.) Also, when an assignment is delegated, it should normally be communicated in terms of "what" rather than "how"; that is, the person receiving it should be accountable for the result to be achieved rather than the specific methods to be used. This allows him or her to seek inspiration and to exercise creativity, within established Church policies and procedures, in accomplishing the task that has been delegated.

Other Councils in the Church

The structure of the Church includes other important councils. Like bishoprics and presidencies, they are generally smaller than stake and ward councils, but they too have been charged to help accomplish the Lord's work. Among these are auxiliary boards, quorum and group committees, priesthood interviews, and home teaching interviews. The principles and suggestions we've discussed in relation to bishoprics and presidencies also apply in many ways to these other councils.

For example, the bishop interviews the elders quorum president and the high priests group leader at least quarterly to discuss "the progress of individuals and families in the ward." As they counsel together during these meetings, the bishop "offers ward resources to help priesthood leaders fulfill their responsibilities to teach, watch over, and strengthen fathers, families, and single members. The leaders, in turn, offer quorum or group resources to help the members of the bishopric with their responsibilities" (Melchizedek Priesthood Leadership Handbook, 22).

Similarly, quorum and group committees are formed to carry out the threefold mission of the Church. Melchizedek Priesthood leaders are instructed to "organize three committees to help their members proclaim the gospel, perfect the Saints, and redeem the dead. When used properly, these committees can reduce the work load of priesthood leaders and provide meaningful participation for members. . . . A member of the quorum presidency or group leadership supervises each committee" (ibid., 10).

Speaking of the organization of Melchizedek Priesthood quorums, President Stephen L Richards once said:

Now, brethren of priesthood quorum presidencies: You need those councils, and I have no hesitancy in giving you the assurance, if you will confer in council as you are expected to do, God will give you solutions to the problems that confront you with reference to your quorums. And he will enable you to find ways and means of approaching the men whom you would like to reach to bring them into accord with your quorum, and have them enjoy its spirit. . . . No matter how many committees you appoint, the quorum presidency is responsible for every man in the quorum; and I am sure you cannot be relieved of that responsibility, although you will want the help of all those who may come to your assistance. (In Conference Report, Oct. 1953, 86)

"To Agree upon My Word"

I believe that we sometimes overlook the importance of one kind of priesthood council that has tremendous power to bring individuals and families to Christ: the home teaching interview. It is primarily through these interviews that quorum and group leaders can provide vision and guidance to the priesthood home teaching program, which is "the Lord's way of watching over the Saints. Through home teaching, priesthood brethren are joined in partnership with the Lord in bringing about His purposes" (Melchizedek Priesthood Leadership Handbook, 5).

I refer to the home teaching interview as a priesthood council because of its sacred purpose—and because of the Savior's promise that "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." When we read that promise in its scriptural context, we can see that it applies specifically to those who meet together for the purpose of learning what the Lord would have them do: "Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them" (Matthew 18:19-20; emphasis added). And He made the same promise to His latter-day servants: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, as I said unto my disciples, where two or three are gathered together in my name, as touching one thing, behold, there will I be in the midst of them—even so am I in the midst of you" (D&C 6:32; emphasis added).

Counseling together to agree on the Lord's will seems to be an important theme in the scriptures. Consider this revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "For verily I say, as ye have assembled yourselves together according to the commandment wherewith I commanded you, and are agreed as touching this one thing, and have asked the Father in my name, even so ye shall receive" (D&C 42:3; emphasis added). And again: "Hearken, O ye elders of my church whom I have called, behold I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall assemble yourselves together to agree upon my word; and by the prayer of your faith ye shall receive my law, that ye may know how to govern my church and have all things right before me" (D&C 41:2-3; emphasis added).

That describes exactly the purpose of the home teaching interview. Its only function is to enable the priesthood leader and the home teacher to prayerfully counsel together and agree on a course of action that will help individual quorum members and their families "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moroni 10:32). President Ezra Taft Benson said: "We call upon quorum leaders to conduct spiritual monthly home teaching interviews, receive a report on the home teachers' activities, evaluate current needs, make assignments for the coming month, and teach, strengthen, and inspire the home teachers in their sacred callings. Such interviews with home teachers provide a setting for leaders to measure progress and better serve the individuals and members they have been called to serve" ("To the Home Teachers of the Church," 51).

It takes tremendous vision and commitment for Melchizedek Priesthood leaders to fulfill that charge, but it can be done. A young elders quorum president related some of the events that helped him discover the value of home teaching interviews:

When I was first called as the quorum president, I don't think I really had a testimony of home teaching interviews, and I guess my attitude rubbed off on my counselors and the members of the quorum. We didn't schedule the interviews as often as we should have, and when we did try to hold them, most of the home teachers weren't very excited about coming. One of them even asked, "What do we need to talk about that we can't cover in a two-minute phone call?"

In one of my quarterly interviews with the stake president, I mentioned the problem we were having. We talked about it for a while, and he helped me understand why we were having a hard time getting the brethren to show up for home teaching interviews. He had me read a verse in the Doctrine and Covenants that said a priesthood leader's duty is to "sit in council" with his quorum members and "teach them according to the covenants" (D&C 107:89). Then he explained that the real agenda of the home teaching interview is to agree on the "next step" to help each quorum member come unto Christ.

He said our presidency would have more success if we would focus every interview on this question: "What does the Lord want us to do in the next thirty days to help each brother and his family move closer to the ordinances and covenants of the temple?" He also suggested some ways to follow up on the decisions and assignments we make in the interviews.

In our next quorum presidency meeting, I talked with my counselors about my discussion with the stake president. We agreed to hold more regular interviews and to try a different approach. I remember that we had to reorganize three or four home teaching assignments that night, and we were a lot more careful about it than usual. When we prayed about our decisions at the end of the meeting, we all felt good about them. I think it was during that presidency meeting that things really started to change in our quorum.

That Sunday, instead of just handing out the new assignments like we usually did, we interviewed every home teacher who had a new assignment and explained what we were trying to accomplish. Some of them were more enthusiastic than others, but I especially remember the interview I had with Gary Martinez. Gary was the one who thought we should do our interviews over the phone, so I was a little nervous about asking him to meet with me, but he didn't seem to mind.

After we knelt down and had a prayer, I spent a few minutes telling Gary about his new families. One of the men on the list was Ed Barker, who had just moved into the ward a few weeks before. I told Gary that we were "calling him on a mission" to help Ed become an elder and take his family to the temple. I told him that my counselors and I had prayed about it, and we felt that he was the man the Lord wanted as the home teacher for that family. Gary said he would do his best, and he seemed to mean it. I asked him if he would come for a home teaching interview every month so we could talk about ways to reach our goal with Ed. He smiled when I said that, but he agreed to come.

One of the reasons we assigned Gary as Ed's home teacher was that they both liked to work on cars, so it was pretty easy for Gary to spend time at Ed's house. In our interviews, Gary and I talked about the "next step" to help the Barkers get to the temple, and I could see he was taking his "mission call" seriously. Our first step, with a lot of help from the Primary presidency, was getting Ed's nine-year-old boy into the Cub Scout program. After that, Gary got Ed and his wife, Julie, to come to church a couple of times. One month he got Ed to say a prayer, and a few weeks later the Barkers came to his house for a family home evening. I always wrote down the goal we agreed on, and in the next interview Gary told me whether he was able to accomplish it. Most of the time he was successful, but not every time.

About seven or eight months after Gary started, and after a discussion I had with the bishop, I felt it was time for Ed to be invited to prepare himself and his family to go to the temple. I remember the interview when Gary and I talked about that. He looked really serious and seemed a little worried, but he said he would do it. We knelt and prayed about it, and the Spirit was really strong. I told him that the whole ward council would be praying for him and the Barkers that month, which we did.

Ed and Julie agreed to attend our temple preparation seminar, and Ed was ordained an elder at the next stake conference. He even asked Gary to ordain him. But the day that meant the most to all of us was the Saturday that Ed and Julie and their son were sealed in the temple for time and all eternity. Ed and Gary are both pretty big men, but they shed a lot of tears when they hugged each other in the sealing room that day.

In our next interview, Gary and I just talked about what had happened over the last year and what it meant to both of us. He told me, "When you asked me to talk with Ed about taking his family to the temple, I was pretty scared. When we prayed about it, I knew it was right—but I also knew I couldn't do it by myself. I really needed the Lord's help. And I think He did help me. While I was sitting in the sealing room watching the Barkers, I suddenly realized that I had been an instrument in His hands to help bring them to the Savior and the temple. It was just like we talked about in our interviews. Thanks for giving me the chance to do this. It's been one of the best experiences of my life."

Since then, I've never had any trouble getting Gary to come to home teaching interviews. In fact, he's one of the most faithful home teachers in our quorum—and so is Ed.

President James E. Faust has said: "We must do all in our power to ensure that no member of the Church departs this earth without having received the necessary ordinances and covenants of the temple. . . . As we keep our temple covenants, we place the Savior at the center of our lives, develop greater love for others, receive protection from evil influences, and obtain spiritual strength, happiness, peace of mind, and eternal life" (address at Regional Representatives' seminar, 1 Apr. 1988; quoted in Church News, 9 Apr. 1988, 5).

Every kind of Church council, whether large or small, is truly vital to this sacred work of bringing souls to the Lord. May He bless each of us as we fulfill our stewardships in His latter-day kingdom, acting under the direction of His Spirit and implementing the divine pattern He has revealed through His prophets.
