M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 7

Disciplinary Councils

The longer I live, the more profoundly grateful I am that the Lord has given us a plan to help us grow and progress. As part of this plan, He has given guidance on how we can overcome serious error and sin. His desire is that all of His children return to Him, that all partake of the precious fruit of eternal life (see Ezekiel 18:21-23).

In God's mercy to His children, His plan provides every opportunity for those who fall into transgression to find forgiveness. The repentance process isn't always easy; in many cases it can be accomplished only through official Church discipline. And so God has inspired the establishment of another important Church council: the disciplinary council. For the next few pages I would like to discuss this remarkable tool of love. This is not intended as a complete overview of disciplinary councils, but rather a collection of feelings, impressions, and counsel about this sacred subject. Priesthood leaders are referred to the General Handbook of Instructions for a thorough outline of disciplinary policy and procedure.

Both the Lord and those who represent Him in His Church stand ready with open arms to welcome back all who stray. The First Presidency has extended this special invitation:

In deep sincerity we express our love and gratitude for our brethren and sisters everywhere. We are aware of some who are inactive, of others who have become critical and are prone to find fault, and of those who have been disfellowshipped or excommunicated because of serious transgressions. To all such we reach out in love. We are anxious to forgive. . . . We encourage Church members to forgive those who may have wronged them. To those who have ceased activity and to those who have become critical, we say, "Come back. Come back and feast at the table of the Lord, and taste again the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints." ("An Invitation to Come Back," 3)

When members need to have certain blessings withheld, the Lord's object is to teach as well as to discipline. Ward and stake disciplinary councils held to impose Church disciplinary measures are incomplete until they are followed by councils of reinstatement and reunion. Although the work of these councils is less public and less generally applicable than other stake and ward councils, it is nonetheless significant in the lives of individuals and families within the Church, and it requires some specific and pointed consideration.

I remember that as a child I occasionally came unkempt to the dinner table. My mother wisely sent me out of the room to clean up and then return. My parents would have been pained if I had taken offense and had run off—and I would have been foolish to do so. In the same way, the servants of the Lord occasionally find that they must, in loving concern, send some of Heavenly Father's children out the door so they can return clean once again. The Lord does not want us to "miss supper." In fact, He has a great feast prepared for those who return clean and pure through the door. He is greatly saddened when anyone decides to be unclean and miss the meal, finds an excuse to take offense, or runs away. He is pleased to extend the chance to start over.

I've known a few rebellious people who disregard the commandments and who transgress God's laws. I've seen their resultant distress and pain. I've also seen their joy when, humbled and fully repentant, they have returned to the Church and have had all of their priesthood and temple blessings restored.

Some time ago I was asked by the First Presidency to visit a man on my way to a stake conference. This man had been excommunicated from the Church, had fully repented, and had been found worthy to be readmitted into the Church by baptism. But baptism alone had not restored his priesthood and temple blessings. That was my assignment, acting on behalf of the Lord at the direction of the President of the Church.

The stake president, the Regional Representative, and I found the man lying in a hospital bed suffering from a disease that left him unable to move or speak. On seeing him, I realized that it would be impossible to conduct the customary interview. Instead, I felt impressed that I should interview his wife, who was there with him. We found a vacant room in the hospital, and I had a wonderful visit with this stalwart woman, the mother of eight. She had stood by her husband, remaining true and faithful through all his struggles and difficulties. Now she, like her husband, greatly desired that he have his blessings restored.

As we walked back into the husband's room, I asked his wife to help me communicate with him. During the two years that his body had deteriorated from disease, he had developed a way to communicate with his eyes. I leaned over his bed and said, "I am Elder Ballard. I have been sent here by the President of the Church. I am authorized to restore your blessings. Would you like that?" I quickly saw I wouldn't need the help of his wife. Tears filled his eyes and ran down his cheeks in affirmative response.

I placed my hands on his head and, using terminology associated with this ordinance, restored to him the Melchizedek Priesthood. He sobbed—perhaps the first sounds he had made in some time. I restored his office in the priesthood. Then I restored to him, by the power of the priesthood, the holy endowment that he had received when he went through the temple for the first time. Last, I restored what was perhaps most valuable to him—his sealing to his wife and children.

As the blessings concluded, we were all filled with emotion. I looked at his wife and had the impression that I was to bless her also. I said, "Sister, would you like us to give you a blessing?"

"Oh, I would love a blessing, Brother Ballard," she said. "I have not had a blessing in a long time."

I asked her to sit down; then the other priesthood leaders joined me in placing our hands upon her head. But when I tried to bless her, the words would not come. Suddenly, I realized what was blocking the Spirit. We took our hands off her head, and I said, "Brethren, let's move her chair closer to the bed." We pushed her chair over where I could lift her husband's hand and place it on her head. As we proceeded again with the blessing, the words flowed. Blessings were given; conviction and comfort came.

I have since thought what a marvelous lesson that experience teaches us. This man had sinned, and a loving Heavenly Father had required that he repent so he could be worthy to be once again numbered among the Saints. He had subsequently done our Heavenly Father's will; he had turned his life around; he had repented. Now, back in the Church and continuing to progress, he was worthy to have his greatest blessings restored. And he was able to use his restored priesthood immediately, participating in giving his wife a special priesthood blessing.

Disciplinary Options

When a bishop (or, in some cases, a stake president) learns of a transgression, usually through the confession of the member involved, he first counsels with the member. When the sin is not grievous, the bishop may decide through inspiration that no disciplinary action is needed. He may continue to give counsel and caution, helping the member resist temptation and avoid further transgression.

Another option the bishop has is to place the member on informal probation, temporarily restricting his privileges as a Church member—such as the right to partake of the sacrament, hold a Church position, or enter the temple. In addition, he may require the member to make specific positive changes in attitude or behavior, read selected scriptures and Church literature, and attend Church meetings. No official record is made or kept of an informal probation. The bishop maintains close contact with the member and may terminate the probation period when he is prompted to do so.

In these cases, informal Church discipline may negate the need for formal disciplinary action and therefore the convening of a formal council. Since repentance and reformation are the primary objectives of most Church disciplinary action, the bishop or stake president may feel that the person has done or is doing everything necessary to repent and that a disciplinary council would serve no useful purpose.

On the other hand, the spirit of inspiration or the seriousness of the transgression may move or require the Church leader to convene a disciplinary council. A disciplinary council is mandatory for certain serious, specified offenses, such as murder and incest, and also for a serious transgression committed by a member holding a prominent position in the Church. In this context, a serious transgression means a major offense against morality, including attempted murder, rape, forcible sexual abuse, intentionally inflicting serious physical injuries on others, adultery, fornication, homosexual relations, child abuse (sexual or physical), spouse abuse, deliberate abandonment of family responsibilities, robbery, burglary, embezzlement, theft, sale of illegal drugs, fraud, perjury, or false swearing.

In the scriptures, the Lord has given direction concerning Church disciplinary councils (see D&C 102). The word council in this sense brings to mind a helpful proceeding—one of love and concern, with the salvation and blessing of the transgressor being the foremost consideration.

The Purpose of Disciplinary Councils

Members sometimes ask why Church disciplinary councils are held. The purpose is threefold: (1) to save the soul of the transgressor; (2) to protect the innocent; and (3) to safeguard the Church's purity, integrity, and good name.

The First Presidency has instructed that disciplinary councils must be held in cases of murder, incest, apostasy, or advocating and teaching apostate and anti-Church doctrines. In addition to these cases and those involving a prominent Church leader, a disciplinary council must be held when the transgressor is a predator who may be a threat to other persons, when the person shows a pattern of repeated serious transgressions, or when a serious transgression is widely known.

Although not mandatory for persons not holding a prominent position in the Church, disciplinary councils should also be considered for other Church members who commit serious transgressions such as those listed above.

Disciplinary councils are not called to try civil or criminal cases; in fact, criminal charges may or may not necessitate Church discipline. The decision of a civil court may help determine whether a Church disciplinary council should be convened. However, a civil court's decision does not dictate the decision of a disciplinary council.

Disciplinary councils are not held for such things as failure to pay tithing, to obey the Word of Wisdom, to attend church, or to receive home teachers. They are not held because of business failure or nonpayment of debts. They are not designed to settle disputes among members. Nor are they held for members who demand that their names be removed from Church records, unless a member who has committed a serious transgression is requesting name removal to avoid the possibility of excommunication or disfellowshipment. The removal of a person's name from the records of the Church is a very serious step but is handled as an administrative action.

The bishopric, in consultation with the stake president, has the responsibility and authority to hold disciplinary councils for ward members. However, if excommunication of a Melchizedek Priesthood holder is thought to be likely, the matter is referred to the stake presidency, who, with the assistance of the high council, may convene a stake disciplinary council in behalf of the Melchizedek Priesthood holder.

If a member feels he or she has been treated unfairly by a Church disciplinary council, an appeal can be made. An appeal of a decision of a ward disciplinary council goes to the stake presidency and high council. Any further appeals go to the First Presidency for consideration.

Missions, districts, and branches have jurisdiction similar to that of stakes and wards, with mission presidents having jurisdiction over the missionaries and over branch members in mission districts.

How Disciplinary Councils Function

After appropriate notice and scheduling, a disciplinary council begins with an opening prayer, followed by a statement from the presiding officer or his designated representative regarding the reported misconduct. If the member denies the reported misconduct, the evidence of the misconduct is presented. The member then presents his witnesses and evidence and makes any comments or statements he wants to make regarding his feelings and what steps of repentance, if any, he has taken. After responding to clarifying questions from the council, the member is excused, and the leaders counsel and pray together. Ultimately the decision rests with the presiding officer, who decides through inspiration. Other priesthood leaders involved are asked to sustain the decision, and differences of opinion, if any, are resolved.

The council takes into consideration many factors, such as whether temple or marriage covenants have been violated; whether a position of trust or authority has been abused; the repetition, seriousness, and magnitude of the transgression; the age, maturity, and experience of the transgressor; the interests of innocent victims and innocent family members; the time between transgression and confession; whether or not confession was voluntary; and evidence of repentance.

Those who sit on the council are to keep everything strictly confidential and to handle the matter in a spirit of love. That includes being respectful and dignified throughout the disciplinary process. Can you imagine how it would feel, if you were a repentant person awaiting a final decision from the stake presidency, to hear loud speaking or laughter coming from the high council room? Whether or not such laughter or conversation has anything to do with the situation at hand, it is unbecoming and inappropriate. Remember, the objective of the council is not retribution; it is to help the member make the changes necessary to stand clean before God once more. Those who come before any Church disciplinary council are entitled to be treated with respect and courtesy.

When a member accused of wrongdoing comes before a disciplinary council, the council can reach one of four decisions: (1) no action, (2) formal probation, (3) disfellowshipment, or (4) excommunication.

Even if a transgression has been committed, the council may decide to take no action at that time. (The member would be encouraged to receive further counsel from his or her bishop.)

Formal probation is a temporary state of discipline, imposed as a means to help the member fully repent. The presiding officer of the council specifies conditions under which the probation can be terminated. During the probation, the bishop or stake president keeps in close contact to help the individual progress.

Like formal probation, disfellowshipment is usually a temporary form of discipline to aid in the repentance process. Disfellowshipped persons retain membership in the Church. They are encouraged to attend public Church meetings but are not entitled to offer public prayers or give talks. They may not hold a Church position, partake of the sacrament, vote in the sustaining of Church officers, hold a temple recommend, or exercise the priesthood. They may, however, pay tithes and offerings and continue to wear the temple garment if endowed.

Excommunication is the most severe judgment a Church disciplinary council can impose. Excommunicated persons are no longer members of the Church. Therefore, they are denied the privileges of Church membership, including the wearing of the temple garment and the payment of tithes and offerings. They may attend public Church meetings, but, like disfellowshipped persons, they cannot participate. Excommunicated persons are encouraged to repent and to live in such a way that they may eventually qualify to become baptized members once again.

Great consideration is given regarding the confidentiality of the decisions of a Church disciplinary council. No announcement is ever made when a member is placed on formal probation. Decisions to disfellowship or excommunicate are generally not announced publicly unless the transgression is widely known, the transgressor's behavior constitutes a threat to the Church or the community, or an announcement is necessary to dispel rumors. Even when an announcement is made, it is limited to a general statement of the outcome.

Facilitating Change through Councils

Church disciplinary action is not intended to be the end of the process—rather, it is designed to be the beginning of a course that will bring the offender back to full fellowship and to the full blessings of the Church. Priesthood leaders try hard to be sensitive to the disciplined person's need for understanding, encouragement, counsel, and assistance. They work to see that he or she has regular visits with his or her bishop; that mature, caring home teachers or others are assigned to help; and that family members receive the attention, counsel, and fellowship they need during the difficult period while the discipline is imposed.

The desired result is that the person will make whatever changes are necessary to return fully and completely and to be able to receive the marvelous blessings of the Church. When the person has progressed to that point, the current bishop or stake president—even if the person is now living in a new ward or stake or if a new bishopric or stake presidency is now serving—has the authority to convene a new disciplinary council to consider taking action to resolve the discipline.

After an excommunicated person has been baptized again, the membership record will show the original baptism and ordinance dates with no reference to the excommunication. In the case of certain offenses, the approval of the First Presidency is required before a person can be readmitted by baptism. A man who previously held the priesthood but was not endowed should generally be ordained to his former priesthood office. Again, his membership record will show his original ordination date and will contain no reference to the excommunication.

A person who was endowed in the temple before being excommunicated may regain priesthood or temple blessings only through the ordinance of restoration of blessings. This is a special ordinance performed by a General Authority as authorized and directed by the First Presidency. Afterward, a new membership record is created, showing the original dates of baptism, endowment, sealing, and priesthood ordinations. As in the cases mentioned above, no reference to the excommunication is found on the newly created record.

Our Father in Heaven is pleased to have former blessings restored to His sons and daughters when they have demonstrated sincere and complete repentance.

Reaching Out to the Penitent

The trauma of being disfellowshipped or excommunicated from the Church will likely never be fully understood by those who have never experienced it.

"The shock I felt was terrible," said one man. "But I knew it was the Lord's will. I could feel the spirit of concern among the brethren in the room as I was told the decision of the council. I felt only love and compassion."

Still, the pain was hard to bear. "Left to cope with the anguish and grief inside me," he said, "I cried, I prayed, I lay awake at night afraid that I would lose my wife and children forever. Although I continued to counsel with my bishop, I felt alone, with rebellion in my heart many times and feelings of guilt because of this rebellion.

"As I look back now, working through each personal challenge was terribly difficult but necessary, and the whole process was a great blessing to me. Repentance is something that each individual must find for himself or herself in process of time."

Another who was excommunicated explained his feelings this way: "Eternal progression is a great blessing. It is like swimming in a river where the goal is the pure headwaters of the river. The important thing about progression is not where you are in the river but that you are swimming upstream. After drifting so far downstream because of sin, it feels good to be free of sin's great weight and to be able to begin swimming toward my spiritual headwaters once again."

Friends and family are vitally important for an individual who is struggling to return to the gospel path. Those who are around such a person must refrain from judging. They must do all they can to show love. The Lord has commanded, "Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:9-10).

A woman who had been a Relief Society president tells of the love and support she received during a painful period of disfellowshipment: "When the brethren of the bishopric listened to me, I could feel love as I had never felt it before. They all wept with me."

Although she initially felt as if her heart would "break into a million pieces," the next day a comforting spirit returned, and she realized that she would not be abandoned.

One of the most difficult things for her was going to church the next Sunday, even though it was much easier than she had thought. The bishop made a point of welcoming her. With words and without, the bishopric who had participated on the council expressed their concern and love. No one else knew. "There was no sign of disrespect," she said.

As the weeks and months passed, she found that her pain and suffering were actually aiding the cleansing and healing process. In fact, her pain and suffering served a necessary purpose in the process of healing. And the pain that her family experienced was relieved somewhat through the kind and thoughtful attention extended to them by others.

With agony she acknowledges, "Every member of the Church must realize that he or she is capable of sinning. How I have paid for fooling myself about what I was doing!"

Protecting Ourselves from Sin

We must constantly guard our thoughts. Serious sin almost always begins with unworthy thoughts. Some years ago at the direction of the First Presidency, I interviewed a man for the restoration of his priesthood and temple blessings. This brother had been excommunicated while serving in an important calling in his ward. While we visited, I asked him, "How did this all happen?"

In very sober terms he said, "It all began when I picked up a pornographic magazine and read it. From this subtle beginning, I was led to more and more erotic things—including R- and X-rated films and videotapes—until I committed adultery with a prostitute."

He continued: "As I look back, I can hardly believe I did those awful things. But I did them, and it all started by reading a pornographic magazine. Brother Ballard, tell the Saints to be careful about what they read and what they see on television, movies, and videos."

Another young man who found himself in much the same circumstance later attributed his return to the Church to several friends and ward members who took him under their collective wing and helped him to feel that his was a soul worth saving. The elders quorum president, in particular, along with his entire family, befriended this man and his wife. They made the distressed couple feel loved, needed, and valued, and helped the man feel welcome at Church.

A sister who was disciplined after years of faithful service and devotion to the Church said: "I had no idea I was capable of committing such a serious transgression. I had assumed that if I knew something was wrong, I would never do it. Little did I understand the sometimes strange dynamics of human behavior, or what I was capable of."

Never forget that. Satan is real, and he has the power to "grasp" mortals "with his everlasting chains . . . and [lead] them away carefully down to hell" (2 Nephi 28:19, 21). Ward and stake disciplinary councils are an important part of God's plan to redeem His children from the chains of sin. All who serve on those councils or who work with loved ones who have been disciplined need to remember to love without judging; to be sensitive and thoughtful without prying; to be warm and caring without being condescending; to be forgiving and forgetful. Above all else, we need to remember that the Lord has said, "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more" (D&C 58:42).

Since we have all become spiritually unclean to one degree or another because of sin, and therefore have need of the atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, can we be justified in doing any less?
