M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 8

Family Councils

When a friend of mine became president of a junior college, he moved with his wife and three children to the president's home near the college campus. Without a mortgage payment, he decided that the family could afford to purchase a new car. But instead of engaging himself in the normal process of test-driving cars, negotiating with dealers, and purchasing the car, he elected to use a family council to make the decision.

"He introduced the idea to our family in a home evening," one of his sons recalls. "The three children, all of whom were in elementary school, as well as our mother, were asked for opinions, advice, preferences, and ideas. We came to the conclusion that we didn't have enough information to make a good decision, so we began the process of gathering information about new cars, which we could review together."

My friend brought home brochures, pictures, and even slides of new cars. The children visited the library, combed through magazine and newspaper advertisements, and talked to friends about car preferences. In another home evening, the family shared the information they had gleaned and began to narrow their focus on the model of car they would consider. Then the family took several trips together to dealerships, where they all piled in for test drives.

Eventually, the family settled on a make and model. But that was only the beginning of the decision-making process. There were still colors and options to consider. And so each family member was given an opportunity to explain preferences as to features, and votes were taken regarding colors and options.

"As it turned out," one son explained, "the majority opinion fell upon a metallic pink car with a powder blue interior. Mom got to pick the type of fabric for the seats, but I think she was outvoted on the color scheme."

Because few auto dealers carry pink cars with powder blue interiors, a special order was placed with the automobile manufacturer in Detroit. While they awaited the arrival of their new car, the family continued to counsel with each other as they planned the vacation they would take to inaugurate their beautiful new pink-and-blue family member. Following the same pattern of gathering information, expressing preferences, and counseling as a family council, they decided on a trip through Yellowstone Park and the Grand Tetons.

"It was a great car and a great trip," one of the children said. "I don't think any of us will ever forget them—or how they came to be."

That these events occurred in 1957 and are still remembered so fondly attests to the potential power of the family council in strengthening family bonds, building family unity, and creating wonderful memories.

Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explained that the family council meeting is an ideal setting to teach children "how to prepare for their roles as family members and prospective parents." In family councils, he said, mothers and fathers can provide training in such topics as "temple preparation, missionary preparation, home management, family finances, career development, education, community involvement, cultural improvement, acquisition and care of real and personal property, family planning calendars, use of leisure time, and work assignments." He also suggested that before family members come together to discuss matters as a council, parents could profit by holding "a family executive committee meeting to plan family strategy. The executive committee, composed of a husband and wife, would meet together to fully communicate, discuss, plan, and prepare for their leadership role in the family organization" ("'For Whatsoever a Man Soweth, That Shall He Also Reap,'" 9).

Like other councils, the family council can be a positive, causative force in the lives of Church members. It can help bring order to the home, provide a forum for soothing hurt feelings, give parents an important tool with which to combat outside influences, and create an opportunity to teach profound gospel truths. But like other councils, the family council will be effective only to the extent that it is properly formed and implemented. Indeed, the principles that govern family councils are basically the same as the principles that govern Church councils. Their overall objective is identical. We want for our families the same thing Heavenly Father desires for His family: "immortality and eternal life" (Moses 1:39). We want to develop loving relationships that will extend beyond this life.

Some time ago, I found myself surprisingly short of breath after climbing a small hill. Concerned, I visited my doctor, and before I knew it I was lying in a bed in the LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City. My doctor informed me that it would be necessary for me to have open-heart bypass surgery. The surgeon came into my room at 11:00 a.m. and explained what would be involved. As he left my room he said, "Gather your family around you before the operation."

I didn't pay as much attention to that instruction as I should have. When he came back at 2:00 p.m. to see me again, he asked, "Have you arranged to have your family here with you?" "Well, no," I said. "I haven't."

He looked at me as only a surgeon who understood what I was facing could look at me and repeated his earlier admonition: "Gather your family around you."

It wasn't until that moment that I began to understand that this surgery might be a little more complex than I anticipated. So I called for my family to come and be with me for a special family council, where a very interesting thing occurred. When they were all standing around my hospital bed, I felt an overwhelming desire to give instruction to the children in the event that something should happen to me. The main thing on my mind was that they should take care of their mother, and the second was that they should take care of each other. Nothing in our lives is more important than each other, and we must look for and capture opportunities to counsel together. Because of the wise counsel I received from my friend and surgeon, my family and I shared a binding moment in life that will live as a precious memory for all of us throughout eternity. Regardless of how difficult some challenges may be, we need to work through them with each other.

We read in the revelations, "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8). Further, the Lord instructed His nineteenth-century followers to "organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (D&C 88:119). Although these scriptural verses refer specifically to God's holy temples, the same principles can and should be applied within the walls of our own homes. Family councils, led by righteous, loving parents who are striving to teach their children to love and respect each other, can make a difference in creating a sense of discipline, order, and loving cooperation in the home.

The Proclamation on the Family

In 1995 the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles issued a significant document called the Proclamation on the Family. Only five times in the history of the Church have the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles felt it necessary to make a proclamation to the world on any subject, so you can be sure that this eternal organization we call the family is of extraordinary importance in our Heavenly Father's kingdom. Consider once again the words of the document as it pertains to our discussion of Church councils and family councils:

We, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, solemnly proclaim that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children.

All human beings—male and female—are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny. Gender is an essential characteristic of individual premortal, mortal, and eternal identity and purpose.

In the premortal realm, spirit sons and daughters knew and worshipped God as their Eternal Father and accepted His plan by which His children could obtain a physical body and gain earthly experience to progress toward perfection and ultimately realize his or her divine destiny as an heir of eternal life. The divine plan of happiness enables family relationships to be perpetuated beyond the grave. Sacred ordinances and covenants available in holy temples make it possible for individuals to return to the presence of God and for families to be united eternally.

The first commandment that God gave to Adam and Eve pertained to their potential for parenthood as husband and wife. We declare that God's commandment for His children to multiply and replenish the earth remains in force. We further declare that God has commanded that the sacred powers of procreation are to be employed only between man and woman, lawfully wedded as husband and wife.

We declare the means by which mortal life is created to be divinely appointed. We affirm the sanctity of life and of its importance in God's eternal plan.

Husband and wife have a solemn responsibility to love and care for each other and for their children. 'Children are an heritage of the Lord' (Psalm 127:3). Parents have a sacred duty to rear their children in love and righteousness, to provide for their physical and spiritual needs, to teach them to love and serve one another, to observe the commandments of God and to be law-abiding citizens wherever they live. Husbands and wives—mothers and fathers—will be held accountable before God for the discharge of these obligations.

The family is ordained of God. Marriage between man and woman is essential to His eternal plan. Children are entitled to birth within the bonds of matrimony, and to be reared by a father and a mother who honor marital vows with complete fidelity. Happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Successful marriages and families are established and maintained on principles of faith, prayer, repentance, forgiveness, respect, love, compassion, work, and wholesome recreational activities. By divine design, fathers are to preside over their families in love and righteousness and are responsible to provide the necessities of life and protection for their families. Mothers are primarily responsible for the nurture of their children. In these sacred responsibilities, fathers and mothers are obligated to help one another as equal partners. Disability, death, or other circumstances may necessitate individual adaptation. Extended families should lend support when needed.

We warn that individuals who violate covenants of chastity, who abuse spouse or offspring, or who fail to fulfill family responsibilities will one day stand accountable before God. Further, we warn that the disintegration of the family will bring upon individuals, communities, and nations the calamities foretold by ancient and modern prophets.

We call upon responsible citizens and officers of government everywhere to promote those measures designed to maintain and strengthen the family as the fundamental unit of society.

Can anyone read and consider those words and not sense the unparalleled significance of the home and family in accomplishing God's will in the lives of all of His children? There never was a time when the world was in greater need of the strength and security that is best sown and cultivated within the deep, fertile soil of familial love. And there never was a time when the family was under heavier attack from worldly antagonists bent on extinguishing a powerful source of light against adversarial darkness. In these perilous times, successful families are built with a wide assortment of tools. And one of the most useful tools in the tool box is the family council, both as a regularly scheduled meeting and as special needs arise. It is in our family councils that we plan family activities, share in one another's burdens and joys, and counsel together toward keeping each family member on the right track spiritually.

Sharing Burdens and Joys through Family Councils

When members of one family began to feel that an unusual amount of contention was invading their home, a family council was called to discuss the situation. "I began by explaining what I had observed and how I felt about it," said the father. "My wife did the same. Then each of our seven children remaining at home, from the oldest to the youngest, had a chance to express his or her feelings."

The mother and father learned that since their two oldest children had left home, one to be married and one to go to college, an unfair burden of responsibility had been unwittingly shifted to the two oldest children remaining at home. The council resulted in a more equitable distribution of responsibility among the children—and a significant reduction in family frustration levels.

A similar thing happened elsewhere for a family of seven children. "As you might expect, with seven children I often used to find myself frustrated by problems that are common to day-to-day living," the mother said. "Occasionally I felt overwhelmed, and then discouragement would set in. Those feelings always passed, but I did wonder if we would ever make any real progress toward becoming the kind of family that we felt we should be."

Then the parents heard one of the Brethren teach that the basic council of the Church is the family council.

"This hit me with great force," the mother said. "After I discussed it with my husband, we decided to try using family councils in our home. We explained it to the children and began holding family councils every Sunday night.

"I have been amazed and delighted by the results," she continued. "One by one, we have begun to tackle problems we see in our family. We aren't a perfect family by any means, but for the first time I can see that we are starting to make real progress. And when problems do crop up, I just make a note, as other family members do, and we take these notes to the next family council. We discuss them and deal with them there."

Too often family councils are held only when the parents feel there are problems—and when parents think they have all the answers. Just as presidents and bishops in other Church councils err if they believe that it is their responsibility to come up with all of the answers to the problems and concerns facing their respective organizations, parents are missing valuable insight and inspiration if they choose not to give due consideration to the ideas their children bring to the family council. Remember, although children never have the right to be disrespectful to their parents, they are entitled to be heard. They need a calm setting where discussion can take place on rules or principles they do not understand and where they will be listened to. Family councils are ideal forums for effective communication to take place. Family rules and procedures are more likely to be accepted and followed if all family members have been given the opportunity to participate in the discussions and agree to the rules.

One couple was troubled when one of their teenage daughters seemed to be going out of her way to choose friends whose values and standards were different from the values and standards of the family and the Church. They were particularly distressed to see a relationship developing between their daughter and a young man with a questionable reputation. They tried to battle the adversarial influence coming into their daughter's life by imposing a series of new family rules, threats, and disciplinary measures. But these only served to heighten the tension and contention in the home.

At last the parents decided to form a special family council that consisted of them and their oldest daughter, who was a year older than the young woman who was struggling. "Tears flowed from all of us as we shared our love for each other and our fears about the direction in which our second daughter was heading," the father said. "Our oldest daughter gently suggested that we needed to stop criticizing her sister's friendships, thereby driving them—and her—away from our home. She recommended that we create a friendly environment in our home that would encourage our daughter to bring her friends there, where perhaps we could have a positive influence on them."

After much thought, fasting, and prayer, the special family council came up with a plan: they would try to be as positive as they could be and would try to find the good in their daughter's friends. "We wanted to become friends with her friends so that they would not be quite so inclined to encourage her to resist us," the father said. "We also encouraged her to invite her friends to visit at our home often so that we could keep an eye on things while her need to socialize with them was satisfied."

The special family council also decided to invite the full-time missionaries over for dinner more often. "As our daughter came to know and trust the missionaries, it was a natural and logical thing for us to suggest that she invite her friends to take the missionary discussions," the father said. "We complimented her, telling her that she was the only active missionary in our family because she was the only one who had non-LDS friends to whom we could introduce the gospel."

The resulting missionary experiences were mixed. When the missionaries taught the best friend of the couple's daughter, they said it was one of the most spiritual lessons they had ever given. When the missionaries taught the young man, however, the discussions were not well received. But even that had a silver lining as far as the family was concerned. "Within two or three weeks we noticed that this young man stopped coming around and calling," the father said. "Later we found out that he was telling people that our family was too 'Mormon' for him."

These good parents credit their oldest daughter's counsel in that special family council with keeping their family together. "For whatever reason, her input made all the difference," the father said. "How grateful we are that the Spirit of the Lord was able to work through her for the betterment of our family."

And how wise those parents were to pay careful attention to the thoughts and feelings expressed by their daughter in that special family council.

Different Families, Different Councils

There are as many different kinds of family councils as there are different kinds of families. Family councils can consist of one parent and one child, one parent and several children, two parents and one child, two parents and several children, or just two parents. Regardless of the size or makeup of the family council, the things that really matter are loving motivations, an atmosphere that encourages free and open discussion, and a willingness to listen to the honest input of all council members—as well as to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit as it comes to confirm truth and direction.

When one older couple found themselves with a rare gift of time to be alone together, they retired to the sun room in their home for a couple of hours of scripture study together. The husband, who was serving at the time as stake president, interrupted their discussion of the book of Matthew to seek his wife's counsel on a stake matter.

"I never discuss personal situations with her, but I felt the need to share with her some global stake concerns regarding the increasing needs of families that are failing," he said. "I have worried about our seeming inability to be effective in drawing on priesthood power to stop this trend. We had been trying to get the priesthood leaders out of their offices and into the homes of the Saints so they could get a firsthand impression of what is going on in the individual families, but we hadn't had much luck. And so I asked my wife, who was serving as our ward Relief Society president, for her perspective."

And what incredible perspective she had. Like most Relief Society presidents, this great woman had spent a considerable amount of time ministering and visiting in the homes of the sisters of the ward. She indicated that her greatest frustration was in not having adequate time to share with priesthood leaders all of the information she gleaned from her personal contacts and from the visiting teaching and compassionate service reports she received.

"The monthly welfare meetings do not suffice," she said. "And although the bishop and I speak frequently, it is usually regarding specific, urgent welfare matters."

As her husband listened to her concerns, he began to sense the power of the Relief Society and the sisters of the Church. And he grew ever more thankful for the blessing of his eternal companion.

"This family council between husband and wife gave us the opportunity to counsel with each other in a meaningful way," the president said. "The Spirit of the Lord was with us, and as a result of our free and open discussion we drew closer to the Lord and closer to each other, and better able to minister in our respective Church callings."

Family councils can be a blessing in the lives of families and individual family members in this life and through the eternities. Through them we can draw closer to our families and closer to God. They also provide a unique opportunity for fathers and mothers to extend their loving influence in important ways. Another father shares the following powerful example of that concept:

Recently my mother suffered a stroke, which paralyzed her left side and rendered her unable to swallow. It looked as though she would quietly pass away the same evening that she had the stroke. Although she had previously given us instructions that no mechanical support systems should be used to keep her alive in such a situation, the doctor counseled with my father and decided to make her last hours more peaceful with the aid of oxygen and an I.V.

At one point during that long night, Mother became conscious for a brief time and held up three fingers, as if she was indicating that she knew that her fourth child was not yet at her bedside. Then she looked steadily into the space above her bed, reached out her arms, and smiled. We had the impression that she saw something that was not visible to us.

Sunrise found her still breathing but in a coma. She continued in that condition through the day, and in the early evening my brother-in-law suggested that we hold a family council. After recognizing my father's authority as the head of our family, he gently suggested that we have a family prayer around Mother's bed. We did so, and immediately Mother awakened. She beckoned to every member of her family—all, including her fourth child, now assembled in the room. One by one, she pulled them close with her useable hand and reverently hugged each one. When she was finished, she lay back down and slipped back into her coma. We gave her a priesthood blessing, asking that she not be concerned about us and releasing her to return to her Heavenly Father.

The next morning found her still on this side of the veil. For the next couple of days, doctors ran tests to determine if there was any possibility of her recovering from the stroke. Eventually we were informed that her condition was irreversible, and that the only thing keeping her alive was the I.V. treatment. It was up to us, the doctor said, to determine the appropriate time to discontinue that treatment.

My father called for another family council. All of the children, their spouses, and my aunt and uncle were there. When we were seated, my eighty-six-year-old father arose and, after an opening prayer, quietly asked for counsel from each person present. I watched my father take charge and lead the council as I had seen him do on many occasions before. He seemed to become stronger as he conducted the business of the council with dignity, respect, and great priesthood power. Eventually we decided that we would wait for two more days before allowing the doctor to discontinue the I.V. treatment. After he expressed his love for Mother and for us, the council was closed with prayer and the influence of the Comforter persisted far into the ensuing hours.

Mother passed away quietly several days later, awakening once to acknowledge her sister and once when my father gave her a blessing. It was as if she lingered until we as a family were settled in our thoughts and united in our direction. That unity and peace came through the priesthood council, a process ordained of God.

As our families share moments such as these, counseling together from a gospel perspective and with the understanding that we are the family of God, we come to know that He loves us. We are precious to Him. He cares. He wants to help us. He wants to give us the support and help that we need in times of crisis. Much of that support and strength comes through counseling with one another.
