M. Russell Ballard, Counseling with Our Councils: Learning to Minister Together in the Church and in the Family ( 1997)

Chapter 9

"Let Us Reason Together"

The bishop had a few minutes between scheduled interviews one Wednesday evening, so he decided to drop in on Mutual opening exercises just to see how things were going. What he saw frustrated and troubled him.

"I couldn't believe it," the bishop said, shaking his head sadly at the memory. "Three of my priests were sitting on the sacrament table, laughing uproariously as the Laurel president stood at the podium trying to open the meeting. A group of Mia Maids were sprawled on the benches on one side of the chapel, carrying on an animated conversation, while a couple of Scouts were arm wrestling on the front pew.

"I looked around to see what the advisers were doing to gain control of the situation, and I could see only two of my Young Women advisers chatting with each other in the back of the chapel, seemingly oblivious to what was going on all around them. Neither the Young Men president nor the Young Women president was in the room at the moment. It was chaos."

The bishop walked to the front of the chapel and restored order. But for the rest of the week, he couldn't get out of his mind the image of those teenagers behaving so disrespectfully in the chapel. The next Sunday in bishopric meeting, he told his counselors about the experience and asked for their advice on what to do. They discussed the issue for a few minutes and decided it would be a good subject to bring before the ward council. So the following week the bishop outlined his concerns before the entire ward council. "The problem as I see it," he said, "is a lack of respect for the chapel as a special place, an important room where each Sunday a sacred ordinance is performed. How do we teach that to our young people in a meaningful way?"

Thick silence hung heavily over the bishop's office. Members of the ward council looked at the bishop expectantly. Finally, the high priests group leader spoke. "What would you have us do, Bishop?" he asked.

"I don't know," the bishop said. "I honestly don't have any answers here. I have some thoughts on the matter, but I'm really interested in hearing what you folks have to say. You are the parents of these young people. You're their leaders and teachers. You know them and love them just as I do. I really want to know what you think. How do we reach them? How do we teach them?"

"Well," the Relief Society president ventured, "if you want to know the truth of the matter, it isn't just the young people who have a problem with this concept. We have adults who don't seem to know how to be reverent in the chapel."

"And it gets even worse out in the cultural hall," the elders quorum president responded. "Have you seen some of the behavior that goes on during men's basketball games? Sometimes I have to remind myself that most of the brethren I'm playing with are returned missionaries, and that we're playing in a dedicated meetinghouse. You'd think that fact alone would prompt us to raise our behavior standards just a little."

"You should try getting everyone's attention at the start of sacrament meeting," one of the bishop's counselors chimed in. "Last week when I started reading the announcements, my wife said she could barely hear me above all of the commotion in the chapel."

"Okay, so we all agree that we have a problem here," the bishop said. "What do we do about it?"

"There's a song that the children sing in Primary that keeps running through my mind," said the Primary president. "It goes, 'Reverence is more than just quietly sitting: It's thinking of Father above, A feeling I get when I think of his blessings. I'm reverent, for reverence is love. When I'm reverent, it shows in my words and my deeds. The pathway to follow is clear. And when I am reverent, I know in my heart Heavenly Father and Jesus are near'" ("Reverence Is Love," Children's Songbook, 31).

"I think that's what we have to teach to our children, our young people, and our adults," the Primary president continued. "This isn't just about being quiet during sacrament meeting. At the heart of this problem is our love and respect for Heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Anything we do that doesn't address that issue is going to miss the mark."

"In other words," the Young Men president said, "behaving disrespectfully in the chapel is just an outward manifestation of a much deeper problem that appears to exist throughout our ward. The greater issue here is personal testimony. If we can strengthen the testimonies of ward members, they will naturally be more reverent."

"But we also have to teach them what constitutes appropriate behavior and what doesn't," said the Young Women president. "We can't just assume that if people have strong testimonies they will naturally know how to act in the chapel. I think some of our youth who were behaving inappropriately the other night have pretty strong testimonies; they just don't know that you don't act that way in the chapel. Nobody has taught them otherwise, and so they just act how they see everyone else act." "I agree with both perspectives," the bishop said. "We need to do a better job of teaching testimony and behavior. So . . . how do we do it? Let's start with the concept of teaching reverence, respect, and love for our Heavenly Father and His house. What can we do to help our people become more spiritually devoted and sensitive?"

"Well, I find that the most spiritual high priests are those who attend the temple regularly," said the high priests group leader. "Being in the temple enhances your sensitivity to holy places. So I'd suggest that our approach to adults include a major effort to help people become worthy to hold a current temple recommend and regularly partake of the blessings of temple worship."

"That's a great idea," said the Relief Society president. "But let's not limit the good influence of temple attendance to our adults. I can't remember the last time my teenagers went to the temple to perform baptisms for the dead. If we're trying to teach reverence and respect for the Lord, there's no better place for them to experience that feeling than in the temple."

"That's an excellent suggestion," the bishop said. "I believe our plan should include a component of temple worthiness and worship. Other suggestions?"

"Maybe we ought to consider moving Mutual opening exercises into the Primary room for a while—at least until we get things under control," said the Young Men president. "That way we could send the message to the young people that the kind of behavior that was going on last week in the chapel is unacceptable and will not be tolerated."

"Or maybe we could just do a better job of teaching them how to behave in the chapel," said the Young Women president. "Like the bishop said, there were only two advisers in there during opening exercises, and they weren't doing anything to control the situation. Maybe if we could spend some time in class focusing on what it means to show our love and respect for the Lord, and then we as advisers commit to being there with them to make sure that they remember whose house we are in, we can help them learn through positive experiences what it means and how it feels when we're meeting in the chapel in a sweet, worshipful way."

"That's great, but once again we're talking about an issue that has broader application than just to our youth," said the ward mission leader. "Remember the family I brought to sacrament meeting a couple of months ago? Two things really bothered them about our meeting: the crying babies and the noise in the chapel from all the conversations between adults, especially in the few minutes before the bishop stood to begin the meeting. So don't assume that adults don't need instruction on how to behave in the chapel."

"Okay—so how do we do that?" the bishop asked.

Once again, the room was silent as ward council members considered the question.

"Perhaps we should ask ourselves what we want to have happen rather than what we want to do," the Young Women president said. "Can we identify our desired end result, and then determine how to achieve it?"

The group considered the question for a moment. "The thing that I want to have happen," said one of the bishop's counselors, "is for people to be able to walk into the chapel at any time and feel calm and peaceful and worshipful."

"I think we want our meetings to be the kind that can make a spiritual difference in people's lives," the Sunday School president said.

"What it comes down to," said the elders quorum president, "is that we want people to be able to come to church and feel the Spirit."

"Beyond that, we want our members to learn how to be open and receptive to that Spirit when it's here," the Primary president added.

"And we want people to experience the feeling of walking humbly before God—both here at church and in their daily lives," said the Relief Society president.

The bishop considered those suggestions and nodded his head in agreement. "Yes, we want all of those things to happen," he said. "And we've got a couple of good ideas about how to make them happen. Are there any other thoughts on the matter?"

The ward mission leader raised his hand sheepishly. "I'm hesitant to say this, but it seems to me that anything we're going to do sort of begins and ends with this group of people in here," he said. "If we leave here and then go out and do a lot of backslapping and loud visiting in the chapel, or if we whisper to each other on the stand, or if we do things that are counter to creating a respectful, reverent environment in our meetinghouse, it won't matter what else we say or do. We've got to be leaders. We've got to be the ones to show respect and reverence, particularly in the chapel, and we've got to help our families be a part of that example.

"Look around you," he continued. "There are eleven families represented here, comprising about fifty or sixty people. Our spouses work in the various organizations of the ward. Our children participate in Young Men, Young Women, and Primary. If we can do a good job of teaching this concept to our own families, we can provide a powerful foundation on which to build our program. And if we expand that to include the families of those who serve with us—our counselors, advisers, and board members—we have an incredible opportunity to make a significant difference in the spiritual life of the members of this ward."

I might add that all too often our members do not show respect for teachers and leaders. Too many personal conversations are carried on in Sunday School classes and during priesthood and Relief Society meetings. The noise and confusion in our chapels prior to sacrament meeting would indicate that we do not have a clear understanding of what reverence is. Reverence may be defined as a profound respect mingled with love and awe. Other words that add to our understanding of reverence include gratitude, honor, veneration, and admiration. The root word revere also implies an element of fear. Thus, reverence might be understood to mean an attitude of profound respect and love and a desire to honor and show gratitude, coupled with a fear of offending God. It would be a marvelous thing if we could come into the chapel and prepare for sacrament meeting by having a few minutes of quiet time to ponder about the gifts and blessings we have received. These include gifts of peace, forgiveness, love, mercy, and understanding, and the greatest gift of all, that of eternal life, which is made possible through the life and sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Do you have any idea what discoveries we might make, what lessons we might learn, if we took five or ten minutes before each sacrament meeting to listen to the softly played prelude music and to ponder about our lives and about Him whom we have come to worship?

But let's return to the ward council meeting. The bishop looked at the men and women seated around him. He paused for a moment, considering the counsel of his ward council. "Thank you, brothers and sisters," he said at last, smiling. "You have presented some excellent thoughts about what we want to have happen and what we need to do to make it happen. I feel especially good about building our program on temple worthiness and worship. I believe that that is precisely the focus the Lord would have us maintain. I also like the idea of teaching reverence and respect by precept and by example, and I am fully in line with the suggestion that we and our families can be crucial to the success of our efforts. That's the direction in which we need to go. Now, let's take the next few minutes to develop some specific plans and suggestions. . . ."

Does this sound familiar? I hope it does. This is the way a local Church council should function, with visionary leadership and free and open participation from all in attendance. Please notice how—

Â The problem is clearly outlined and articulated, but the council isn't allowed to dwell on negativity.

Â The council leader controls the flow of the discussion without dominating it. He asks questions and calls for opinions, and then he listens.

Â Council members speak from their own perspective as individuals and not just as representatives of their respective organizations (such as when the Relief Society president urged baptisms for the dead on behalf of her teenage children).

Â Attention is focused on "what we want to have happen" rather than "what we want to do."

Â In its deliberations, the council never strays far from the mission of the Church: bringing souls to Christ through proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead.

Â Council members aren't allowed to forget the importance of their individual influence and example.

Â Input is solicited from everyone, but final decisions are left to the council leader, who relies upon inspiration more than personal opinion in guiding the decisions of the council.

Counseling with Our Councils

Counseling with our councils in this manner should extend far beyond stake presidencies, bishoprics, and stake and ward councils. It can also help individual families, priesthood quorums, and auxiliary organizations accomplish their respective missions and goals. The council system can help the leadership of high priests groups, the presidencies of elders quorums, and quorum and group committees fulfill their important responsibilities. Young Men leaders will discover that councils such as the ward and stake Young Men presidencies, Aaronic Priesthood committees, Aaronic Priesthood—Young Women committees, bishopric youth committees, and quorum presidencies and committees will help accomplish the mission of the Aaronic Priesthood. For ward and stake Relief Society leaders, presidency and board councils can be important in helping them fulfill the purposes and goals of the Relief Society. Stake and ward Young Women presidencies, Aaronic Priesthood—Young Women committees, bishopric youth committees, and Young Women class presidencies should counsel together to help young women live lives that reflect the beautiful philosophy espoused by the Young Women theme. Primary presidencies and boards can implement the council system to "teach children the gospel of Jesus Christ and help them learn to live it." Family councils can provide opportunities for open, nonjudgmental communication that enables parents and children to teach and strengthen one another.

These are lofty goals. But then, that's the nature of the work in God's kingdom in these latter days: lofty, far-reaching, eternal. We are working to help our brothers and sisters receive all that our Father in Heaven has to give to His faithful children, including the blessings of the celestial kingdom. Nothing more, nothing less. It is a sacred trust that God has given to all who have been called to positions of authority in His Church. And it is a responsibility that can be accomplished much more effectively and efficiently by using the council system the Lord has inspired Church leaders to implement in all of the organizations of the Church. Governance through councils is more than just a good idea; it is God's plan. It is how we share the burdens of gospel responsibilities. It is how we accomplish the mission of the Church. And it is how God receives His very glory by bringing to pass "the immortality and eternal life of man." As the Lord said through the prophet Isaiah, "Come now, and let us reason together" (Isaiah 1:18).

It is my sincere prayer that we may all find ways to make more effective use of the wondrous power that can be harnessed by counseling with our councils. I testify that it is only in doing so that we can bring the full force of God's revealed plan for gospel governance into our respective ministries, both in our families and in the Church.
