Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

A FOREWORD

King Limhi of the Nephites in the Land of Nephi, tells Ammon of the Plates of Gold. The Book of Ether is first brought to our attention in a report of an interview between the King of the Nephites in the country of the Lamanites, the Land of Nephi, Limhi and Ammon, a messenger from Zarahemla. (Mosiah 8:9) The King related a remarkable bit of history. He had, at one time, sent an embassy with an important mission to Zarahemla. The delegates of that legation, being without a competent guide, lost their way in the wilderness and missed their hoped-for destination. Instead of finishing their journey in Zarahemla, they came to a country where there were many ancient ruins, and other evidences of cultural enlightenment. Among the most manifest of these shattered remains of bygone ages was the condition into which the buildings of these venerable people had fallen; all around them were the bones of men and beasts, evincing a terrible devastation. In corroboration of their strange report, they brought back with them twenty-four plates of gold with unknown engravings covering them, besides many other remarkable antiques. King Limhi now desired to know whether Ammon could interpret such writings.

The visitor from Zarahemla replied that he could not, but he hastened to add that the King over the people of his homeland had such a gift, because he had in his possession certain miraculous interpreters. (Mosiah 8:14)

In due time King Limhi and his people broke away from the servitude that enslaved them unto the Lamanites, and found refuge in Zarahemla. King Mosiah, the son of Benjamin, received them with joy and took care of their valuable records. (Mosiah 22:14) Afterwards the royal Prophet translated the twenty-four plates and found thereon an account of a people who had inhabited the land to the north, but had been destroyed through internecine strife. (Mosiah 28:13)

Not an accidental discovery. The twenty-four plates were called the Book of Ether after its author. (Ether 1:2) Their discovery was not an accident. For, when Ether had finished his record thereon, "he hid them in a manner that the people of Limhi did find them." (Ether 15:33) Here is an ideal place to remember that, as the poets have said, "The accidents of man are the inspirations of God, and the incidents of this life are the leadings and the guidings of Him who made it."

The visions of the Brother of Jared. Before the Jaredites, named after Jared, one of the leaders of the people of whom the Book of Ether is a record, left Moriancumer, their camp in the Old Country from which they came, the Brother of Jared was given indescribable visions on Mount Shelem. The Lord instructed him not to make them public during his lifetime, but to place them on record before his death, in the language commonly spoken before the building of the Towel of Babel, but no longer known by later generations. This record was to be sealed up. He also received two stones, prepared so as to "magnify," or make clear, "the things which ye shall write." These stones, known to us as the Urim and Thummim, were also to be sealed up. (Ether 3:21-24, 27, 28)

We know, from the information given by Moroni, the abridger of King Mosiah's translation of the plates of gold, that Mosiah also had the writings of the Brother of Jared, and that he kept them in case the time for their publication should come. We also know that these writings, together with "the interpretation thereof"—the translation by King Mosiah—had come into his (Moroni's) possession, as did the Interpreters. (Ether 4:1-5)

There is, then, no doubt that Mosiah, the son of Benjamin, was the custodian, in his day, of the Jaredite Record and the Two Stones, the Interpreters, which the Lord gave to the Brother of Jared. (Mosiah 28:11-16)

The Jaredite Record was part of the twenty-four plates of gold which the Prophet Ether had hid up unto the Lord, and which came, providentially, into the hands of Mosiah through the expedition of King Limhi. In all probability he received the interpreters from his father, King Benjamin, who may have got them from Mosiah I, his father.

Amaleki, the son of Abinadom, gives, in the Book of Omni, what is, perhaps, the correct clue to the question that has been asked, "How did the Stones of Interpretation, originally given to the Brother of Jared, come into the hands of the kings in Zarahemla? Amaleki says, that a large stone, possibly a monumental pillar or stele, was brought to King Mosiah I, who interpreted the engravings thereon by the gift and power of God. We may infer that this means that that Mosiah had the Interpreters. By this power it was found that the stone contained an account of Coriantumr, the last King of the Jaredites, and the slain of his people. (Omni 20:22) Undoubtedly, Coriantumr had brought this information to the Mulekites in Zarahemla. May he not have carried with him the Interpreters also? It must be remembered that this lone survivor after the Battle of Ramah had usurped the highest ecclesiastical as well as the political offices, and that he, therefore, may have had the sacred instrument in his possession, although it was worthless to him. Ether prophesied that he would not fall in the war then raging, but that he would live, to be buried by another people. The inference is not farfetched that he was spared for the very purpose of bringing to the Nephites the story of the dealings of God with the Jaredites.

Mosiah disposes of the Sacred Objects. King Mosiah, the son of Benjamin, was the custodian of the twenty-four plates, his own translation of the contents thereof, the Interpreters, the Plates of Brass, and other records. (Mosiah 1:16) Towards the end of his career, he delivered all of them to Alma, the son of Alma, he being a High Priest and the Chief Judge of the whole country. The Interpreters were included in the sacred collection. (Mosiah 29:42) When transferring the responsibilities of custodial possession to Alma, Mosiah commanded him to keep and preserve the valuable relics, and to cause them to be handed down from one generation to another. (Mosiah 29:11-20)

The Records preserved. At the proper time Alma gave his son, Helaman, charge of the sacred treasures entrusted to him by Mosiah. (Alma 37:1-4) By such transfers they were preserved from generation to generation. About the year 320 of our era, Ammaron, having received them from his brother, Amos, prompted by the spirit, did "hide them unto the Lord, that they might come again unto the remnant of the House of Jacob." (IV Nephi 48-49; compare Words of Mormon 10-11; Alma 37:4)

Mormon instructed concerning the Records. The great Nephite commander and leader, Mormon, relates that when he was about ten years old, Ammaron charged him to go to the Hill Shim, in the Land of Antum, when he should reach the age of about 24, as the Sacred Things had been deposited there. He instructed Mormon to take the Plates of Nephi and complete the records from his own observations. The other plates and articles were to be left in the Hill. (Mormon 1:1-4; 2:17-18)

Cumorah, the final place of safety. Mormon carried out Ammaron's instructions. But later he went to the Hill and "did take up all the records which Ammaron had hid up unto the Lord." (Mormon 4:28) He, finally, hid them all in the Hill Cumorah, having first furnished his son, Moroni, with the entire story of the Plates of Nephi in a much abridged form. (Mormon 6:6)

Moroni finished the tragic chapter telling of the final great battle at Cumorah, and then "hid up the records in the earth," (Mormon 8:4) presumably in the Hill Cumorah. But he also predicted that they would be found and come to light at some future day, (Mormon 8:14-16) a prophecy fulfilled through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Moroni gives one final reference to the miraculous interpreters, when he says: "But the Lord knoweth ... that none other people knoweth our language; therefore He hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof." (Mormon 9:34) This means was the very crystals prepared for, and presented to the Brother of Jared on Mount Shelem. (Doctrine and Covenants 17:1)

Only two miraculous Interpreters. History knows of only two sacred instruments of this kind, also known as Urim and Thummim (meaning lights and perfections). One was given to Abraham in the City of Ur of the Chaldees (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:1) This was, probably, handed over by Moses to Aaron, the High Priest, who carried them in his "Breastplate of Judgment," an important part of his ecclesiastical equipment. (Exodus 28:30) It was, finally, lost sight of.

The other was given to the Brother of Jared. It was this very same one that the Prophet Joseph had for some time.

The contemporary nations on the eastern continent—Egypt, Chaldea, and Babylonia—were insignificant when compared with the vast extent of territory held and filled by the Jaredites; they were the sole rulers of the whole western hemisphere, and possibly the originals, whence arose the stories of the greatness and grandeur of the fabled Atlantis; for we have no account in the sacred records that God shut them off from the knowledge of the rest of mankind when he planted them in America, as he afterwards did the Nephites; and later research has shown that geographical knowledge of the ancients was much greater in the earlier ages than at the time of the Savior.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE JAREDITE RECORDS

Let us turn to the year B.C. 123. At that time the Nephites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi were suffering sore afflictions at the hands of the Lamanites, to whom they were in bondage. In this extremity, Limhi, their King, bewildered and almost ready to despair, sent a company of forty-three able-bodied men, with instructions to discover, if possible, their brethren in the Land of Zarahemla, that peradventure they would bring them succor and ultimately, deliverance. The expedition was unsuccessful insofar as its immediate objective was concerned. The company missed the Land of Zarahemla, pushed northward into Central America, and how far beyond we cannot tell. At last they found the remains of an ancient people who apparently had been destroyed in battle. Among other things, they discovered twenty-four gold plates that were covered with hieroglyphics which they could not decipher. This treasure with some other relics of the vanished race, they took back to King Limhi.

When, shortly after, this section of the Nephite people escaped from their Lamanitish taskmasters and returned to Zarahemla, the twenty-four gold plates were presented to King Mosiah, the younger, and he, being a seer, translated them by the aid of the Urim and Thummim.

These plates were found to contain the history of the world from the Creation to the time of the building of the Tower of Babel, and of the race whose remains had been found by the people of Limhi scattered on the land northward.

This was, however, not the first intimation that the Nephites had of the previous existence of this people. In the days of the elder Mosiah, a large engraved stone was brought to him which he interpreted. It had been found by the people of Zarahemla, and on it was an account of this same race which is known to us as the Jaredites, but it more particularly referred to its last ruler, Coriantumr, for he had just previous to his death, resided in their midst for nine months.

The history we have of this remarkable people, as it is recorded in the Book of Mormon, is Moroni's abridgment of their annals as translated by King Mosiah, the younger, from the twenty-four gold plates. It commences with the dispersion of the human family at Babel. The original plates had on them an account of the Creation of the Earth, and then on down to the building of the Tower of Babel. But Moroni did not include this part of their story in his abridgment because of its length, and besides it was already had among the Jews. Interspersed with the narrative are many interpolations of Moroni's, in the shape of reflections, prophecies, and explanations of different passages which he felt that without them, we might misunderstand their Scriptures. As these additions or notes are inserted in the body of Moroni's work and not as footnotes, the reader of his abridgment has to use care in its perusal, or perchance, his ideas of the Jaredites may become confused, and he finds himself troubled to account for statements which are perfectly plain when it is understood that they were written by Moroni nearly four hundred years after the advent of the Savior.

The ancestors of the Jaredites were engaged in the attempt to build the Tower of Babel. It is probable they were of the family of Shem, as they were worshipers of the true God, and upon them he conferred the Holy Priesthood which he, himself, held. How far they had wandered from the Tower, if at all, when the Lord commenced the revelation of His will to them, is not apparent from the sacred text. They were commanded by Him to go "down into the valley which is northward," and as the expressions up and down, where they are used in the Book of Mormon in connection with geographical locality, are always used with great exactitude, we may venture two surmises: that Jared and his family had already wandered into some not far distant hilly region, or that the valley into which they were commanded to descend sloped towards the north, the flow of its waters, if any, being in that direction.

The Valley into which the Lord led the Jaredites was called Nimrod after that mighty hunter of the early post-diluvian age. Here, they tarried for a short time while they prepared for the long journey that was before them. Their flocks and herds they had with them were only part of the impedimenta that slowed their progress to the Promised Land. They went to work snaring wild fowls, they carried with them hives of honeybees (known to them as Deseret). They prepared a vessel in which they transported the fish of the waters. Everything that possibly could be of use to them in their travels, they appear to have collected. They were going to a land which we may suppose was or had been swept clean by the waters of the Deluge. It had been bereft of all its animal life, and seeds of grains and fruits for the use of man, had not yet germinated in cultivated abundance for the benefit and blessing of humankind. The little colony had to replenish the continent with the animal and vegetable life so necessary to the comfort and sustenance of their own life, as well as the beasts of the field they took along with them. They were compelled to look ahead and provide all such provisions and worldly goods as if they were going to a new earth which to all intents and purposes they were.

When in the Valley of Nimrod the Lord came down from His dwelling On High, and talked with the Brother of Jared. But Jared's brother saw Him not for the Lord remained concealed in a cloud. The Lord directed that the little company should go forth into the wilderness, "into that quarter where there never had man been." As they journeyed the Heavenly Presence went before them in the cloud and instructed them and gave directions as to which way they should travel. In the course of their journey they had many waters—seas, rivers, and lakes—to cross, on which occasions they built barges as directed by the Lord. It must have been an arduous labor, requiring much time and great patience, to transport their flocks and herds, with all their cumbrous freight across these many waters.

We shall not attempt to trace the wanderings of the company on their way to the Promised Land. The account given in the Book of Ether is entirely too meager for that purpose.

Some suppose that they went as far north as the Caspian Sea, which they crossed; then turning eastward, slowly journeyed along the Central Asian Plateau. That led them to the Pacific Seaboard, most probably on the Coast of China. These suppositions may be correct; the writers do not know enough to either affirm or deny them, but one thing is certain, the journey must have been a long and tedious one. The region through which they passed was one in which no man dwelt, they could purchase no supplies, and if they did not live entirely on wild fruit, fish, and small game, it is probable that they tarried now and then, at favorable points, long enough to plant and harvest a crop. As they advanced to a greater distance from the center of population in western Asia, it is possible that they traveled beyond the limits to which the larger animals had, by that time scattered; and if so, they were entirely without the aid of the food obtained by the chase. On the other hand, it is probable that the fish in the rivers and lakes formed a valuable source of food supply; yet it must also be remembered that they carried fish in a vessel with them.

Through their faith and prayers the founders of the Jaredite Nation obtained many precious promises of the Lord. Among these was the assurance that their language should not be confounded, and that the Lord, Himself, would go before them, and lead them into a land that was choice above every other land upon the face of the Earth. And again, that the nation they should found, there would be none greater among all the nations of the world. The history of their descendants proves how fully this last promise was realized. The contemporary nations upon the eastern Continent—Egypt, Chaldea, and Babylonia—were insignificant when compared with the vast extent of territory held and filled by the Jaredites; they were the sole rulers of the whole western Hemisphere, and possibly the originals whence arose the stories of the greatness and grandeur of the fabled Atlantis. We have no account that God shut them out from the knowledge of the rest of mankind when He planted them in America as He afterwards did the Nephites, and late research has shown that the geographical knowledge of the ancients was much greater in the earlier ages than at the time of the Savior and a few hundred years previous to His advent.

Led personally by the Lord, instructed from His own mouth, protected by His presence, the colony, of which Jared's brother appears to have been the prophet and leader, at last reached the borders of the great sea which divides the Continents. To the place where they tarried they gave the name, Moriancumer. Here they remained for a period of four years, at the end of which time the Lord again visited the Brother of Jared in a cloud and chastened him and his brethren because of their neglect to call upon His Name. Repentance followed this reproof, and on their repentance their sins were forgiven them.

The Brother of Jared was then commanded by the Lord to build eight barges after the pattern of those he had previously constructed. This command he obeyed with the assistance of the company. The vessels were small, light in construction, and water tight. As they were dark in the interior, by reason of there being no windows, the Lord, at the entreaty of Jared's brother, touched sixteen white stones which the latter had molten out of a high mountain called Shelem. After the Lord had touched them they shone forth and gave light to the vessels in which they were placed. When the Lord put forth His finger to touch the stones, the veil was taken from the eyes of the Brother of Jared and he saw the finger of the Lord; and he beheld that it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood. Then the Brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he was struck with fear, but because of his faith the Lord not only permitted him to see His finger, but showed Himself to him.

Furthermore, the Lord said to the Brother of Jared, "Behold, I am He Who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem My people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In Me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on My Name; and they shall become My sons and daughters. And never have I showed Myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in Me as thou hast. Seest thou that ye are created after Mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning, after Mine own image. Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of My Spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the Spirit, will I appear unto My people in the flesh."

All things being prepared, Jared and his people, with their animals, fishes, bees, seeds, and multitudinous other things, went on board. A favorable wind wafted them from shore and they gradually drifted to the American coast. At the end of the voyage which lasted three hundred and forty-four days, the colony landed on this continent. It is generally understood that the place where they landed was south of the Gulf of California and north of the Isthmus of Panama.

When the members of the little colony set their feet upon the shores of America, they humbled themselves before the Lord, and shed tears of joy because of the multitude of His tender mercies over them. Then they went forth and began to till the earth, and soon grew strong in the land which God had given them; they being a righteous people, were taught directly from On High.

Before long the question of government arose, and the people desired a king. This thing was grievous to their divinely inspired leaders, for they saw that it would lead to captivity; but perceiving the determination of the people, they consented. It was difficult to find any suitable man who would consent to occupy the royal position. At last, when all the other sons of Jared were eliminated because of their refusal to reign as a king, the youngest of Jared's sons whose name was Orihah, consented, and he was anointed King.

It appears altogether probable that this choice was taken as a precedent, for among this people there seems to have prevailed a custom entirely opposite that of other nations—that of having one of the younger, generally the youngest instead of the eldest, succeed his father on the throne. The Jaredites were a very long-lived race, full of vitality, often having sons and daughters born to them until the very end of their days. The number of generations mentioned during the period embraced in their history is much fewer than the general average for the same number of centuries, notably so, where the eldest son succeeds to the rank and title of his sire.

The kings of the Jaredites, in the order of their succession, were Orihah, Kib, Corihor, Kib restored, then follows Shule. In the days of Shule the kingdom was divided. Noah, the son of Corihor, established a separate monarchy over a portion of the land. After his death he was succeeded by his son, Cohor, who was slain in battle by Shule, when the whole kingdom was restored to the last named.

Shule was succeeded by his son, Omer, who was deposed and imprisoned by his son, Jared, but two other sons afterwards defeated Jared and restored the kingdom to the rightful ruler, their father. In this civil war between Omer and his son, Jared, when the latter had been defeated by his brothers, they spared his life on condition that he recognize the right of his father to the throne.

Jared became very sorrowful at his defeat, as he had set his heart on being king. While in this state of mind, his daughter, who was exceedingly fair, came to him, and learning the cause of his discontent, made a most extraordinary and villainous proposition to him, which showed she was as conscienceless as her father. It was that he should invite a friend, named Akish, to visit him; when he came she would dance before him and use her charms to captivate his heart. If her plan succeeded and Akish desired her to wife, Jared was to grant his request on condition that Akish brought him the head of his father, Omer. To enable him to accomplish this diabolical scheme, the daughter of Jared reminded her father of the signs and covenants of the ancients, whereby they entered into compact one with another for mutual aid and comfort, including protection in carrying out any great wickedness they might desire to commit.

Her plan was accepted and proved in every way to be successful. After the manner she suggested, Akish gathered his kinsfolk, and persuaded them to swear, with terrible oaths, that they would be faithful to him in all that he might require of them. By these wicked combinations the Kingdom of Omer was overthrown. But he, being warned of the Lord, escaped to a distant land, which was called Ablom. Then Jared was anointed King, and gave his daughter to Akish to wife.

But Akish was not satisfied. He plotted with his associates and they slew Jared as he sat upon his throne, and Akish reigned in his stead. But after committing these crimes, he became suspicious of his partners in sin, and grew jealous of one of his own sons whom he shut up in prison and starved him to death. Before long, other sons of Akish seduced the people from their allegiance to their father, a civil war of the utmost magnitude ensued which ceased not until all the people were slain except thirty, and those who had fled to Omer in the Land of Ablom. After this, Omer returned and reigned over the few souls that remained.

Omer was succeeded by his son, Emer; Emer by his son, Coriantum; Coriantum by his son, Com. Com was slain by his son, Heth, who took possession of the Kingdom after he had murdered his father.

In the days of Heth, there was a great famine which destroyed the greater portion of the people, among them the King himself. He was succeeded by Shez, Shez by his son, Riplakish, who was dethroned by Morianton, whose son, Kim, afterwards followed him in the kingly power. Kim was brought into captivity, through rebellion, and it was not until the next reign, that of his son, Levi, that the usurpers were driven from the throne. Then follow the reigns of Corom, Kish, Lib, and Hearthom. The last named was deposed after reigning twenty-four years, and held in captivity all the remainder of his days. So also were his son, Heth, his grandson, Aaron, his great grandson, Amnigaddah, and the latter's son Coriantum.

We are not informed what were the names of the kings of the usurping dynasty who reigned while the royal family served in captivity; but in the days of Coriantum's son, Com, the reigning prince was named, Amgid. Com went to war against him, overthrew him, and gained possession of the throne of his ancestors. Shiblon, the son of Com, succeeded his father, but was slain, his son, Heth, being made captive and was thus held all his days.

In the next generation, Ahah, Heth's son, regained the throne and reigned over the whole people for a short time. Few and iniquitous were his days. Ethem, called a descendant and also the son of Ahah, was the next king. His son, Moron, succeeded him. In Moron's days there were renewed rebellions which ended, as had so frequently been the case before, in the captivity of the king. Moron was a captive all the rest of his life, and his son, Coriantor, passed his whole earthly existence in captivity.

Ether, the Prophet, was the son of Coriantor. The King in his days was named Coriantumr, the last king of his race, for the wars that desolated the land in his reign culminated in the destruction of the Jaredites. This very short sketch of the reigns of their kings shows how thoroughly were the fears of Jared and his brother realized—that the anointing of a king to rule them would lead to captivity.

Like their successors, the Nephites, the troubles of the Jaredites grew out of their iniquities. Many mighty prophets ministered to them, but only occasionally were they listened to. Like the Nephites, in another phase of their existence, they owed many of their misfortunes to cherishing the secret bands of Gadianton-like assassins, who, bound by infernal covenants, perpetuated the most unnatural and bloodthirsty crimes. In the days of Omer, the daughter of Jared (who in more than one respect reminds us of the daughter of Herodias) was instrumental in first introducing these soul-destroying confederacies with Satan among the Jaredites; and in after ages they dwindled or flourished according to the amount of their faith and integrity of the people.

Materially, the Jaredites were wonderfully blessed. It could scarcely have been otherwise. They had all the treasures of this choice land at their disposal. In the days of Emer, the sacred historian describes them as having become exceedingly rich, having in their possession all manner of fruit, grain, silks, fine linen, gold, silver, and precious things; and also all manner of cattle, sheep, swine, goats, and also many other kinds of animals which were useful for the food of man; and they also had horses, and asses, and there were elephants and cureloms and cumons; all of which were useful to men, and more especially the elephants, cureloms and cumons. What the last two above named were, we do not know.

Owing to their gross and abounding wickedness, the Lord on several occasions visited the Jaredites with partial destruction. These judgments came in the shape of fratricidal war, pestilence, drought, and famine. In the days of Heth there was a great dearth of water in the land, through which the inhabitants were destroyed exceedingly fast, while poisonous serpents came forth "and did poison many people." These serpents drove, it is said, the flocks and herds south, and then congregated at the narrow neck uniting the two great divisions of the land, thus hedging up the way so that the people could not pass, adding another factor to their misery, for their crops were not only destroyed because of the lack of rainfall, but the resource to animal food was taken from them. Thus they became a broken people, but when through their misery they had sufficiently humbled themselves before the Lord, He sent the long desired rain, and there began to be fruit in the north countries and in all the countries round about. Other desolations at various times came upon them because of their disobedience to the behests of Heaven.

The war which ended in the entire destruction of the Jaredite government as an enemy, was one of the most bloodthirsty, cruel, and vindictive that ever cursed this fair planet. Men's most savage passions were worked up to such an extent that every better feeling of humanity was crushed out. The women and children armed themselves for the fray with the same fiendish activity, and, fought with the same intense hate, as the men. It was not the conflict of armies alone; it was the crushing together of a divided house that had long tottered because of internal weakness, but now fell in upon itself.

The war was not the work of a day; it was the outgrowth of centuries of dishonor, crime and wilful disobedience to God's laws. And as this continent was once cleansed of its unrighteous inhabitants by the overwhelming waters of a universal Deluge, and only eight souls left, so this second time, as a flood, through the promises of the Lord to Noah, was no longer possible, instead thereof the wicked slew the wicked until only two men remained, the King and the historian; the one to wander wounded, wretched, and alone, until found by Mulek's colony; the other to record the last dreadful throes of his people for the profit of succeeding races, and then to be received into the loving care of his Father and his God. Both the Nephites and ourselves are indebted to him for our acquaintance with the earlier history of the American Continent, which otherwise would have been entirely shut out from our knowledge.

Some four or more years before the final battle near and around the Hill Ramah, otherwise, Cumorah, two millions of warriors had been slain, besides their wives and children. How many millions actually fell before the last struggle ended, and Coriantumr stood alone, the sole representative of his race, it is impossible to tell from the record handed down to us, but we think we are justified in believing that for bloodshed and desolation no such war ever took place before, or has occurred since in the history of this world; if the annals of any nation have the record of its equal, it is not known to us.

The duel between the leaders of the two contending hosts, Coriantumr and Shiz, when their fellows were all slain, was a unique and horrible one, for when all had fallen except these two, Shiz, one of them, fainted for loss of blood. Then Coriantumr, after having taken a short rest, raised his sword and smote off the head of his foe. Shiz raised himself on his hands, fell, struggling for breath and died. Then utterly exhausted, Coriantumr dropped to the ground and became as though he had no life.

Coriantumr, when he regained consciousness, wandered forth, aimlessly and alone, the last of his race. A whole continent lay round about him, but there was nothing in any place to invite him to tarry or to depart. Companions, he had none; every creature in the image of God, save himself, had moistened the soil with his life's blood. All had been swept into unsanctified graves or poisoned the air with the smell of their unburied bodies. The savage beasts alone remained to terrify him with their hideous calls as they held high carnival over the unnumbered slain. Weak from loss of blood, he staggered on, placing as great a distance as his failing powers would permit between himself and the horrors of the last battleground. He passed onward through each deserted valley, each tenantless town; in neither was there any human voice to greet him; the homes of his own people and those of his enemies were alike—a silent desolation; all the land was a wilderness.

How long Coriantumr wandered to and fro, wretched, comfortless and forelorn, we do not know; but at last he reached the southern portion of the northern continent, thousands of miles from Ramah, and there, to the great astonishment of both, he found the people of Mulek, who had been led by the hand of the Lord from Jerusalem. With them he spent his few remaining days, and when nine moons had grown and waned he passed away to join the hosts of his people in the unknown world of spirits.

All this was in fulfillment of the prophecies of Ether, who, years before, had been sent by the Lord to Coriantumr with the fateful message that if he and all his household would repent, the Lord would give him his kingdom, and spare the people; otherwise they should be destroyed save it were himself, and he should live only to see the fulfilling of the prophecies which had been spoken concerning another people receiving the land for their inheritance; and Coriantumr should receive a burial by them; and every soul should be destroyed save it were Coriantumr.

But Coriantumr did not repent, neither did his household; and all the words of the Lord, through Ether, came to pass. Not the least of them remained unfulfilled.

MORONI

THE ABRIDGER OF THE JAREDITE RECORDS

THE BOOK OF ETHER

The son of Mormon, and the last representative of the Nephite race. He was an officer under his father and commanded a corps of ten thousand men at the battle of Cumorah. He wrote the concluding portions of the Book of Mormon, from the commencement of the 8th chapter of the book bearing his father's name to the end of the volume. This includes the book bearing his own name and his abridgment of the history of the Jaredites known to us as the Book of Ether. He takes up the history of the continent from the time of the slaughter at Cumorah and tells us (A.D. 400) that "the Lamanites are at war one with another and the face of the land is one continued round of murder and bloodshed; and no man knoweth the end of the war." And again, yet later, he writes, "Their wars are exceeding fierce among themselves, and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ, and I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ, wherefore I wander whithersoever I can, for the safety of mine own life." Such was the sad condition of the Lamanite race in the early part of the fifth century after Christ. There (A.D. 421) the inspired record closes; thenceforth we have nothing but uncertain tradition until the veil was withdrawn by the discovery of America.

In the course of nature Moroni died and in the Lord's due time he was resurrected. [^1]The sacred record and other holy things, buried in Cumorah, still remained in his care. On him the duty fell to watch that no unsanctified hands disturbed their rest. When the time set in the councils of heaven for their translation came he delivered them to the instrument chosen by the Holy Ones, Joseph Smith, the prophet, who, when he had accomplished his work, returned them to Moroni, who still keeps ward and watch over these treasures.

But was there any fear that the records would be disturbed by unholy hands? We believe there was. It must not be forgotten that the Lamanites of the days of Moroni were not the benighted savages of earlier centuries. They were not the pure blood of Laman and his associates. They were dissenters from the Nephites, apostates from the true church; and they were as well acquainted with the fact that the records existed as the prophet himself. In the days of Mormon he removed the plates from the hill Shim, for the very reason that he feared the Lamanites would get hold of and destroy them. There were the same reasons for fear should they discover their resting place in Cumorah.

The tradition of the existence of these records remained for long ages with the Lamanites; undoubtedly growing fainter and fainter and more confused as the centuries rolled by, but still not entirely extinguished. Indeed the remembrance is not utterly obliterated in the minds of some of Lehi's children to this very day.

So strong was this recollection in earlier days, that we are told of a time when a council of wise men, with royal consent, made an attempt to rewrite them. How successful they were we have no means of telling; but this we know, that when the Spaniards conquered Mexico the land was full of sacred books. These so much resembled the Bible of the Christians that the Catholic priests came to the conclusion that it was a trick of the devil to imitate the holy scriptures, and in this way lead the souls of the Indians to perdition. In their bigoted zeal they burned every copy of these books or charts that they could find, and inflicted abominably cruel punishments upon those who were found concealing them. In this way almost every copy of these valuable works was destroyed.

Though the original records were hidden by the power of God, it is quite possible that many copies of the scriptures remained in the hands of the Lamanites when the Nephites were destroyed. In the Book of Mormon frequent reference is made to the abundance of these copies. No doubt in the last desolating wars between the Nephites and Lamanites but little care was taken of these scriptures. Both peoples had sunken deeply in iniquity; they cared nothing for the word of God, and probably, as we may infer from Mormon's apprehensions, the Lamanites destroyed all the copies of the holy books that they found. Still, it is not improbable that some few of these works remained untouched; and when the Lamanites had gotten over their first overwhelming bitterness and aversion to everything Nephite, and again began to grow in civilization, they would search for these records, if for nothing else than as valued curiosities; though we think they sometimes prized them much more highly.

The plates having been guarded by the power of God, were translated by the same power. No book was ever translated more accurately; none, by human wisdom, as faultlessly as the Book of Mormon. [^2]

Joseph Smith, the youth whom God honored by making him the instrument in His hands of restoring these precious records to the knowledge of mankind, was born in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, on the 23rd of December, 1805. When about ten years of age his parents, with their family, moved to Palmyra, in the State of New York, in the vicinity of which place he lived for about eleven years; the latter portion of the time in a village called Manchester. Joseph helped his father on the farm, hired out at day-work, and passed his years very much after the manner common to young men in the rural districts. His advantages for obtaining anything beyond the rudiments of education were exceedingly small: he could read without much difficulty, write an imperfect hand, and had but a limited understanding of arithmetic.

The circumstances attending Joseph's first vision in the early spring of 1820, when he saw the Father and the Son, have been so often published, and must necessarily be so familiar to our readers, that with this bare reference to the fact we will pass them by. It is sufficient for the purpose of our present research to know that this marvelously important event did happen. Then and there the corner-stone was laid of the vast fabric to God's glory of which Joseph was the master builder, when mortal beings alone are considered.

Footnotes

A WORD OF WISDOM TO THE STUDENT OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

Scholars among the early arrivals in America after Columbus were at a loss to account for the similarity they observed between some Indian traditions and ideals and those of the patriarchal (or even Mosaic) age of the Old Testament.

Others, who have spent years studying the records of the first European invaders and what little remains of aboriginal literature, have been similarly impressed.

Among such scholarly writers we believe Lord Kingsborough has a prominent and representative place. According to Mr. Bancroft's review of his conclusions (Native Races, Vol. V, pp. 84-91), the noble Lord found, for instance, that the Mexicans anciently acknowledged the unity of God in Tezcatlipoca, and that they, at the time, revered angels, thrones, principalities, dominions, powers, as did the people of Old Testament times. The Toltecs, probably, were acquainted with the story of the Fall as related in Genesis; the story of the deception by the Serpent, (the Nahash), who in the Pearl of Great Price (Moses 4:6-7), is said to have been the agent and mouthpiece of Satan. Lord Kingsborough found striking resemblance between the Creation, Flood, and Dispersion traditions of the Hebrews and the American aborigines. He also believed it probable that some of the Indians had a seventh-day Sabbath. The Mexicans, as the Hebrews, he pointed out, poured sacrificial blood upon the earth; they sprinkled it and they marked persons with it. In Palestine, no one was permitted to enter the holiest compartment of the temple. That was the law in Peru. That man was created in the image of God, was a Mexican, as well as Hebrew conception.

According to Lord Kingsborough, it is impossible, on reading what Mexican mythology records of the War in Heaven and the Fall of Tzontemoc and the other rebellious spirits; of the Creation of Light by the word of Tonacateculiti, and on the Division of Waters, of the Sin of Ytztlacoliuhgui, and his blindness and nakedness; of the Temptation of Suchiguecal and her disobedience in gathering roses from a tree, and the consequent misery and disgrace of herself and all her posterity—not to recognize Scriptural analogies.

It is certainly not scientific to deny the logical force of such conclusions by men who speak after years of research—men of undisputed credibility in all common affairs of life. Scientific considerations demand a more reasonable view. The Book of Mormon, in relating the story of the migration of the Jaredites and showing their descent from Shem; and also the latter immigration of Lehi and his family, and Mulek and his guardians, about 600 B.C. enables us to account for the strictly Hebrew and Semitic features of Indian institutions and achievements, as shown by remains from remote millenniums as well as from more recent dates.

ALEXANDRIAN MANUSCRIPT

The Alexandrian Manuscript, known as A in theological literature, also by the name Alexandrinus Codex, corroborates in an astounding way the form of the name JARED as it appears in the Book of Ether.

That manuscript consists of four volumes containing a Greek translation of the entire Old Testament and most of the New. It has, besides, an epistle of the famous Athanasius to Marcellinus, and an assortment of early writings. According to one tradition, the copy was made in Alexandria about the middle of the 4th Century by an English lady by the name of Theclah. It was presented to King Charles I by the Patriarch of Constantinople in the year 1628, and it has been in the British Museum since 1753.

The value of the manuscript is very great for the textual criticism of the Bible, and its reading of Jared (as in the Book of Ether) for Jerah, a form of spelling in some earlier translations of the Book of Moses (Genesis), is of importance to students of ancient American history and not only to readers of the Book of Ether.

THE JAREDITES

According to the Book of Mormon, a colony, now known as Jaredites (Moroni 9:23), some time shortly after the attempt to build the famous Tower of Babel, came to America from the region occupied by the tower builders.

Very little is known about these colonists and their descendants, but we may suppose that their migration was part of a general movement in all directions which took place at that time, from the Land of Shinar, afterwards called Chaldea.

A GENERAL MIGRATION FROM BABYLON

That such a general migratory movement actually took place can hardly be doubted. Josephus, who drew information from both Hebrew and Greek sources, says:

"After this they were dispersed abroad, on account of their languages, and went out by colonies everywhere, and each colony took possession of that land which they lit upon, and unto which God led them; so that the whole continent was filled with them, both the inland and the maritime countries. There were some, also, who passed over the sea in ships and inhabited the islands." [^3]

In a much more recent work we read: [^4]

"All history demonstrates that from that central focus (Babylon) nations were propelled over the globe with an extraordinary degree of energy and geographical enterprise."

A Chinese tradition is mentioned by Dr. Fisher of Yale, thus:

"The nucleus of the Chinese Nation is thought to have been a band of immigrants, who are supposed by some to have started from the region southeast of the Caspian Sea, and to have crossed the headwaters of the Oxus. They followed the course of the Hoang Ho, or Yellow River, having entered the country of their adoption from the northwest, and they planted themselves in the present province of Shan-se." (Improvement Era, Feb., 1927, p. 314)

It is not impossible that others of the Jaredite Race followed the pioneers of the Book of Ether, and remained at the seashore, laying the foundation of the Chinese Empire. The annual pilgrimage of Chinese to the top of their sacred mount just at the point of the peninsula of Shantung confirms this supposition.

DATE OF THE JAREDITE MIGRATION

According to the chronology of Bishop Usher, which appears in English versions of the Bible, the building of the Tower was undertaken about B.C. 2,200. Dr. Joseph Angus, in his Bible Handbook, suggests 2,247. According to Babylonian traditions, the City of Babel was founded about the year B.C. 2,230. But as early as B.C. 2,000, there were clay tablets in the Babylonian Library, now preserved in the British Museum, which contained the story of the Tower-building. It must have been ancient history already at that time. Everything considered, the great dispersion can hardly have taken place much later than B.C. 2,500.

LOCATION OF THE TOWER

Near a place called Hillah on the east bank of the Euphrates, there is a splendid ruin known as Birs Nimrud, standing like a watch-tower on a vast plain. It is in the shape of a pyramid and is 150 feet high. On its top there is a solid mass of vitrified bricks. From inscriptions Sir Henry Rawlinson found its name to be The Temple of the Seven Planets. [^5] This ruin has been supposed to be what is left of the Tower of Babel.

THE JAREDITES AT MORIANCUMER

According to the Book of Ether (Ether 1:42; 2:1) the Jaredites began their journey by going northward into the Valley of Nimrod. In the course of their travels from this valley, they crossed many waters—lakes and rivers—and eventually they came to that great sea which divideth the lands, and there they pitched their tents and called the place Moriancumer, probably after the Brother of Jared who was the leader and head of the little colony. Here they remained four years.

JAREDITE CIVILIZATION

The Jaredites were far from being savages, or even barbarians, as these terms are used by modern writers. They were agriculturists familiar with seeds of every kind, and they had flocks of every kind. They were hunters and trappers, and bee-keepers [^6] and they understood how to utilize the food supply in the rivers and lakes, for as part of their equipment for the journey into the wilderness where there never had man been, they made a vessel in which they did carry with them the fish of the waters. All this indicates a civilization further advanced than we generally give the people of the so-called Stone Age credit for. A people cultivating the soil, taking care of flocks, keeping bees, hunting and fishing and constructing boats, (Ether 2:6) must have known a great variety of industries.

But, as a further evidence of the high intellectual and spiritual level attained by the Jaredites, their records tell us that they had revelations of the most exalting truths concerning God and man, which presupposes a high degree of intellectual and spiritual advancement.

BUILDING BARGES

At Moriancumer the Jaredites constructed eight barges, or vessels, in which they crossed the ocean.

Let us note one remarkable circumstance connected with the building of these ships. When they were completed, the question of illumination presented itself. The barges had no windows, and the travelers were not permitted to make a fire. The Brother of Jared, consequently, prompted by the most sublime, childlike faith, presented the difficulty before the Lord. But, the Divine Architect, instead of giving His faithful servant direct instructions on the matter, referred the question back to him: "What will ye that I shall do?" The ingenuity of the Brother of Jared thus being put to the test, this great leader of men, went up on a mountain, and there he did molten out of a rock, sixteen small stones, clear and transparent. These stones he presented before the Lord and asked that He make them luminous. God did so. He touched them with His finger, and they became light-bearers. [^7]

SETTLEMENTS IN THE LAND OF PROMISE

The first country settled in the Land of Promise was called Moron. [^8] Where that country was, we do not know, except it was near the Land which by the Nephites was called Desolation. From this center the Jaredites spread out in all directions, and became so numerous that there was no greater nation upon all the face of the earth, according to the word of the Lord.

Orson Pratt was of the opinion that the "Jaredite colony ... landed on the western coast of Mexico, and extended their settlements over all the North American portion of the Continent, where they dwelt until about six centuries before Christ, when, because of wickedness they were all destroyed." (Mill. Star, Vol. 38, p. 693)

Very early in their history the people made Orihah, the youngest son of Jared, their King. He walked humbly before the Lord, exercised his judicial functions in righteousness, and lived a happy domestic life, being the father of thirty-one children.

Omer, the fourth successor of Jared, had a rebellious son whom he named Jared. This son and his followers left the Country of Moron and established themselves in the Land of Heth.

Omer, being warned in a dream to leave his country because of the secret combinations, "traveled many days and came over and passed by the Hill of Shim, and came over by the place where the Nephites were destroyed, and from thence eastward, and came to a place which was called Ablom," possibly after Abel. Here, Omer was joined, later, by Nimrah and his followers.

During a season of drought and famine, in the days of Heth, the eighth from Jared, many of the Jaredites fled "towards the land southward, which was called by the Nephites, Zarahemla," and many perished, being attacked by poisonous serpents: nevertheless, "there were some who fled into the land southward." These were separated from the rest of the people, for the Lord caused the serpents "... that they should hedge the way that the people could not pass."

s

Although the history of the Jaredites in the Book of Ether is merely a faint outline, it makes it clear that, while Moron was the center of interest to the historian, the people had spread from there in various directions.

The first king of Moron was Orihah, the son of Jared. [^9]

Shule was one of the great rulers of the Jaredites. His reign, however, was exceedingly stormy, with wars and rebellions, and he fought with varying success, until he had overcome his enemies and given his people peace. He was a righteous judge and a wise law-giver, as well as a mighty warrior.

The success of Shule as a warrior is attributed to his superior arms. The historian says: "Wherefore, he came to the Hill Ephraim, and he did molten out of the hill, and made swords out of steel for those whom he had drawn with him."

STEEL

The Jaredites, in all probability, did not know iron in the particular form which we call steel, but from the earliest days of history the people had a metal which in the Old Testament Hebrew is called nechushah and nechushet, and which our Bible translators have rendered "steel" in four places, and "brass" twice. In Genesis 4:22, we read that Tubal-cain, a descendant of Cain, was an expert in "brass" (nechushah), and Job says of this metal that it is molten out of the stone, using an expression almost identical with that of Ether. In II Samuel 32:35; Job 20:24; Psalm 18:34; and Jeremiah 15:12, the same word has been rendered "steel." It means, in fact, neither. According to Gesenius it means "copper," "mostly as hardened and tempered in the manner of steel and used for arms and other cutting instruments." That was the kind of "steel" that Tubal-cain converted into implements, and may also have been the kind that Shule used in making swords. [^10]

CORIANTUMR

The last king of Moron was Coriantumr. In his day the country was the scene of incessant warfare. It was invaded by Shared, by Gilead, a brother of Shared, by Lib, and by Shiz, his brother, in succession, and so fierce were the conflicts during these invasions that two million men, and many women and children perished. (Ether 15:2) Coriantumr, appalled at the loss of life, made overtures for peace, but in vain. The opposing armies then took up strong positions near the Hill Ramah. For four years, Coriantumr and Shiz prepared themselves for a final battle. Each gathered his followers, "that they might receive all the strength which it was possible that they could receive." Even women and children were conscripted. The outcome of that battle was that both armies were annihilated. Shiz was slain. Coriantumr escaped and eventually reached the Country of Zarahemla. (Omni 21)

ALL JAREDITES NOT SLAIN?

The general understanding, we believe, is that the entire Jaredite Race was exterminated in this sanguinary battle, with the exception of Coriantumr. It is, of course, possible that the narrative is to be so understood, but the probability is that the Prophet Ether only refers to the annihilation of the two armies and the end of the monarchial form of government.

At the time of the Battle of Ramah there must have been probably millions of Jaredites in this hemisphere; that is evident from the fact that two million souls had perished in the four years before that battle. But it would be absurd to suppose that every Jaredite, men, women, and children, old and young, sick and cripples, as well as strong and well-informed individuals, were enlisted in the armies and encamped around the Hill. It, furthermore, would be contrary to human experience to suppose that there were no desertions from the armies during the long and deadly encounters. It is much more probable that some escaped and when missing, were counted as dead. Again, is it improbable that some of the wounded recovered and survived, without any record having been made of their recovery? We know, from Ether 9:32, that some Jaredites escaped into the "Land Southward," during the famine in the days of Heth, and they must also have become numerous and possibly were not directly interested in the war between Coriantumr and Shiz.

It is very customary to speak of an entire nation when we mean only the more important part of it. We say, for instance, that the Kingdom of Judah was carried away into captivity, when, as a matter of fact, only a small portion, though an important one, was transported to Babylon. Thus, in the first captivity, B.C.598, the Babylonians carried away 3,023 souls, leaving the common people in their homes. Ten years later 832 captives, and in B.C. 584, 745 more were expatriated—4,600 in all; [^11] or, if these figures give only the number of men, say 15,000, including women and children. In the same way, we speak of the return of the captives, when, as a matter of fact, only half of them, 31,629, according to one estimate, and 42,360, according to another, left the land of captivity. [^12]

Furthermore, it seems to us that some Indian traditions regarding the migration of their forefathers, some of their religious ideas, especially the place of the heavenly bodies and the serpents in their symbolism, and many linguistic peculiarities point to a Jaredite origin, which cannot be explained on the supposition that the entire race was wiped out.

Destruction does not always mean extermination. We speak of the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jews (I Nephi 10:3), but they still exist. Compare II Nephi 25:9, where the Jews are said to have been destroyed "from generation to generation."

If we set Bishop Usher's chronology aside as too short [^13] and assume that the building of the Tower and the dispersion took place about B.C. 2,500, and if the Battle of Ramah took place not long after the arrival of the Mulekites in America, the history of the Jaredites in the Book of Ether covers a period of about 1900 years. During all that time the people built cities, cultivated the ground, engaged in arts, industries, and trade; they lived, loved, and died, until, because of moral degeneration, their governments were broken up and their countries made desolate, through famine, pestilence, and war.

JAREDITES HAD TIME TO INCREASE

Nineteen centuries may not be a long period in the history of the Earth, but what a multitude of events are crowded into 1900 years of human records! Or even much less time than that. Here is an illustration:

In 1865, one of the big trees in Calaveras County, California, was cut down. Edgar de la Rue calculated that it began to grow about 620 A.D.; then he went over history since that time to see what had happened during the lifetime of that venerable tree. His article found its way into print, in the form of a dispatch, dated Red Bluff, Cal., February 4, 1922.

The tree was born about the time Mohammedanism began to take root, and, we may add, when papacy was established by the imperial decree of Emperor Phocas, in 607 A.D. [^14] It was 110 years old when the Battle of Tours was fought. Figuratively speaking, the tree saw the introduction of Christianity in Scandinavia in 830; the beginning of the Reign of Alfred the Great in England; the Crusades; the signing of the Magna Charta in 1220; and the conquest of Wales in 1280. The tree was growing and developing when Columbus discovered America in 1492, and when Balboa, in 1520, first viewed the Pacific Ocean. The tree was 1,030 years old when Oliver Cromwell was made Protector, and had reached the age of 1,156 years when America's Declaration of Independence was signed in 1776. It was, finally, 1,244 years old at the close of the Civil War, in 1865, when it was cut down. If to this age of a tree we add six or seven centuries for the history of the Jaredites, we can form some idea of the immensity and infinite diversity of the contents of that history, of which only a fraction, and that in mere outline, has been handed down to us. Consider also, that it is about 1,900 years since the Christian Religion, itself, was revealed.

Footnotes

Orihah Coriantum Morianton Lib Coriantum Ethem

Kib Com Kim Hearthom Com Moron

Shule Heth Levi Heth Shiblon Coriantor

Omer Shez Corom Aaron Seth

Emer Riplakish Kish Amnigaddah Ahah

The last ruler, the contemporary of Ether, the Prophet, was Coriantumr. (Ether 12:1)

THE JAREDITE LANDS

PLACE OF LANDING NOT KNOWN

The Jaredites, led by Divine Power, landed on the shores of the Promised Land, after a perilous voyage across the deep, that had lasted 344 days. Such is the information contained in the Book of Ether. But where they disembarked, the historian does not say. (Ether 6:11-12)

MULTIPLYING AND SPREADING

The next fact concerning the newcomers is, that "they went forth upon the face of the land,—the Promised Land, the North American Continent—"and began to till the land." We read further, that "they began to spread upon the face of the land, and to multiply and to till the earth; and they did wax strong in the land."

These two statements read together can only mean that the various families of the Jaredites, soon after their arrival, separated and occupied each its own territory for cultivation, under the administration of the great leaders, as appears later. From the outset, they were avoiding the mistake of the tower builders. They were not centralizing the population, but distributing it. Settlers went forth from the place of landing as soon as naturally convenient, and established themselves in new localities. This process was repeated in the following generations, and the whole continent became gradually well populated.

The record, having stated that the country had a numerous population, breaks the historical chain of events, and joins the disconnected links years afterwards, when the Brother of Jared let it be known that he felt old age and dissolution approaching. Many years, with their rapidly progressing developments, are thus passed by in silence. How many we know not. But the two sons of Joktan, Jared and his brother, must have reached a very high age before they realized that their work was nearly finished. They were, perhaps, nearing the end of their second century. We venture this supposition on the strength of Genesis 11:11-26, where the age of each of the ancestors of Abraham is given.

Peleg, the brother of Joktan, lived 239 years. Regu, the son of Peleg, was also 239 years of age when he died. Serug, Regu's son, was 230 at the time of his death. Nahor, the son of Serug and the grandfather of Abraham, reached the age of 148 years. It is a reasonable conclusion that the two sons of Joktan, Jared and his brother, reached at least the average age of the mentioned descendants of Peleg, the brother of Joktan, or about 214 years. During that time, important geographic changes must have occurred in the Jaredite settlements, as well as progress in other directions, for the purposes of replenishing the Earth (Genesis 9:1), not gathering.

Another conclusion is, also, in our judgment, unavoidable. We must not expect to find the administration of the two great leaders of the people, a century or a century and a half after the landing, to be located at the coast. As settlers went forth in various directions and founded colonies, the centers of population changed, and, at a time when the means of communication were not what they are today, the convenience of the government must have demanded that its seat be moved to the more populous and influential of communities. Jared and his brother must, therefore, at the end of their long career, have had their capital, probably far from the coast. If, as some have said, the landing place was somewhere "south of the Gulf of California and north of the Isthmus of Panama," such moves, either north or south, would have been feasible.

The foregoing comments are offered on Ether 6:19-20, where we read that the Brother of Jared proposed to take a census preparatory to submitting the question of the future form of government to a general vote. The necessity of a registration of the voters indicates that the Jaredites were numerous at that time.

THE LAND OF NEHOR

This is the first American Land, or country, which is mentioned by name in the Book of Ether. Jared had passed away, also his Brother. Orihah, Jared's son, was no more. Kib, the son of Orihah, was the reigning head of the government.

One of Orihah's sons was named Corihor. He forsook his father's house and homeland and established himself in the Land of Nehor. Here, after some years of preparation, he placed himself at the head of a rebellion. Kib, the King, was captured by the insurgents and became a prisoner of war, and Corihor usurped his place in the government.

The name of the country, supposing it to be a Semitic word, may give a clue, at least to the direction in which to look for it. Nehar is the Hebrew for river. As a verb it is used metaphorically (Jeremiah 31:12; 51:44; Micah 1:4) for the flowing together of nations into one place. Nehor, the Jaredite form of the word, almost certainly has the same meaning as the Hebrew nahar, a river, or a place, a land, by a river; a country into which people are flowing. Nehor is said to be Egyptian for the Nile. To the Hebrews and other Semites, nahar was the Euphrates. The country between the Missouri and the Mississippi may well have reminded the Jaredites of Mesopotamia. The Mississippi may well have been the Nahar, or Nehor, of the Old Country to them.

Here it may be mentioned that the American press, a few years ago, announced that recognized archeologists had come to the conclusion that a city-building people had inhabited Illinois, Ohio, Indiana, and Wisconsin, as far back as B.C. 3000. This would take us back further than the beginning of the Jaredite era, according to the chronology of Ussher, and it is not necessary to go back that far. But the point is this, that the mighty Mississippi River is flowing through the very area that is mentioned by the archeologists as the habitation of a city-building people. This raises the question whether the Nehor of the Book of Ether is not the Mississippi, and the Land of Nehor the Mississippi Valley and an adjacent indefinite area, where today innumerable mounds prove a numerous population in the remote antiquity.

THE LAND OF MORON

The king dwelt here. (Ether 7:5-6; 17) It was the capital, the center of Jaredite culture. To the generation of Orihah and Kib, following immediately after that of Jared and his brother, Moron was the Land of their first inheritance, (vv. 16-17) because it was a land which the two great leaders, before they passed away, undoubtedly, bequeathed to their posterity. In time it became the center of Jaredite history as well as culture. (Ether 14:11)

The literal meaning of the word Moron, supposing marana, meaning our Lord (I Corinthians 16:22) to be its AramÃ¦ kindred, would also be our Lord. Applied to a country it would mean The Land of Our Lord. It had, undoubtedly, been dedicated to His service. Compare Ether 2:12, where it is expressly stated that nations living in this Promised Land are under obligation to serve the Lord of this land, Who is Jesus Christ, in return for the blessings of liberty.

Moroni, who abridged Mosiah's translation of the Twenty-four gold plates which contained the full account of the Jaredite history, gives the information that Moron was near the Land which is called Desolation by the Nephites. (See, Alma 22:30-32; 46:17; 50:34; 63:5) If, as is probable, Moron was in a south-western direction from Nehor, the land by the river, and north of Desolation, it would include in its area what is now known as Missouri, and, consequently, Jackson County, where Independence City is located. It would also embrace Adam-ondi-Ahman, about fifty miles north of Jackson County, an area made sacred during the time of Adam, and which is again to attain to extraordinary prominence in the Kingdom of God, when the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel, the Prophet. (Doctrine and Covenants 116) Orson Pratt says Adam-ondi-Ahman means, The Valley of God. (Journal of Discourses, Volume 16, p. 48), almost the same as Moron. (Also, read Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-57)

Independence has become an almost sacred place in the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It will again, in due time, be the stage on which the glory of the Almighty will be manifest to all the world. Revelation says of Missouri: "This is the Land of Promise, and the place for the city of Zion. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place." (Doctrine and Covenants 57:2-3) "There the center place, or Zion, will be built up." [^15] A magnificent temple will be erected there. There the New Jerusalem will be built, beginning at the Temple Lot (Doctrine and Covenants 84:2-5; also see, III Nephi 20:22; 21:23-25; Ether 13:3-6).

Missouri, and especially Independence, Jackson County, is, accordingly, destined to become the attraction of the world, when the Holy City rises there is splendor, with, figuratively speaking, streets of gold and gates of precious stones; when the first temple-palace ever built by man is reared in which the King of kings, with His glorified attendants, will receive His Holy Priesthood in audience, to confer with them and give instructions concerning the affairs of His Kingdom.

Does anyone, half doubtful, ask why such signal honor should be bestowed upon a region such as of which we are speaking?

The answer is: Adam-ondi-Ahman was, undoubtedly dedicated to the Lord by our great progenitor, himself, during the Adamic dispensation, before the Flood. Moron, in all probability the same land as that in which Adam-ondi-Ahman was situated, was similarly dedicated by the Brother of Jared, during the dispensation of Noah, after the deluge. Such a dedication is a covenant between God and man, similar to the Covenant of God with Abraham concerning Palestine. But, as far as God is concerned, a covenant stands forever. It is everlasting, even if it be temporarily set aside by the other part. That we believe, is the reason for the selection by the Lord of Missouri to be a Land of Promise, the place for the New Jerusalem, the place for the City of Zion.

EPHRAIM

This is the name of a hill, or, perhaps, a hilly region, near the City of Nehor, the Capital of the Land of Nehor. The meaning of the word is fruitful, indicating a prosperous part of the country. It must have been known especially for its wealth of minerals, for when Shule decided to begin military operations against his brother, Corihor, on behalf of their father, Kib, he went to the Hill Ephraim, and there he made swords of steel for his army. Thus equipped he attacked and deposed his wicked brother, liberated their father, and placed him again at the head of the government. (Ether 7:9)

There seems to be no doubt that the ancient dwellers of the region through which the Mississippi flows were miners. Bancroft (Native Races, Volume 4, p. 783) says that ancient miners have left numerous traces of their work in the region of Lake Superior. At one place a piece of copper—almost pure—weighing over five tons has been found fifteen feet below the surface. It bore marks of fire.

THE LAND OF THEIR FIRST INHERITANCE

This seems to be Moron. (Ether 7:17) Corihor had a son named Noah. He organized a rebellion against Shule, the King, and Corihor, his father. Having become the ruler over the Land of their First Inheritance, he made Shule a prisoner of war and carried him captive into Moron. That identifies Moron as the Land of their First Inheritance.

THE LAND OF HETH

(Ether 8:2) Where this Land, or, district, was, we do not know. Heth, according to Genesis 15, was the second son of Canaan, a descendant of Ham, and the ancestor of the Hittites, who at one time were a powerful people, strong enough to wage war against Egypt and Assyria. They inhabited Canaan at the time of the Exodus. The name means terror. Perhaps there were descendants of Ham among the friends who followed Jared and his brother from the Tower. That would account for the name of this Land.

ABLOM

(Ether 9:3) The name means green meadows. The country was situated possibly on the Atlantic Seacoast. That was the opinion of Orson Pratt as stated in a footnote in earlier editions of the Book of Mormon.

The Hill Shim, which Omer and his family passed on their flight to Ablom was located in a Country called Antum. (Mormon 1:3) This name, as some other Book of Mormon words, is evidently the Kechua, anta, which Garcilasso de la Vega translates, copper. It is, no doubt, related to antion, a piece of gold (Alma 11:19), and onti, a piece of silver (Alma 11:6). It is suggestive of a mining region.

Nimrah, after his brother had been murdered by their father, fled to Ablom, to the colony of Omer.

THE LAND SOUTHWARD

This, as the Prophet Moroni explains (Ether 9:31), was known as Zarahemla by the Nephites. It was the Land Southward to the Jaredites, while Moron, Nehor, and the countries round about, were the north countries. (v. 35)

THE NARROW NECK OF LAND

The Isthmus of Panama. See, Ether 10:20.

THE VALLEY OF GILGAL

In the fourth year of the war that ended in the disaster at Ramah, Coriantumr, the last King of the Jaredites, met his bitter enemy, Shared, in this valley. The murderous combat lasted for three days. Shared was defeated and fled precipitately to the Plains of Heshlon (Ether 13:27-28). See, Ether 6:14. The name Gilgal means circle. It may have been given to the valley on account of its circular form, or because of certain mounds erected there for dwellings, or for sepulchral purposes or for fortifications. The mounds were of different forms. Some were in the shape of animals. One mound in Ohio is thought to represent a snake swallowing an egg. Other mounds are circular. Circleville, Ohio, has its name from mounds of that form.

WILDERNESS OF AKISH

(Ether 14:3-7) There is a Semitic word, akash, to be froward, false, etc., as in Psalm 101:4, "A froward heart shall depart from me." Akish, the name, may be a derivative from the same root as this word. Its meaning would describe accurately the character of Akish, the son of Kimnor, in Ether 8:10.

Two years after the death of Shared, his brother, Gilead, attacked Coriantumr. The Battle of the Wilderness of Akish ensued. Gilead succeeded in usurping the throne of Coriantumr in Moron, and the latter entrenched himself and his followers in the Wilderness of Akish. They remained there for two years. During that time Gilead was murdered by his chief ecclesiastical official, who, in his turn was slain by an ambitious individual named Lib. Coriantumr now attacked Lib, but he was defeated and fled to a place called Agosh. Here another battle occurred. Lib fell, but his brother Shiz assumed the leadership.

The people, at this time, began to split into two parties. Many thousands had been slain upon the battlefields during the years of war. Of the survivors, some joined Coriantumr, others Shiz. The next battle was fought "upon the seashore," possibly on the shore of some great inland lake. (Ether 14:11-26)

LAND OF CORIHOR

(Ether 14:27-31) Coriantumr continued his retreat, closely pursued by Shiz. So terrible were the losses inflicted on the armies of Shiz by the rear guard of Coriantumr's troops that the inhabitants in the settlements through which the armies passed, fled in terror and panic, to the Land of Corihor. After a battle of three days at the seashore, Shiz went into camp in the Valley of Corihor, and Coriantumr pitched his tents in the Valley of Shurr. A battle was fought at the Hill Comnor. Coriantumr was severely wounded and was carried from the battlefield as though dead.

THE HILL RAMAH

(Ether 15:11) The Jaredite name for Cumorah. When Coriantumr recovered sufficiently from his wounds, and then realized that two million men, and in addition their wives and children, making perhaps a total of between three and four million souls, had been slain during the years of warfare, he offered his antagonist the Kingdom if he would end further bloodshed. Shiz rejected the offer. He demanded the life of Coriantumr. So the war was continued.

Coriantumr took his stand near the waters of Ripliancum, probably an inland lake. Shiz attacked and was defeated. He fled with his soldiers to a place called Ogath. Coriantumr, who was again wounded, did not pursue, but went—probably northward—to the country and Hill Ramah. The two deadly enemies each had its own gathering place—one at Ramah, the other at Ogath.

The next four years preparations were made in both these camps for a final conflict. All things being made ready, the massacre at Ramah took place, as is described in Ether 15:15-34.

CONCLUSION

In order to get a correct picture of the conflict at Ramah, its antecedents and consequences, certain facts should be remembered.

The disaster was brought about when the leaders of the people had apostatized from the Lord, rejected His Government, and persecuted His Holy Prophets.

The Jaredites, in this country, had an experience similar to that of the Israelites and Jews in their Promised Land, ages afterwards, who, after the destruction of their City and Sanctuary, were slain or driven and scattered all over the globe, where they became lost both to themselves and to the world.

It should also be remembered that the reign of Lib, the son of Kish, a considerable exodus of Jaredites took place from the North Countries to the South. (Ether 10:19-28) This movement was primarily for the purpose of procuring food, clothing, and we dare say, materials for implements, weapons and ornaments, for the agriculturists in the north who had seen their stock perish, and their farms burn up during the years of drought. Many of these hunters, as they are termed, did not return. They remained in the south. They built at least one great city by the narrow neck of land on the place where the sea divides the land. (Ether 10:20) How many more cities they founded we do not know, but they must have multiplied at least at the same rate as their kindred in the north. (Ether 9:16; 10:4; 12:22) If the Jaredites in the north were counted by the millions (Ether 15:2), there may have been other millions in the south. Coriantumr, the last and only individual who survived the war between him and Shiz, and who wandered many miles south of the scene of that last battle at Ramah, may have been hopeful of finding these very same people.

We should be reminded, further, of the fact that the conflict at Ramah was the final settlement of the chief issue between two political parties, or their leaders, Coriantumr and Shiz, respectively. Both were in the field for power and royal honors. Shiz, in addition, was consumed by an unquenchable thirst for revenge. He wanted the life of his antagonist. Their campaign during the four years preceding Ramah (Ether 15:14) was a tireless effort to bring as many people as possible together in their two gathering places, but especially men for service on the battlefield, together with their resources.

Footnotes

THE BOOK OF ETHER

CHAPTER 1

SCEther 1 1Ether 1 2Verses 1-2

SCEther 1 1Ether 1 2The Book of Ether. In the Book of Ether, Moroni, the son of the Prophet Mormon, presents an account of the ancient inhabitants of America who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord in the "north country."

SCEther 1 1Ether 1 2The land referred to is evidently that in which Moroni sojourned at the time he made his version of this Book, which land is also known as Desolation. It was probably in North America, where the Battle of Cumorah had been fought.

SCEther 1 1Ether 1 2The account of Moroni's is, substantially, a summary of the translation of King Mosiah of the twenty-four gold plates found by the explorers of Limhi (Mosiah 21:25-29). They became known as "The Book of Ether," from the name of the author (Ether 1:6).

SCEther 1 3Ether 1 4Ether 1 5Verses 3-5

SCEther 1 3Ether 1 4Ether 1 5The story of the beginnings not told. Moroni explains that the stories of the Creation and of Adam, and the history of the world to the time of the building of the great tower occupied the first part of the twenty-four plates, but that this section was omitted from his version because it was "had among the Jews," referring to the records of Moses. This is a notable testimony to the genuineness and the authenticity of the first eleven chapters of the Book of Genesis in the Bible, and, by inference, of the whole five Books of Moses. Here, as elsewhere, the Book of Mormon is, in the language of many scholars, "A New Witness for God."

Ether 1 5Verse 5

Ether 1 5Not a full account. In the first paragraph Moroni informs us that the subject of his historical sketch is the ancient inhabitants who were destroyed "upon the face" of this "north country." He is relating the tragic fate of that part of the Jaredites. In the fifth verse he adds that he does not copy the full account as committed to writing by Ether, but only a part of it.

Ether 1 5The Jaredites, at the time of Ether, were widely scattered on the American Continents. All students of the Book of Ether agree on that. The divine promise to Jared, before he left for America, was, "There will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto Me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto Me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth." This promise was fulfilled during the centuries that intervened between the arrival of Jared in America and the Battle of Ramah.

Ether 1 5Orson Pratt says:

Ether 1 5"In process of time they became a very numerous and powerful people, occupying principally North America; building large cities in all quarters of the land; being a civilized and enlightened nation." (Remarkable Visions, Edinburgh, 1840)

Ether 1 5President George Reynolds says:

Ether 1 5"The contemporary nations on the Eastern Continent—Egypt, Chaldea and Babylonia—were insignificant when compared with the vast extent of territory held and filled by the Jaredites; they were the sole rulers of the whole Western Hemisphere, and possibly the originals whence arose the stories of the fabled Atlantis; for we have no account that God shut them out from the knowledge of the rest of mankind when He planted them in America, as He afterwards did the Nephites; and late researches have shown that the geographical knowledge of the ancients was much greater in the earlier ages than at the time of the Savior and a few hundred years previous to His advent." (The Story of the Book of Mormon, p. 325, Edition of 1957)

Ether 1 5When studying the Book of Ether it is important to remember that neither the original author, or authors, nor the later copyist, intended to produce a handbook on American archaeology or ancient ethnography; Ether gives, very briefly, some of the main historical features of the people governed by Jared and his descendants through Orihah. Of the descendants of the Brother of Jared we are informed that one of them, "a mighty man," overthrew Moron, the grandfather of Ether, and kept him prisoner and his son, Coriantor, the father of the prophet, in captivity all their days. (Ether 11:17-23) But what of the other immigrants who left the site of the Tower with Jared and his brother and accompanied them to what is now called America? In Ether 6:16 we read that, "The friends of Jared and his brother were in number about twenty and two souls, and they also begat sons and daughters before they came to the Promised Land; and therefore they began to be many." At the time of the Battle of Ramah there must have been Jaredites of the many various lineages in favorable locations all over the Western Hemisphere, as amply evidenced by shell heaps, mounds, and mysterious ruins in widely separated places.

SCEther 1 6Ether 1 7Ether 1 8Ether 1 9Ether 1 10Ether 1 11Ether 1 12Ether 1 13Ether 1 14Ether 1 15Ether 1 16Ether 1 17Ether 1 18Ether 1 19Ether 1 20Ether 1 21Ether 1 22Ether 1 23Ether 1 24Ether 1 25Ether 1 26Ether 1 27Ether 1 28Ether 1 29Ether 1 30Ether 1 31Ether 1 32Verses 6-32

SCEther 1 6Ether 1 7Ether 1 8Ether 1 9Ether 1 10Ether 1 11Ether 1 12Ether 1 13Ether 1 14Ether 1 15Ether 1 16Ether 1 17Ether 1 18Ether 1 19Ether 1 20Ether 1 21Ether 1 22Ether 1 23Ether 1 24Ether 1 25Ether 1 26Ether 1 27Ether 1 28Ether 1 29Ether 1 30Ether 1 31Ether 1 32There are thirty generations, beginning with Jared.

SCEther 1 6Ether 1 7Ether 1 8Ether 1 9Ether 1 10Ether 1 11Ether 1 12Ether 1 13Ether 1 14Ether 1 15Ether 1 16Ether 1 17Ether 1 18Ether 1 19Ether 1 20Ether 1 21Ether 1 22Ether 1 23Ether 1 24Ether 1 25Ether 1 26Ether 1 27Ether 1 28Ether 1 29Ether 1 30Ether 1 31Ether 1 32SEMITIC NAMES

SCEther 1 6Ether 1 7Ether 1 8Ether 1 9Ether 1 10Ether 1 11Ether 1 12Ether 1 13Ether 1 14Ether 1 15Ether 1 16Ether 1 17Ether 1 18Ether 1 19Ether 1 20Ether 1 21Ether 1 22Ether 1 23Ether 1 24Ether 1 25Ether 1 26Ether 1 27Ether 1 28Ether 1 29Ether 1 30Ether 1 31Ether 1 32On closer examination of the names of Ether's progenitors, we find a large percent of them to be related to Semitic stems. For instance, Jared means in Hebrew, one who descends, or, according to others, one who rules. Compare Ether 2:1, where it is stated that the journey began with Jared and his companion "descending" into the Valley of Nimrod. Shule (possibly from "shaal," to ask for, to desire) meaning a man of prayer. His biography (Ether 7:7-27) justifies this appellation. Omer and Emer (possibly from "amar") means a speaker, or perhaps (like Omri) one to whom God speaks. Com and Kim (from kum or koom) meaning to arise, to stand up, and is applied to a hill, a height. Levi (from the stem "lavah" to join or to associate with; compare Genesis 29:34), meaning a joining. Aaron, meaning a mountain of strength; Kish, straw, forage; Lib, whiteness; Seth, put; Ethem, their strength Ether, abundance.

SCEther 1 6Ether 1 7Ether 1 8Ether 1 9Ether 1 10Ether 1 11Ether 1 12Ether 1 13Ether 1 14Ether 1 15Ether 1 16Ether 1 17Ether 1 18Ether 1 19Ether 1 20Ether 1 21Ether 1 22Ether 1 23Ether 1 24Ether 1 25Ether 1 26Ether 1 27Ether 1 28Ether 1 29Ether 1 30Ether 1 31Ether 1 32It is evident from this genealogical record that Jared was a descendant of Shem that son of Noah of whom it is said that he was the "father of all the children of Eber"; that is, of all the peoples later known as Hebrews (Genesis 10-21).

THE JAREDITES IN GENESIS

The story of the Jaredites, as preserved by Ether, lends added interest to the brief notes concerning the lineage of Eber in Genesis.

This patriarch had two sons. One he called Peleg (division), "for in his day was the earth divided." (Genesis 10:25) The other was called by him, Jokta (meaning either "small," or "dispute," "contention." Both names were a remind of some historic event by which the human families in the early stage of the existence had been separated and dispersed.

The names of the ancestors of Eber from Shem, and his descendants through Peleg to Abraham, are found in Genesis 11:1-26, proving the Semitic and Hebrew lineage of the Israelites or Jews. This is one of the highest importance for the identification of our Lord as the Messiah of the Old Testament prophecies.

A shorter list of names of the families of Eber, from Shem to the sons of Jokta is given in Genesis 10:21-32, representing a Hebrew line different from that Abraham. This brief genealogical record closes with the significant words: "They are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, and their nations * * * and by those were the nations divided in the earth after flood"; so that, although the record of names is small, the history covered by concerns many people, countries, and cultures. This may be sufficient ground the assumption that the Jaredites, too, have a place among the links of this genealogical chain; that, in fact, Jared was a descendant of Joktan, as Abraham was Peleg.

JOKTAN AND JUCATAN

There are geographical names in America, which can best be accounted for on this supposition. Yucatan is one of them, for that is, we have no doubt, the same as Joktan, and it may have been brought to America by descendants, perhaps a son, of that great-great-grandson of Shem. [^16] The Arabians who claim that Joktan was one of the principal founders of their nation call him, "Kahtan."

OPHIR

One of the sons of Joktan was so named. Very early some place, famous for its gold, also became known as Ophir. The name signifies, it is said, "red," or, as a name of a certain place, a "fruitful place," the same as "Bountiful," a prominent name in the story of the Book of Mormon. In the Book of Job, one of the earliest literary productions of the Old Testament, the "gold of Ophir," is mentioned twice. Eliphas, a friend of the sorely tried patriarch, tells him that if he would repent and put aside iniquity, God would give him "gold as dust and gold of Ophir as stones of the brook." [^17]

WHERE WAS THE LAND OF OPHIR?

That question has been very much debated. The preponderance of opinion has placed it in southern Arabia, where other sons of Joktan settled and became the ancestors of mighty Arabian tribes. But Armenia has also been suggested as the Land of Ophir. Some have thought that one of the Moluccas, or Spice Islands, in the Malay Archipelago, was Ophir, while others have regarded the region about the delta of the Indus River in India as the marvelous land of gold. Bancroft and others note that Columbus believed the Island of Haiti (Hispaniola) to be the Ophir of King Solomon. (Native Races, Vol. 5, pp. 64-65) He must, consequently, have thought that a vast commercial traffic connected the Old World with the Western Hemisphere more than a thousand years before our era. Bancroft also quotes notable authority for the hypothesis that Ophir was Peru in South America. Finally, it should be noted that both Jeremiah (10:8-10) and Daniel (10:5) refer to Ophir under the name of "Uphaz."

Perhaps, as suggested by Dr. John Fiske and others, "Ophir" was a common designation for valuable articles of merchandise, which daring merchant-sailors brought from almost mythical localities outside the boundaries of the more generally known world. Perhaps Hebrew writers, anciently spoke of gold of Ophir as we speak of "foreign" products and contrast them with domestic goods. [^18]

JERAH

This is another interesting and, for this inquiry, important name in the genealogical list of the descendants of Noah, through Shem. It is, in Genesis, the name of a son of Joktan, the brother of Peleg in whose days the earth was divided. It is the same name as that by which the great hero of the Book of Ether, Jared, is known. There is little doubt that the Jerah of Genesis is the Jared of Ether.

This may call for a word of explanation. Varients of the same name. The spelling in Genesis is Jerah (English) and Jarach (Hebrew), the ch representing an audible h-sound. According to Smith's Bible Dictionary, the Alexandrian Codex, one of the oldest and most useful guides on questions relating to the genuineness of the Scripture texts, spells the name, Jarad, which is, letter for letter, when the consonants alone are read, the same as in the Book of Ether. It is always to be remembered that in the earliest Hebrew manuscripts there were no vowel points, only consonants. The Septuagint of the Complutensian Polyglott edition has, Jerach. In I Chronicles 1:2, the Aldine of the Septuagint reads, Jader instead of Jared, while the Complutensian edition has, Jare, the final letter apparently missing. The two forms, Jader and Jare, are most likely probably slips of the copyists, easily accounted for. Letters will sometimes, in copying, become transposed inadvertently, and sometimes omitted. Compare "Jarad," "Jerach," "Jader," "Jare," with "Jared." The Arabian is, "Yerakh." But they are all the same name. [^19]

THE DIVISION OF THE EARTH

According to Genesis (10:25 and 31-32), during the days of Peleg and his brother Joktan, the earth was divided between various families, tongues, and nations. Several of the sons of Joktan settled in southern Arabia, but Jerah does not seem to have been among these. In Smith Dictionary of the Bible, the information is given that "he has not been satisfactorily identified with the name of any Arabian place or tribe, though a fortress (and probably an old town, like the numerous fortified places in the Yemen of the old Himyarite Kingdom) named Yerakh is mentioned as belonging to the district of Nijjad." This is perfectly intelligible, if, as the Book of Ether relates, Jared and one of his brothers were, by Divine inspiration, appointed to lead a company of colonizers to America. And why should not this hemisphere have been peopled, as well as the eastern continents, when "the nations were divided in the earth after the flood?" (Genesis 10:32)

Ether 1 32Verse 32

Ether 1 32Oriah, the son of Jared. The genealogical record of Ether begins with the names outlined in verses 6-32. The names connecting Jared, or Jerah, with Shem, the son of Noah, and through him with Adam as in Genesis, are all omitted. Moroni has already explained that he begins his story with the dispersion at the Tower, because history of previous events "is had among the Jews." (Ether 1:35)

Ether 1 33Verse 33

Ether 1 33Jared came forth with his brother. Joktan had thirteen sons: Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah (or Jared), Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, Obal, Abimael, Sheba, Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab (Genesis 10:26-29). Each of these names stands for some characteristic, some act, or experience, of the owner of it. Almodad means "Measure of God." Hazarmaveth, a place name, "Dwelling of death," the same as "desolation." Abimael means "my father from God." Jobab is said to mean "howling or mourning." The first part of the name, Jobab, seems to connect it with the patriarch in the Land of Uz, "whose name was Job." (Job 1:1)

Ether 1 34Verse 34

Ether 1 34The Brother of Jared. It is stated in this verse that the Brother of Jared was a "large and mighty man, and a man highly favored of the Lord." His name is not given. We think it is a striking testimony to his humility and self-negation that he, notwithstanding his spiritual endowments and physical characteristics, which made him a great leader of men, was content with being known as Ahijared (the Brother of Jared) or some such subordinate title.

Ether 1 34In the absence of direct revelation on the question of his name we can only form opinions. It is reasonably certain that it was one of the other twelve sons of Joktan, who went with Jared and became prominent in early American history. But which one of them? There were twelve. And they were all brothers of Jared.

Ether 1 34Everything considered, we are inclined to think that Ophir, the eleventh son of Joktan, is the Brother of Jared of the Book of Ether; chiefly for the reason that he became the best known, the most famous, of the twelve others, next after Jared. Very early his fondness for gold, or his ability to acquire it, prompted his contemporaries to attach his name to any place in the far away, dimly known regions of the earth where the precious metal abounded. The gold was the "gold of Ophir." And in one place (Job 22:24), "ophir," is in the mouth of Eliphas of Theman, means gold. His message to the patriarch has been quoted in a previous paragraph of this chapter, but it is worth repeating. This is what he said literally:

Ether 1 34"Yes, throw in dust gold,

Ether 1 34And on rocks of brooks, ophir."

Ether 1 34If ophir is understood to mean gold, Peru in olden times certainly was a "land of ophir." The story of Inca Atahualpa and Pizarro is well known. The Spaniard promised the Inca to give him life and liberty, if he would fill a certain room with gold as high as a man could reach. Atahualpa did so. The value of the precious metal thus collected at a short notice is, by Prescott, estimated at fifteen and one-half million dollars, and it would be worth much more at this time. At the time of King Solomon there may have been more than one land of ophir, or gold, but the commercially famous Eldorado of that age was so far distant from Ezion-geber that three years were required for the round trip. That was far enough away from the port of embarkation to make the suggestion that Ophir was in Peru seem more than a dream. May not Ophir have been the brother who accompanied Jared to America at the time of the dispersion? (See note under "Moriancumer," Ether 2:13)

THE DISPERSION

The familiar story of the Dispersion is told in Genesis 11:1-9. While the human family as yet had but one language, some of them, journeying eastward, came to the Plain of Shinar, where, later, the famous City of Babylon was built. In this inviting locality they decided to build a world city, with a tower, or sanctuary, to become known throughout the entire inhabited world. By this means, they argued, their unity as one people with one speech and one religion would be preserved. Perhaps they also thought that the privileged class might find a refuge in the tower in case of another flood. At all events, the plan was displeasing to the Lord. It disregarded the commandment to Noah: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." And, in all probability, it was an evidence of doubt and contempt as regards the sacred covenant of God with all living beings on earth, of which the rainbow was made the glorious symbol. (Genesis 9:12-13) And so the Lord frustrated their plans by confounding their language.

THE ACCOUNT AMPLY CONFIRMED

The Hebrew account of the Dispersion is amply confirmed. Fragments of a document with cuneiform text, discovered by Professor George Smith, the English Assyriologist, tell of men who had turned against God and essayed to build a mound at Babylon. But the winds blew down their tower and Anu confounded great and small on the mound and "made strange their counsel."

Plato refers to a tradition according to which men and animals, at one time, had one language. But men became too ambitious in their quest for immortality, wherefore Jupiter confounded their speech, and they were dispersed.

In the Sibylline Oracles which at one time were supposed to be inspired by a prophetess in Babylonia, an alleged relative of the Egyptian Isis, the Dispersion is referred to thus: "The gods sent storms of wind and overthrew the tower, and gave everyone his peculiar language, and for this reason it was that the city was called Babylon." (Josephus, Antiquities 1:4) [^20]

THE CALL OF JARED, HIS BROTHER, AND THEIR FRIENDS

This section contains information concerning the origin of ancient Americans. It connects them by means of an historic chain, through the lineage of Shem, with the post-diluvian ancestor of the human race, Noah. It shows that in the providential division of the earth, the Western Hemisphere was included. It shows how the descendants of the patriarch actually did "replenish the earth," and not only the Eastern Continents.

THE STORY OF JARED

Jared, impressed by the apparent divine favors enjoyed by his younger brother,—let us call him Ophir—asked him to pray that the Lord would not confound their language.

This seems to indicate that the calamity which ended the building of the tower did not overtake them in a moment, all at one time, but that it came gradually, and that those who were willing to turn to God had time for repentance and prayer.

The Brother of Jared prayed, and God granted his petition.

Again, at the direction of Jared, his brother prayed for some of their friends. This prayer was also heard. (Verse 37) Their language was not confounded.

Jared now instructed his brother to ask God for information as to where He wanted them to go, in case they were to be expelled from the flourishing Valley of Shinar. He rather intimated that, in his opinion, the Lord would be owing them a choice piece of property in exchange for their present home. The Brother of Jared did pray as instructed, and the Lord heard and answered the prayer. But, in answering. He actually placed the Brother at the head of the expedition. He told him to gather the flocks, to lay in a supply of grain, and to bring the people together, including Jared and his family, and, the Lord said, "Thou shalt go at the head of them down into the valley northward. And there will I meet thee, and I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth." The Lord was evidently not entirely pleased with the Brother of Jared. But, He, nevertheless, promised to make the Jaredites the greatest nation on the face of the earth, because of the prayers of the Brother of Jared: "Because this long time ye have cried unto Me."

ETHER

The last great prophet of the Jaredites to whom we are indebted for the history of that race, for it is an abridgment of Ether's writings, made by Moroni, that we have in the Book of Mormon, under the title of the Book of Ether. Ether was of the royal race, his father Coriantor, one of those unfortunate monarchs who lived in captivity all his days. In the reign of Coriantumr, the last king of the Jaredites, Ether came forth and proclaimed the near destruction of the entire people, a prophecy which many of his predecessors had also uttered; but he also promised that the king should survive all his subjects and live to see another race occupy the land. Great and marvelous were the prophecies of Ether. He saw the days of Christ and the great work of the last dispensation, even to the coming of the new Jerusalem. Indeed, he appears to have had revealed to him a complete history of the dealings of the Lord with the inhabitants of this earth from his own day to the end of time. But the people heeded not his words and ultimately grew weary of this threatenings and drove him from their midst. He hid himself in a cavity of a rock, coming forth in the night time to view the course of events and occasionally appearing and repeating his warnings. While thus hidden, he wrote the history of contemporaneous events, and, year by year, watched the fulfillment of the word of the Lord, as the people gradually destroyed each other in unrelenting warfare. He lived to record the utter destruction of his people at Ramah (Cumorah) with the sole exception of Coriantumr, who survived as a witness to the unfailing word of God. We are not told whether Ether died or was translated. We incline, from his own words (Ether 15:33), to the latter opinion. When he had finished his record he hid the twenty-four golden plates on which it was engraven in the place in which they were afterwards found by the people of King Limhi (B.C. 123).

CORIANTOR

The father of the Prophet Ether; he was the son of Moron, one of those unfortunate kings of the Jaredites who was deposed through treason and rebellion and held a prisoner the remainder of his life. Coriantor was born in captivity and remained so all his days. This period of Jaredite history is a particularly sad one; it is an epoch of sin and war. Many prophets appeared, who proclaimed that the Lord would execute judgment against the Jaredites to their utter destruction and that he would bring forth another people to possess the land as he had their fathers; but the people rejected all the words of these servants of God "because of their secret societies and wicked abominations"; nevertheless, in that and the succeeding generation these prophecies were all fulfilled—the Jaredites were destroyed and the land was given to a branch of the house of Israel.

MORON

One of the last and most wicked kings of the Jaredites; his father, Ethem, also ruled in unrighteousness. During his reign the Gadianton-like bands, which at that time flourished among the Jaredites, led a rebellion against the king and succeeded in wresting from him half the kingdom but after many years Moron succeeded in reconquering his lost provinces. Soon after, a descendant of the brother of Jared, who is described as "a mighty man" headed another revolution against Moron and was so successful that he took possession of the whole of the kingdom and held Moron in captivity all the rest of his days. In captivity Moron begat Coriantor who was the father of the prophet Ether. Moron, in all probability, lived in the seventh century B.C.

ETHEM

A wicked king of the later Jaredites, living, most probably, in the eighth century before Christ. He was the son and successor of Ahah. In Ethem's days many prophets came and prophesied that unless the Jaredites repented the Lord would utterly destroy them from the earth. But the people hardened their hearts and repented not; the prophets mourned over their depravity and withdrew from among them. Ethem was as his people and did wickedly all his days; when he died he was succeeded by his son Moron, who was like unto his father.

AHAH

A wicked king of the Jaredites, who reigned in the latter days of that nation. His father's name was Seth. Seth, owing to internal commotions, was brought into captivity and thus remained all his life. But Ahah obtained the kingdom and reigned over the people until his death. He did all manner of iniquity by which he caused the shedding of much blood but providentially his reign was a short one. He was succeeded on the throne by his son Ethem.

SETH

A Jaredite prince, the son of King Shiblom, who, in the war in which his father was slain, was brought into captivity and so held all the rest of his life. His son, Ahah, regained the kingdom. Of Seth's character we have no details.

SHIBLOM OR SHIBLON

The son of Com; one of the later monarchs of the Jaredites. In his day, because of the iniquity of the people, many prophets appeared and foretold the woes that would mark the extinction of the race. Wars and grievous calamities also marked the reign of Shiblom. First, his brother inaugurated a bloody civil war which extended throughout all the land. The wicked combinations, akin to the Gadianton robbers of the Nephites, did their part to render anarchy more complete. Famines and pestilence followed rapine until "there was a great destruction, such an one as never had been known upon the face of the earth." In the extreme of their misery and degradation the people began to repent and then the Lord had mercy upon them. Finally Shiblom was slain and Seth, his son, was brought into captivity. Of Shiblom's character we have no record but his rebellious brother issued the infamous mandate that all the prophets who prophesied of the destruction of the people should be put to death. (Ether 11:4-9)

COM

A righteous king of the Jaredites, who reigned in the latter days of that nation. Like the preceding, his father's name was Coriantum, though they appear to have lived nearly a thousand years apart. Com's father was one of the dynasty of monarchs who were deposed and held in captivity by the successful house. In that captivity Com was born but when he attained manhood he rebelled and gained possession of half the kingdom. When he had thus reigned 42 years he made war with Amgid, the ruler of the other half and after a desolating conflict of many years he gained power over the whole realm. While he was king, robber bands, like unto the Gadiantons, began to appear who administered secret and damnable oaths, after the manner of the ancients and sought again to destroy the kingdom. Com fought these robbers with vigor but without success, for they had the sympathy of the masses of the people, who were rapidly ripening for destruction. Many prophets came in these days who foretold the impending destruction of the race if the people did not repent and turn unto the Lord. But the voice of mercy and warning was rejected and the sin-sunken Jaredites sought the lives of the heaven-inspired messengers. The prophets fled to Com for preservation and he appears to have valiantly protected them. While with him they prophesied many things for his comfort and edification and he was blessed of the Lord all the remainder of his days. He lived to a good old age and begat Shiblom, who, at his death, reigned in his stead.

CORIANTUM

One of the royal dynasty of the Jaredites who was held in captivity during his entire life; his father's name was Amnigaddah. In the days of his ancestor, Hearthom, the reigning family was deposed and for several generations they were held as prisoners. Com, the son of Coriantum, rebelled and after a lengthy war, regained possession of the kingdom.

AMNIGADDAH

A Jaredite king, the son of Aaron and the father of Coriantum. His father, himself and his son were kept prisoners all their lives by the dynasty that had usurped the throne. In his grandson Com's days the kingdom was recovered.

AARON

One of the royal race of the Jaredites. He was the son of Heth, a descendant of Jared. In the days of his grandfather, Hearthom, who was the reigning monarch, the kingdom was taken away from him and he was kept a prisoner all his days. His son Heth, his grandson Aaron, and Aaron's son Amnigaddah were also kept in captivity all their lives by the triumphant party. In the days of Aaron's great-grandson, Com, the kingdom was reconquered for the dynasty of which Aaron was a member. At a rough guess we should image that Aaron lived about a thousand years before Christ.

HETH

A Jaredite prince, who was, by the usurping dynasty, held in captivity all his days. He was the son of King Hearthom who was deposed and kept a prisoner all his life. Heth's son, Aaron, was also held captive from the day of his birth to his death.

HEARTHOM

A king of the Jaredites; he was the son of Lib, whom he succeeded. When he had reigned twenty-four years the kingdom was wrested from him and he was held in captivity by the successful party all the remainder of his life. Only one of his sons is mentioned whose name was Heth. Of Hearthom's private character the record is silent.

LIB

A righteous king of the Jaredites in whose reign the nation prospered and multiplied greatly. He was the son and successor of Kish. In the reign of a former monarch named Heth the Lord had deeply afflicted the people because of their sins and among other things he had caused numbers of poisonous serpents to occupy the regions in the neighborhood of the Isthmus of Panama and thus prevented the people from gaining access to the southern continent. In Lib's days these venomous reptiles were destroyed and the land southward was found to be full of beasts of the forest. That country was preserved as one enormous hunting ground of the race. Lib himself becoming a great hunter. He also built a large city at the narrowest portion of the Isthmus, apparently for the purpose of guarding the regions south from settlement, so that it might be the source of their meat supply for the country northward was covered with inhabitants. In this region the people greatly developed in the arts of civilization. They prosecuted mining with much vigor, improved in the manufacture of textile fabrics, agriculture made marked advance through the invention and application of improved machinery in the cultivation of the earth and the harvesting of their crops. They also made all manner of weapons of war, though, as this was a time of profound peace this can only be regarded as a precautionary measure. In fact, to use the words of the sacred historian: "never could be a people more blessed than were they, and more prospered by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land that was choice above all lands, for the Lord had spoken it."

Lib lived many years, was blessed with a numerous posterity and when he died he was succeeded by his son Hearthom.

KISH

A king of the Jaredites. He was the son of Corom and succeeded his father on the throne. Nothing is said in the Book of Ether about his character, the events of his reign or the length of his life. All we are told of him is that he reigned in the place of his father and that when he died, he was succeeded by his son Lib.

COROM

One of the few righteous kings of the Jaredites. It is said of him that he did good all his days. He was the son and successor of Levi and when he died at a very advanced age, leaving a numerous posterity, his son Kish reigned in his stead.

LEVI

A Jaredite prince, the son of Kim. His father was driven from the throne and held in captivity for the remainder of his days. Levi was born in captivity and so remained until 42 years after the death of his father when he rose in rebellion against his uncle who occupied the throne, deposed him and reigned in his stead. During his reign he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord and his people were greatly prospered. He lived to a good old age, was blessed with a large family and when he died his son Corom succeeded him as king.

KIM

A king of the Jaredites. He was the son of Morianton, born to him when he (Morianton) was very aged.

The days of Morianton were among the most prosperous that the Jaredites saw; they grew exceedingly rich during his reign. But when he became very aged he abdicated in favor of Kim, who reigned in his father's place for eight years before the latter died. Kim, however, did not reign in righteousness and by his wickedness he displeased the Lord, so that he permitted the brother of Kim to rebel against him, dethrone him and hold him in captivity all the remainder of his life. During his captivity he begat sons and daughters, the only one whose name is mentioned is Levi, who was born to him in his old age.

MORIANTON

A king of the Jaredites. It appears that Riplakish, a monarch of that race, became so obnoxious to his people on account of his tyranny and abominations that they rose in rebellion, slew him and drove his descendants out of the land. After many years one of these descendants, named Morianton, gathered an army of outcasts and invaded the Jaredite country. The war that followed was an exceedingly severe one and lasted a number of years. One by one the cities of the Jaredites fell into the hands of Morianton until he had made himself master of the entire country. When established in power he conciliated the people by lightening their burdens so that they anointed him king. During his mild though energetic reign the people were greatly prospered, many new cities were built and the nation grew exceedingly rich. He lived to a very great age and when too old to hold the reins of government he abdicated in favor of his son Kim, Morianton surviving this action eight years. His character is thus summarized in the Book of Ether, "he did do justice unto the people, but not unto himself, because of his many whoredoms; wherefore he was cut off from the presence of the Lord."

RIPLAKISH

An unrighteous king of the Jaredites. He greatly afflicted his people by imposing upon them grievously heavy taxes and when they could not, or would not pay these exactions he cast them into prison, where he compelled them to labor continually to sustain him in his whoredoms and abominations and in the erection of costly and magnificent edifices that conduced to his luxury; if any prisoner refused to labor he was put to death. In this way he greatly adorned his kingdom but he also filled it with prisons. For forty-two years the people groaned under his oppressions when they rose in their anger, slew Riplakish and drove his descendants out of the land. What form of government immediately followed is uncertain; we have no information on this point but we are told that after many years one of his descendants, named Morianton, established himself as king.

SHEZ

A king of the Jaredites, the son of Heth. By reason of the great wickedness of the Jaredites in the days of Heth, the Lord permitted a severe famine to come upon them by which the far greater portion of the people were destroyed. Of the royal family, all perished except Shez, who, when the crops again began to grow commenced to build up this desolate race. He was a virtuous man and taught his people righteousness and the sun of prosperity shone upon them. His peace, however, was marred by the treason of his son Shez who rebelled against him. This son, however, was slain by a robber and peace was restored. In the later years of his lengthy reign Shez built many cities and the rapidly increasing people spread out in various directions. This monarch lived to an exceeding old age, was blessed with numerous children and when he died was succeeded on the throne by his son Riplakish, who was apparently the youngest of his family. (Ether 10:1-4)

HETH

A cruel and vicious king of the Jaredites. He was the son of Com. His grandfather, Coriantum, was a righteous ruler and the people prospered greatly during his reign; but in the days of Com the increase of wealth and prosperity was accompanied by an increase of wickedness and the old secret plans and associations were revived. Heth became a leader in these things and rose in rebellion against his father, slew him with his own sword and became king in his stead. The Lord then sent many prophets who called upon the people to repent, declaring that if they did not a terrible famine should come upon the land. The people, led and inspired by Heth, rejected the words of the prophets and cruelly persecuted them; some they cast out, some they threw into pits and left them to perish. Before long the rains from heaven ceased and there was a great dearth over all the land and poisonous serpents made their appearance and killed many people. These serpents also attacked the flocks of the Jaredites and drove them in vast bodies towards the southern continent. Many perished by the way but some reached the land known to the Nephites as Zarahelma. Restrained by the power of God, the serpents stopped at the Isthmus of Panama where they formed a cordon, preventing the Jaredites from further following their scattered flocks. The carcasses of the beasts which fell by the way were ravenously eaten by the famished people until they had devoured them all. We can scarcely imagine the horrors that must have attended this famine when the people consumed the poisoned flesh of the creatures thus killed. Disease in its most terrible form must have followed famine. Before long then this loathsome food was all consumed and the people rapidly perished. Then those who remained began to repent of their sins and call on the Lord; and when they had humbled themselves sufficiently, the Lord sent the long-needed rain and the remnants of the race began to revive. Soon there began to be fruit in the north country and the regions around about and Shiz, the only survivor of the royal house, reigned over the few that were left; for Heth and all his household, except Shiz, had perished in the famine.

COM

A king of the Jaredites, the son of Coriantum. Com was born when his father was very aged, evidently considerably over one hundred years old, for Coriantum's first wife died at the age of 102 years, after which he married a young maid who became the mother of several children, among whom was Com. In Com's reign the Jaredites increased greatly in numbers; they also spread widely over the face of the land; but they also grew in iniquity and the secret associations (see Akish) that a few generations before had caused the almost entire destruction of the race, were revived. One of the leaders in these crimes was a son of Com, named Heth, who was born when Com had reigned 49 years. This young man conspired against his father, slew him with his own sword and reigned in his stead.

CORIANTUM

A good king of the Jaredites. He was the son of Emer, who, four years before his death anointed Coriantum to reign in his stead. He was a righteous, just and vigorous ruler and in his days the Jaredites were greatly prospered and many large cities were built. But he had no children until he was exceedingly old; his wife died when she was 102 years of age, after which he married a young maid who bore him a large family. He lived until he was 142 years old, when he died and was succeeded on the throne by his son Com.

EMER

One of the early kings of the Jaredites. Two years before his death, Omer, his father, anointed him to reign in his stead. Emer was one of the best kings of his race. He executed judgment in righteousness all his days. In his reign the people greatly increased in numbers and in wealth, becoming the owners of large herds of useful animals and rich agricultural and mineral products, in gems and fine manufactured goods. The curse, also, which had come upon the land during the days of Akish because of the iniquity of the people, began to be removed as they were now living more righteously. Emer's was a lengthy reign, sixty-two years are mentioned; but it is not evident whether this period covers the whole of his reign or not. When he died, full of years and honor, he was succeeded by one of his numerous sons, named Coriantum, whom he had anointed king four years before his death. It is recorded of Emer that he saw the Son of Righteousness and did rejoice and glorify in his day.

OMER

A righteous but unfortunate king of the early Jaredites. He was the son of Shule and the father of a prince named Jared. Jared rebelled against his father and by his flatteries led away the people of half the kingdom. He then gave battle to his father and took him prisoner, holding him in servitude half his days. While thus in bondage Omer begat several children, among whom were two sons named Esrom and Coriantumr. When these young men grew to manhood they espoused the cause of their father, raised an army, attacked the forces of Jared by night and utterly routed them. Jared retained his life by renouncing his rights to the throne and Omer was reinstated in the kingly authority. Jared, greatly chagrined at the loss of the royal power, entered into secret combination with Akish, a friend of Omer, to assassinate the king and restore Jared to the throne. Their attempt was partially successful. Omer was driven from the throne but being warned by the Lord in a dream, he fled with the faithful portion of his family to the far off north Atlantic seaboard, passing in his journey the hill Shim, where the Nephite records were in after ages hid, and the hill Ramah. From the direction of his journey we are justified in believing that the land Ablom, where he established himself, was on the New England coast. From time to time others jointed Omer while the Jaredite people were rent by internecine wars which ended in their almost entire destruction. Then Omer returned with his followers and reigned over the remnant of a once numerous people. He lived to be exceedingly old and two years before his death he anointed his son. Emer to reign in his stead. His days were many and full of sorrow.

SHULE

Shule was one of the Jaredite Kings in the early ages of that people. He was the son of Kib, born to him in his old age while he was held in captivity by another son, named Corihor, who had rebelled against him and deposed him as the legal ruler. When Shule grew to manhood, he became mighty in judgment and in bodily strength, and being angry with his brother, Corihor, for rebelling against their father, raised an army, armed it with swords made by himself, gave battle to his brother at a city named Nehor, defeated the latter's forces and restored their father to the throne. Kib, being very aged, placed the sovereign power in the hands of Shule, who reigned in righteousness and extended the borders of his growing people in all directions. Corihor, repentant of his former treason, received many favors from Shule, and was placed in positions of high power in the nation, the trusts whereof he faithfully performed. But as he had rebelled against his father in his early days, so in like manner one of his sons, named Noah, rebelled against him, and in this rebellion drew away all his brothers. At first Noah was successful. He obtained possession of the Land of the Jaredite's First Inheritance, called by them, Moron, and reigned King of that region of Central America.

Again, he attacked Shule, and this time took him prisoner, carrying him captive to Moron with the intention of putting him to death. But before he had carried out his bloodthirsty designs, his cousins, the sons of Shule, broke into his house and killed the usurper. They then went to the prison where their father was held, released him from his confinement and replaced him on the throne of that part of the country not held by the son of Noah. There were now two kingdoms, both of which were growing, while that one under Shule "did prosper exceedingly and waxed great." After a time Corihor, the son of Noah, commenced war with Shule in which Corihor was deservedly unsuccessful and in the conflict that followed he was slain. His son Nimrod, knowing the unrighteousness of his father's cause, restored Noah's Kingdom to Shule, so that the latter again, as in the beginning, reigned over the whole of the Jaredite Race. For this act of magnanimity, Shule bestowed great favors upon Nimrod, who did in the whole kingdom "according to his desires."

Though the people were highly prospered at this time, they gave way to idolatry, and grew hard in their hearts. This, no doubt, was intensified by the bad example of the royal family, and the miseries and cruelties of the wars which their wars induced. During Shule's days the Lord sent many prophets to the Jaredites who warned the people of His impending judgments. For a time these prophets were rejected and reviled. But Shule made a law that the prophets should have free access wherever they wished to go, and further decreed a punishment for all those who persecuted and reviled them. The preaching of these holy men eventually brought the Jaredites to repentance and because of their penitance the Lord spared them and turned away His judgments and the people prospered again. In his old age Shule begat Omer who succeeded him on the throne. Shule's days were full of trouble and sorrow, but he reigned in righteousness, was faithful to the Lord and executed judgment in justice towards his people. We are of the opinion that Shule was a contemporary of the Patriarch Abraham.

KIB

The second king of the Jaredites. He was the son of Orihah and grandson of Jared. He was born in his father's old age and succeeded him to the throne. Among Kib's sons was one named Corihor, who, when he was thirty-two years old rebelled against his father and drew many people after him. He first established himself in the land of Nehor and when strong enough came against Kib in the Land of Moron, which Moron was near the land called Desolation by the Nephites. Having taken his father prisoner, Corihor held him in captivity for many years. In his old age Kib begat Shule, who, when grown to manhood overthrew Corihor and replaced his father on the throne. His father having then arrived at an exceedingly great age resigned the kingdom to Shule who reigned in his stead.

ORIHAH

The youngest of Jared's four sons and the first king of the Jaredites. When Jared and his brother had grown old they desired to know the wishes of their people before they went down to their graves. The people desired to be ruled by a king. This idea was displeasing to their leaders but they ultimately consented to one being chosen. All the sons of Jared and of his brother refused this dignity until Orihah was reached and he accepted the kingly honor. He reigned in righteousness, executing judgment in justice, walking humbly before heaven and instructing his subjects in the ways of the Lord. He lived to a very great age, was the father of thirty-one children, twenty-three of whom were sons and when he died he was succeeded on the throne by his son Kib. The Jaredites prospered and multiplied greatly under his wise and beneficent reign.

JARED

The founder of the Jaredite race. He was apparently one of those engaged in the building of the Tower of Babel. It is presumable that he was a descendant of Shem, as he and most certainly his brother, held the holy priesthood. We are inclined to believe, from the brief narrative in the Book of Ether, that Jared's brother was the leading spirit of the colony that accompanied these brothers on their toilsome journey to this continent. Of Jared's private character we are told but little but he appears to have been more conservative, more pliable and less energetic than his brother. The race was named after him, we presume, because one of his sons, Orihah, became its first king and Jared's thus became the royal family. Jared had four sons and eight daughters: the names of his sons were Jacom, Gilgah, Manhah and Orihah, Jared lived to a great age. He died and was buried in the Land of Moron. (For particulars of the journey of Jared and his people see Jared, Brother of.)

JARED, BROTHER OF

The prophet and leader of the founders of the Jaredite race. His name is not given in the Book of Mormon, but we learn through modern revelation that it was Mahonri Moriancumer. He was in all probability a descendant of Shem and was present at the building of the Tower of Babel, if not actually engaged in that work; though he and his brother had not fallen into idolatry as had so many of the builders of that notorious edifice. When God scattered these presumptuous builders, Jared and his brother pleaded with the Lord that their language and that of their friends might not be confounded. Their prayer was heard, their mother tongue was preserved. In answer to their further entreaties the Lord promised to lead them into a land choice above all others where he would make of them a great people and he himself would go before them as their guide. In obedience to the heavenly command Jared, his brother and their friends, with their respective families gathered their flocks and seeds of various kinds and started to follow as the Lord should lead.

The valley into which the Lord first led them was called Nimrod after that mighty hunter of the early post-diluvian age. Here the people of Jared tarried for a time while they prepared for the long journey which was before them. Their flocks and herds they had with them; they now went to work and snared fowls; they carried with them hives of honey bees (known to them by the name of deseret) and prepared a vessel in which they transported the fish of the waters. They appeared to have collected everything that could possibly be of use to them. They were going to a land that had been swept clean by the waters of the deluge; it had been bereft of all its animal life; the seeds of grains and fruits no longer germinated in its soil and the colony had to replenish the continent with the animal and vegetable life necessary for their comfort and sustenance, as though it was a new earth. When in the valley of Nimrod the Lord came down and talked with the brother of Jared. But the brother of Jared saw him not for the Lord remained concealed in a cloud. But God directed that the company should go forth into the wilderness, into that quarter where man had never yet been. As they journeyed the Heavenly Presence went before them in a cloud, instructed them and gave directions which way they should travel. In the course of their journey they had many waters—seas, rivers and lakes—to cross, on which occasions they built barges, as directed by the Lord. It must have been an arduous labor, requiring much time and great patience to transport their flocks and herds, with all the rest of their cumbrous freight across these many waters. As they advanced to a great distance from the centre of population in western Asia, it is possible they traveled beyond the limtis to which the larger animals had by that time scattered and if so, they were entirely without the aid of the food obtained by the chase; on the other hand, it is probable that the fish in the lakes and rivers formed a valuable source of food supply; yet it must also be remembered they carried fish in a vessel with them.

Led by the Lord personally, instructed by his own mouth, protected by his presence, the colony, of which Jared's brother appears to have been the prophet and leader, at last reached the borders of the great sea which divides the continents. To the place where they tarried they gave the name of Moriancumer. Here they remained for a period of four years, at the end of which time the Lord again visited the brother of Jared in a cloud and chastened him and his brethren because of their neglect to call upon his name. Repentance followed this reproof and because of their repentance their sins were forgiven them.

The brother of Jared was then commanded by the Lord to build eight barges after the same pattern as those he had previously constructed. This command he obeyed with the assistance of the company. The vessels were small, light in construction and water tight. As they were dark in the interior, by reason of being without windows, the Lord, at the entreaty of the brother of Jared, touched sixteen small white stones, which the latter had molten out of a high mountain called Shelem; and after the Lord touched them they shone forth and gave light to the vessels in which they were placed. When the Lord put forth his finger to touch these stones the veil was taken from before the eyes of the brother of Jared and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood.

And because of the brother of Jared's great faith the Lord showed himself unto him and declared himself to be Jesus Christ who should come into the world to redeem his people.

All things being prepared, Jared and his people, with their animals, fish, bees, seeds and multitudinous other things, went on board; a favorable wind wafted them from shore and they gradually crossed to the American coast. At the end of a somewhat stormy voyage of three hundred and forty-four days the colony reached this continent. It is generally understood that the place where they landed was south of the Gulf of California and north of the land Desolation which was north of the Isthmus of Panama.

No sooner had the people of Jared landed than they humbled themselves before the Lord, many of them shedding tears of joy because of the multitude of his tender mercies in bringing them so safely to this new land of promise. Their next duty was to prepare for the future. They commenced to till the soil and perform the other labors incidental to founding a new home. In these efforts they prospered greatly. They began to grow and increase in numbers and in wealth; and even better than this, they were a righteous people, being taught directly from on high. In process of time Jared and his brother grew old and perceiving that their course on earth was nearly finished the latter proposed that they gather the people, number them, give them necessary teachings and learn their wishes. This was done; but to the grief of the brother of Jared the people desired a king be anointed to rule over them. He saw, by the spirit of prophecy, that this action would lead to many evils and he was inclined to refuse their request but Jared pleaded that the wishes of the people be granted and his brother finally consented. It was the first step in the wrong direction and led to much sin, misery, contention and captivity. The people having the privilege granted them, chose Pagag the eldest son of their prophet. He declined, as did all of his brothers and also all the sons of Jared except Orihah. The last named accepted the royal dignity and was anointed king. Soon after this, the brother of Jared died, full of years and honor. Like Enoch, he had been privileged to enter the presence of the Lord and to have revealed to him the history of the world in all its generations. He was also a seer, having received the priceless gift of a Urim and Thummim. His faith was never exceeded by the sons of men; he laid hold of the promises of the Almighty with unshaken confidence. By that faith he performed miracles; Moroni tells us that by its power he "said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed" (Ether 12:30) but of the circumstances that attended this manifestation of divine power we have not the slightest details. The brother of Jared is also said to have been "mighty in writing," the uncorrupted language which he used being, unquestionably, most favorable for expressing niceties of thought in written characters. He was a "large and mighty man" in personal appearance and undoubtedly as strong in his integrity to God and in his moral courage as he was in physical characteristics. Altogether, we deem him one of the greatest prophets and leaders of God's people that ever graced this Earth. When he died he left behind him twenty-two sons and daughters.

Footnotes

"If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be restored;

But thou must put away iniquity far from thy tent;

Throw away thy gold as dust, and thy Ophir among the stones of the brook;

Then the Almighty shall be thy golden Treasure,

He shall be thy finest silver." (Job 22:23-25)

Job mentions gold of Ophir when he speaks of the value of wisdom, thus:

"It cannot be had for gold,

Silver cannot be weighed for the price thereof.

It cannot be valued with gold from Ophir,

Nor with precious onyx or for sapphire." (Job 28:15-16)

In one of the Psalms the poet sings the praise of the king:

"Thy garments smell

of myrrh, of aloes and cassia;

From palaces of ivory,

Stringbands made thee glad.

King's daughters were thy maids of honor,

Upon thy right hand stood the queen

In gold of Ophir. (Psalm 45:8-9)

Genesis 11:10-26 Genesis 10:21-32 Ether 1:6-32

Shem Shem

Arphaxad Arphaxad

Salah Salah

Eber Eber

Peleg——his brother——Joktan

Reu Jerah, or Jared

Serug Orihah

Nahor Kib

Terah Shule

Abram Omer, Etc.

Down to Ether

---
Notas:
[^1] Marquis de Nadallac, Pre-Historic America, p. 68.
[^2] The general impression is that the colonists first went northward; then they turned eastward across the Asiatic wastes. Orson Pratt calls these seas the "inland waters of Asia."
[^3] Students of ancient history are pretty well agreed on locating settlements of the descendants of the sons of Joktan in Yemen, in the southwestern part of the Arabian Peninsula. They have found traces of districts and cities originally named after Hazarmaveth, Uzal, Sheba, Ophir, and Havilah, and it is considered well established that the early inhabitants of these localities had commercial connections with India as well as Ethiopia. This leads us to think that the colonists of Jared and his brother probably turned eastward when they left their first home at Moriancumer on the sea which divideth the lands, and that they may have landed on the west coast of what is now called North America. Even in our day an occasional fisherman from Japan has crossed the Pacific to our west coast, driven by the winds and the Japanese Current.
[^4] "And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory." (1 Timothy 3:16)
[^5] "Sanscrit, nala, nara, man; compare Greek anar; Latin, Nero. (Mexican Linguistics, Denison)
[^6] This name is in all probability akin to the name Merom (Joshua 11:5), now known as Marum. It may also be akin to Maran (I Corinthians 16:22), where it means Our Lord. In passing it may be observed that Maranatha should be written Marana tha, and be rendered, Come, O our Lord. For it is, no doubt, the same expression which we find in Revelation 22:20, Come Lord.
[^7] The following list of Jaredite rulers is given in the Book of Ether:
[^8] This takes us back to the beginning of the bronze age. How far back the use of iron can be traced in this country is another question. J. W. Foster says that in shell heaps at Grand Lake on the Teche have been found in mounds "unique specimens of axes of hematite iron ore," and also they were found in mounds covered with soil in which large oaks were growing and had been growing for centuries. (Prehistoric Races of the United States, p. 159)
[^9] Flinders Petri, Egypt and Israel, p. 81.
[^10] Ezra 2:6-65; Nehemiah 7:6-67.
[^11] Short correctly observes that the authors of the Bible do not profess to give a complete chronology, or even to furnish data for an infallible system. Their accounts are condensed. In their genealogies they leave out several generations, which can be seen if we compare the genealogy of our Lord as given in the Gospels with those of the Old Testament. Their purpose was not to give a complete list of descendants, but to prove descent through a certain line, and their condensed lists serve that purpose only. (Short's North Americans of Antiquity, p. 199)
[^12] Boniface III was a deacon of the Roman Church, who in 603 A.D., was sent to Constantinople by Gregory the Great as a legate (apocrissarius). There he supported Phocas, a usurper of the throne of the vilest character, and in return when Boniface had been elected pope in 607, Phocas issued, at his request, a decree against Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople, in which it was ordained that "the see of blessed Peter, the apostle, should be the head of all the churches," and that the title of "universal bishop" belonged exclusively to the Bishop of Rome. And this was, evidently the keystone in the arch of apostasy.
