Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 2

Ether 2 1Verse 1

Ether 2 1Nimrod. Nimrod was the son of Cush, the eldest son of Ham (Genesis 10:8-10). The general understanding of the biographical notes in that section of Genesis is that Nimrod had greatly bodily strength, and was eminent as a hunter of wild, dangerous animals; that he became popular among young men who gladly joined him in his hunting expeditions, and whom he organized into a military force by the aid of which he assailed and subjugated the inhabitants of Shinar; that he was a despot who built forts, towns and cities, chief among which was Babel. Other important places were called after his name. There was a Birs Nimrod (Borsippa) near Babylon; a Tel Nimrod (Hill of Nimrod) near Baghdad, and a mound, later known as Calah. In the Book of Ether we learn that there was a Valley of Nimrod, probably the region now known as Irak. In Persian and Greek mythology Nimrod is supposed to be represented by the magnificent constellation Orion.

Ether 2 2Verse 2

Ether 2 2Fish of the waters. These colonists had a vessel in which they carried fish as part of their provisions. This information reminds us of the fact that the early Americans were largely dependent on sea-food for their subsistence as proved by the contents of the shell heaps, or kitchen middens.

Ether 2 2SHELL HEAPS

Ether 2 2These are found along the coasts of America and inland by the rivers. There are such remnants from a distant past in Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Massachusetts, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Tennessee, Florida, California, Oregon, Alaska, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Terra del Fuego.

Ether 2 2Some of these mounds are very large, covering from sixty to one hundred acres, or even larger. Some are only a few feet high, while others are over forty feet in height. In some localities they are quite numerous. Colonel Island, Georgia, is said to be covered with them. Forty of such have been explored.

Ether 2 2The contents of these mounds show the people around whose dwellings they accumulated engaged in fishing as well as hunting. They have yielded the bones of the elk, the beaver, the seal, the mud turtle, the great auk, the wild turkey, as well as the reindeer and the dog. Bones of fishes and reptiles have also been found, but more particularly shells of mussels and oysters. At the bottom of one, a pit in one of these mounds in Little Miami Valley, Florida, a Mr. F. W. Putnam found a large quantity of carbonized corn, covered with husks and matting of reeds indicating agriculture and a sedentary life.

Ether 2 2The date of the early shell heaps is unknown, but it is certain that they are the accumulations of many generations. Those in California are considered more recent than those in Florida.

Ether 2 2The shell heaps, as the name indicates, are simply the refuse, the garbage, left behind when the people departed for new homes, or camping grounds. But they also contain so many objects of value to students of ancient cultures. Deposits in Peru have yielded, among other things, little figures of gold and of silver, representing fishes. Also numerous fragments of pottery. The Peabody Museum of Cambridge, Mass., owns twenty gold ornaments from the Chincha Islands, off the coast of Peru. They consist of very thin plates arranged in parallelograms from seven to eight inches long by three to four inches wide, covered with dotted lines and furnished with a hole by means of which they can be hung around the neck, or fastened to the clothes. To all appearances these deposits belong to the same periods as the shell heaps. [^1] We need hardly remind the reader of the Twenty-four Gold Plates of Ether, found by the explorers of King Limhi (Mosiah 8:9).

Ether 2 3Verse 3

Ether 2 3Deseret. Moroni says this word, "by interpretation," means "honey bee." Possibly in the original language, spoken before the confusion of tongues and the dispersion of peoples, this was so. The Hebrew for honey is debesh (Exodus 3:8), or nophet (Psalm 19:10), or yahar (1 Samuel 14:25). Bee is generally deborah (Deuteronomy 1:44). None of these words seem to be etymologically related to deseret. But there is an Arabian word for honey, 'asal, which may be near enough akin to the word for honey bee as used in the Book of Ether to suggest a common stem.

Ether 2 4Verse 4

Ether 2 4The Lord appears to the Brother of Jared. In the Valley of Nimrod God revealed Himself to the Brother of Jared, surrounded by a cloud. Not the dark mass in which electric forces are concentrated and which manifest themselves in blinding, destructive lightning flashes and terrifying, rolling, rumbling, thunder claps; but rather the softly falling, friendly evening shades, which enable mortal eye to view the setting sun as the most glorious wonder of nature. (See Exodus 33:17-23.) As in the case of Elijah, the Lord manifested Himself to the Brother of Jared in a still small voice, that of man speaking to another; not in a devastating cyclone; not in an all order and law-defying earthquake; nor in an all-consuming fire. God had a message to convey to the Brother of Jared. He had a mission for him to perform. He had certain authority to confer upon him. And all this was done without ostentation, but nonetheless effectively. (Compare the story of Elijah on Mt. Horeb 1 Kings 19:9-13).

Ether 2 4We note that whenever God reveals Himself in person to man, He appears as a man. And this is true of every divine personal revelation of God on record, from the time He walked with Adam in the Garden of Eden where our progenitor was listening to hear His voice (Genesis 3:10), to the day when He appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove. True, Divine Spirit is everywhere (D. and C. 88:5-13; 41). As the poet will have it: "Every bush alive with God." But, nevertheless, the God of Creation, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of Jesus Christ, His Beloved Son, has individuality and personality, as His children have.

SCEther 2 5Ether 2 6Ether 2 7Verses 5-7

SCEther 2 5Ether 2 6Ether 2 7The Lord commanded them. Through the Brother of Jared, the Lord gave unto the colonists His further commandments. From now on the divine guidance came through him.

SCEther 2 5Ether 2 6Ether 2 7INTO THE WILDERNESS

SCEther 2 5Ether 2 6Ether 2 7The following particulars concerning the route the little company traveled are given: (1) It went through an uninhabited region (v. 5). (2) There were many waters—rivers and lakes—which they crossed by means of barges. God was their Pilot (v. 6). (3) There was a sea, possibly a lake in the wilderness, where the prospects of a settlement seemed inviting, but the Lord would not permit them to stay there. He had, He said, a better home for them, a land of promise, choice above all other lands. At the same time the Lord warned the company that it was a land preserved for a righteous people. (v. 7)

SCEther 2 5Ether 2 6Ether 2 7Several notable rivers originate in the mountainous district known as Ararat (Holy Land). The Euphrates and the Tigris flow into the Persian Gulf; the Araxes and the Cyrus into the Caspian Sea, and the Acampsis into the Black Sea. These and other rivers may have been the many waters. If so, the sea in the wilderness may have been the Caspian Sea. But as to this, nothing certain is known. [^2]

Ether 2 8Verse 8

Ether 2 8He had sworn in His wrath. This should be read in conjunction with Ether 1:38-39. It appears that Jared instructed his brother to ask the Lord for guidance as to where to go in case they were driven from their homes. In doing so, he hinted broadly that he would expect a land which is choice above all the earth as a compensation for their abandoned homes. The Brother of Jared prayed as instructed, not even adorning the petition with meaningless diplomatic phrases. The Lord at once saw through the character of the prayer. He heard it, and answered it. But it was granted in—humanly speaking—righteous anger. The Lord was angry. He told the petitioners that they would be led to a land choice above all other lands, but the Lord added that whose should possess it "should serve Him, the true and only living God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of His wrath should come upon them." Having made this covenant with the Brother of Jared, the Lord conferred the authority of leadership upon him instead of Jared: "Thou shalt go at the head of them (Ether 1:42). One of the most instructive stories ever written!

SCEther 2 9Ether 2 10Verses 9-10

SCEther 2 9Ether 2 10The decrees of God concerning this land. In these two paragraphs, Moroni, by way of comment, repeats and emphasizes the solemn obligations which the inhabitants of this land of promise assume when making their homes here, under the covenant of God with the Brother of Jared: "Whatsoever nation shall possess it," Moroni says, "shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of His wrath shall come upon them." (v. 9) That is the covenant. It is a mortgage resting on the entire land.

SCEther 2 9Ether 2 10Owing to His special interest in this portion of the Earth, the Lord raised up unto Him, wise men, and caused them to establish a Constitution "for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles." He even "redeemed the land by the shedding of blood," this being inevitable at the time of the revolutionary conflict. (D. and C. 101:77-80) It was God who inspired and established the American Constitution. The Lord further said that it is He Who has made the people free; therefore, they are free indeed.

Ether 2 10Verse 10

Ether 2 10An everlasting Decree. The Covenant is here again stated. "He that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off." And this is added: "For it is an everlasting decree of God." It is as much in force today, as it was thousands of years ago.

Ether 2 11Verse 11

Ether 2 11This cometh unto you, refers to the Book of Ether. One of the purposes of this literary composition is to make all the world acquainted with the fact that the Lord has, as it were, a special encumbrance on this portion of the Earth, by virtue of the covenant He made with the Brother of Jared. People who make their homes here have a right to know that by living here they assume the obligations of serving the Lord. If they are dissatisfied with the conditions, they are at liberty to move somewhere else, but not to rise up in rebellion against God. "Blessed is in the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people whom He hath chosen for His own inheritance." (Psalm 33:12)

Ether 2 12Verse 12

Ether 2 12Freedom promised. Moroni here assures us that obedience to the God of this land, Who is Jesus Christ, will be rewarded with freedom from bondage and captivity from all nations under Heaven.

Ether 2 12"The Earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, The world and they that dwell therein; For He hath founded it upon the seas, And established it upon the floods."

(Psalm 24:1-2)

Ether 2 13Verse 13

Ether 2 13That great sea. Whether this refers to the Pacific or Atlantic Ocean is not known for certain. In the absence of any authoritative information on the question, we prefer to accept the suggestion of Elder Orson Pratt. It is at least plausible that the Jaredite migration was an eastward movement. [^3]

Ether 2 13MORIANCUMER

Ether 2 13Moriancumer is the name of the colonists gave to the first camp on the shores of the great sea. It was the name of the Brother of Jared. As customary anciently, the central settlement of a community was named after the chief leader. And thus the first resting place of this company was called Moriancumer.

Ether 2 13This is a matter of history.

Ether 2 13In the Messenger and Advocate, April 1835, pp. 108-112, there is a letter on the early days of the Church. Oliver Cowdery was the editor of the magazine, and the Prophet Joseph Smith had recently offered to look over the historical matter in order to see that "our narrative may be correct." (Messenger and Advocate, Oct., 1834, p. 11) In this letter we read: "It is said, and I believe the account, that the Lord showed the Brother of Jared all things which were to transpire from that day to the end of the earth, as well as those which had taken place."

Ether 2 13At this place we record an authoritative statement regarding the name of the Brother of Jared. In the Juvenile Instructor, Volume 27, p. 282, one of the authors hereto, President George Reynolds of the First Council of Seventy, furnishes this information:

Ether 2 13"While residing in Kirtland, Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day, while the Prophet Joseph Smith was passing by his door, he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the baby the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing he laid the child upon the bed, and turning to the father, Elder Cahoon, he said, 'The name I have given your son is the name of the Brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown (or revealed) it to me.' Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing nearby, heard the Prophet make this statement to his father; and this was the first time the name of the Brother of Jared was known in the Church in this dispensation."

Ether 2 13In a previous note we have expressed the thought that Ophir, the eleventh son of Joktan, may have been the brother that was called to accompany Jared on the long and perilous journey. This was only by way of suggestion. But whosoever he was, his name was no doubt changed at the time when he was called to take the lead of the expedition (Ether 1:42). Such changes of name were not uncommon. Jacob was called Israel: "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel," (Genesis 32:28). Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, was also known as Hobab (Numbers 10:29). Daniel was called Belteshazzar (Daniel 4:8). And in New Testament times, we have John, the evangelist, also known as Mark (Acts 12:12); Bartholomew was called Nathanael (John 1:45). Our Lord changed the name of Simon, the son of Jona, to Cephas (John 1:42), and Saul, after his conversion, became known as Paul.

Ether 2 13THE MEANING OF THE NAME

Ether 2 13Concerning the meaning of the name, Moriancumer, we can offer only a brief suggestion. The first part of the name, Morian, may be related to the Aramic, Mara, which means lord or master. Or to Moreh, a teacher, the name of the place where Abraham first rested on his arrival in Canaan (Genesis 12:6). In the second part of the word, the main idea is expressed in cume, which means to stand up, or to rise (Mark 5:41). The final r is in many languages, ancient and modern, expresses the idea of being, or making. Witness such nouns as maker, doer, hunter, lover, etc., etc., in English, and their equivalents in cognate languages. If this analysis of the name, Morian - cume - r, is correct, it would mean, One who stands up for God, that is, one who speaks for, or represents the Lord. As applied to a locality, it would mean a place, a hill, a camp specially claimed for the Lord. It would express the same idea as the name, Cumorah, in which the identical grammatical elements appear.

Ether 2 13The meaning of the first name, Mahonri, given to the baby by the Prophet Joseph, is not entirely unknown. We believe we are safe in analyzing it thus: Mahon - r - i. Mahon, or Mahan, means one who is the master of a great secret. (See Moses, Pearl of Great Price, 5:29 and 45-49) That is the literal meaning of the term. The name given to the Brother of Jared signifies that he, too, had become the possessor of a great secret; but his secret was a revelation from God, while the secret of Cain came from the opposite source. For this is a mystery of Godliness [^4] as well as mysteries of satanic origin. The r may be an abbreviation of the nr which is one of the original languages, means (we understand) man. [^5] The i may be an abbreviation of Jah. The name, Mahonri Moriancumer, would then be, "The Master of the mystery of Jehovah, who stands up for the Lord."

Ether 2 14Verse 14

Ether 2 14The Lord came again. Four years after the first manifestation of the Lord to Moriancumer, the Brother of Jared, He again revealed Himself in a cloud, as He had done the first time. But on this occasion He rebuked His servant because he had neglected his prayers.

Ether 2 15Verse 15

Ether 2 15The Brother of Jared repented. After a severe rebuke, Moriancumer asked for forgiveness, and the Lord assured him that He was willing to forgive both him and his brethren, if they would sin no more.

Ether 2 15Here the important truth is taught that neglect of prayer is a sin. The consequence of continuance in neglect would be that they would be cut off from the presence of the Lord. Prayer is a connecting wire between God and His children in their temporary absence from their eternal home. They need it every day, every hour, in their daily lives. And if they are leaders among men their need of prayer is still more urgent, for no one can be entrusted with leadership safely, who is not, himself or herself, in uninterrupted communication with God. Officials of Church and State, teachers of children, parents, who are supposed to be the representatives of God in the home, all need the Spirit of the Lord, and My Spirit will not always strive with man.

SCEther 2 16Ether 2 17Ether 2 18Ether 2 19Ether 2 20Ether 2 21Ether 2 22Ether 2 23Ether 2 24Ether 2 25Verses 16-25

SCEther 2 16Ether 2 17Ether 2 18Ether 2 19Ether 2 20Ether 2 21Ether 2 22Ether 2 23Ether 2 24Ether 2 25Instruction concerning the barges. The barges were to be small and light on the waters (v. 16); perfectly watertight, peaked both fore and aft, the length of the longest trees available, so as to insure the perfect solidity of the hulk; and they were to have a door that would keep out the water when closed (v. 17); also proper ventilation (vv. 19-21) and necessary light (vv. 22-25).

GENERAL NOTES

The following is from an editorial in the "Juvenile Instructor," April 15, 1892, by President George J. Cannon:

"There are wide-spread traditions which connect Nimrod, the grandson of Ham, with this Tower of Babel. By some it is asserted that he was the leader or king of the people who essayed to build it. Certainly it was not earlier than his day, for when Jared and his people first began their journey they passed northward into a valley named after this same Nimrod.

"But the date that Nimrod dwelt on the earth is quite uncertain. Tradition has it that he was born to his father Cush, in the latter's old age, and some rabbinical and Mahometan traditions make him a contemporary of the Patriarch Abraham. As man in those days lived to be several hundred years old, this is not impossible, although it would bring the confusion of languages to a much later date than is given in the generally accepted chronologies.

"Too much trust must not, however, be placed upon chronologies dealing with those times. Two varying ones, now before us, give the building of Babel at 2247 and 2207 B. C., respectively, and the birth of Abraham at 2056 and 1996 B. C. We incline to the opinion that the first named event occurred at a greater distance from the universal flood than is generally asserted.

"Having no fixed date upon which we can depend for the confusion of tongues, we cannot with any exactness compute the length of time that the Jaredites occupied this continent. It also prevents us from forming any trustworthy estimate of who among these people were the contemporaries of the Hebrew patriarchs and prophets of the Israelitish kings. When we reach the later ages of their history we can from some slight idea by tracking backward from Coriantumr and Ether, who evidently lived at the time as Lehi and Nephi, Zedekiah and Mulek. On the other hand, while Abraham and Jared may possibly have lived simultaneously on the earth, the probabilities, almost amounting to a certainty, are that Orihah, the son of Jared, and the first King of the Jaredites, was, either in his early or his later years, a contemporary of the Father of the Faithful."

A CHOICE LAND

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of this land, Who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things we have written." (Ether 2:12)

DOUBLE RESPONSIBILITY

"From out of this comes both our opportunity and our responsibility, and these two are double. We have from our civil ancestors, from Washington and all the rest, the gift of free government which has come to us out of their God-given wisdom, their trials, hardships and sacrifices, even to the last sacrifice of all—life itself. We have from these same ancestors the wealth of guiding advice, admonition, and experience. All this, every one of our fellow citizens has likewise.

But we have also the word of God, direct and through His prophets, giving us His promises regarding this land and this government, and the conditions upon which these promises are based. The world does not believe these, but the Lord has given to us the testimony of their truth and reality.

NO CHANGE

God has never changed or modified or withdrawn one whit of His promises or their conditions. This we must always and poignantly remember.

Since our knowledge is doubled, our obligation is twice multiplied. We ought not to escape this obligation if we could; we cannot escape it if we would.

The Lord has repeatedly declared in our day that this continent—hemisphere—is Zion.

To Isaiah of old the Lord revealed:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it."

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"And He shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up their sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Isaiah 2:2-4)

Nephi repeated these words to his people.

WASHINGTON'S PLEDGE

Washington had a vision of all this when in his Farewell Address, he pledged his:

"unceasing vows that Heaven may continue to you the choicest tokens of its beneficence; that your union and brotherly love may be perpetual; that the free Constitution, which is the work of your hands, may be sacredly maintained; that its administration in every department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue; that in fine, the happiness of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection, and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it."

This is the destiny of America—that all men shall come to freedom and the blessings of liberty, through our good works, "for the Law shall go forth from Zion and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Deseret News, Church Section, March 4, 1939)

MORIANCUMER, LAND OF

The place on the shore of the great ocean where Jared and his people tarried four years before crossing to America. It was evidently named after the Brother of Jared (Mahonri Moriancumer). Here the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to him and gave him many glorious revelations and here, by divine command, the company built the eight barges that carried them across the great waters. We have no direct information in regard to the locality of Moriancumer, but those who believe that the Jaredites traveled eastward through Central Asia, are of the opinion that it was near the mouth of one of the great rivers that flow through the Chinese Empire into the Pacific Ocean.

NIMROD, VALLEY OF

The Valley of Nimrod was in Mesopotamia, or in the adjacent regions, and was so called after the mighty hunter who founded the Babylonian Empire. There the Jaredites assembled and organized their journey. In this Valley the Lord talked with the Brother of Jared, and commanded him that the company of which he and his brother were the leaders, should go forth into that region where man had never yet been, but Jared's brother did not at that time see the Lord for He was hidden in a cloud.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Nihil nisi Intellectus ipse.
[^2] From "dokimae," (II Corinthians 9:13), translated experiment, proof, trial.
[^3] Meaning Lights and Perfections.
[^4] The church fathers who, during the latter part of the second century A.D., formulated the so-called Apostolic Creed, had such antichrists and their destructive heresies in mind. The so-called old Roman text reads, in translation, as follows:
[^5] "Sanscrit, nala, nara, man; compare Greek anar; Latin, Nero. (Mexican Linguistics, Denison)
