Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 3

Ether 3 1Verse 1

Ether 3 1Shelem. After the vessel had been prepared, Moriancumer ascended a mount to which the pilgrims had given the name, Shelem. Zebach Shelem is the Hebrew for thank offering, wherefore we safely conclude that this mount had been set apart for sacred purposes (See Leviticus 7:12, 15; 22:27). Hence the name.

Ether 3 1TRANSPARENT STONES

Ether 3 1Moriancumer now presented sixteen small stones, clear as transparent glass, before the Lord and asked Him to make them luminous (v. 4). Dr. Adam Clark, in his commentary on the Bible, says that, according to Rabbinical tradition, the word translated window in the story of the Ark of Noah, in Genesis, was a shining object; a stone which the Patriarch had found in the River Pison, and which had been made luminous. If this tradition were founded upon facts, Jared and his family would have heard it from their parents.

Ether 3 1A practical application to our own spiritual lives of this account of Moriancumer praying for light, is the lesson that when a servant of the Lord has done all he can to overcome the difficulties he is sure to encounter, he may confidently ask the Lord to do for him what he cannot do for himself. That is the privilege of a child in his father's house. And

Ether 3 1When God has touched our efforts With the finger of His might, Then every worthless pebble Is a bright and shining light.

SCEther 3 2Ether 3 3Ether 3 4Ether 3 5Verses 2-5

SCEther 3 2Ether 3 3Ether 3 4Ether 3 5The prayer. The prayer of Moriancumer might profitably be made a special study by every reader of the Book of Mormon. It should be used as a pattern for own private devotions.

SCEther 3 2Ether 3 3Ether 3 4Ether 3 5Moriancumer first reminded the Lord that the difficulty he had met had arisen in the divine command itself. "Thou hast said" (v. 2). Also: "Thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon Thee." Moriancumer did not feel that he was an intruder before the Almighty. He then humbly asked the Lord not to be angry with him for his weakness, his failure to solve the problem before him; or his unworthiness on account of the Fall. Thou, he said, art holy, and dwellest in the Heavens; we because of the Fall have become evil continually. That is, our natures have been permanently affected by the transgression in Eden.

Ether 3 3Verse 3

Ether 3 3Next, the Prophet acknowledged the mercy of God unto the people while in the wilderness, who had been driven forth because of their iniquity, referring to the building of the Babylonian Tower.

Ether 3 4Verse 4

Ether 3 4Because of the mercy already experienced, Moriancumer felt emboldened to ask to be favored with light to illumine the barges.

Ether 3 5Verse 5

Ether 3 5Finally, Moriancumer said that he realized he asked for a great miracle, even if it did seem small to some. Yet he knew that the Lord could do it. "Thou art able to show forth great power."

Ether 3 5In this prayer we have the picture of a servant of the Lord, effacing himself in sincere humility, while extolling the justice, mercy, and power of the Almighty. It reminds us of Abraham, who, on a notable occasion, in his prayer exclaimed, "Behold, now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord," I,—dust and ashes.

Ether 3 6Verse 6

Ether 3 6The Lord touched the stones. The prayer of Moriancumer was heard and answered immediately. The Prophet Isaiah, referring to the Millennium and speaking about prayer, says as the word of the Lord: "And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear" (Isaiah 65:24). God is always ready to help His children, and there is no red tape in the administration of the affairs of His Kingdom.

Ether 3 6THE FINGER OF GOD

Ether 3 6While the stones were being made luminous by the touch of the Almighty, or were being prepared to become lightbearers, Moriancumer obtained a glimpse of the finger of the Lord. What he saw overwhelmed him. He was struck with fear, and he fell to the earth.

SCEther 3 7Ether 3 8Ether 3 9Verses 7-9

SCEther 3 7Ether 3 8Ether 3 9I knew not that the Lord had flesh and blood. Flesh and blood is a genuine Hebrew expression for humanity in contrast to divine Existences. We recall our Lord's word to Peter: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in Heaven," (Matthew 16:27). It is an expression that may be traced to the covenant of God with Noah, when animal blood was said to be the life, or rather the soul (nephesh), the lifegiving principle of living beings. Moriancumer was familiar with this patriarchal concept, and he marveled greatly when the part of the divine person which he saw appeared to be material, flesh and blood, that is, human. Then fear of death added to his weakness. Would the Lord strike him down? (Compare Exodus 33:18-25) The Lord hastened to allay the fears of His servant. He explained to him that what he had seen was in a prophetic vision. "Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon Me flesh and blood," some time in the future. Because of his faith, Moriancumer was given a preview of the central fact and main foundation of the Plan of Salvation, which the Apostle John states thus: "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth" (John 1:14).

Ether 3 10Verse 10

Ether 3 10Show Thyself unto me. Moriancumer recovered. Then he felt emboldened to ask for a full view of the divine personage Who was speaking to him. It appears from this that Moriancumer, during the first part of the interview, did not see the Lord. He heard His voice. Perhaps not with the outward ear, but in some manner by which we must assume that one spirit communicates with another.

Ether 3 13Verse 13

Ether 3 13The Lord showed Himself. When Moriancumer had solemnly confessed his implicit faith in the Divine Word, he was granted the favor he desired. And not only that, but the entire Plan of Salvation was explained to him.

Ether 3 13Because thou knowest these things. The importance of knowledge is here shown in redemption from the Fall; in the return to the Divine Presence, and divine manifestations. This is in accord with modern revelations. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth" (Doctrine and Covenants 93:36). Again: "And verily I say unto you, that it is My will that ... you should obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion" (D. and C. 93:53; See also 131:6 and 136:32).

Ether 3 14Verse 14

Ether 3 14I am the Father and the Son. Our Lord, Who, before the earth was created, was prepared to be the Redeemer of His people, here reveals Himself as Jesus Christ, and also as the Father and the Son.

Ether 3 14Redemption means, literally, either the repurchase of something that has been sold, by repaying the price (Leviticus 25:25-28), or, the release of what has been impounded, by substituting something else (Leviticus 27:27-31). In the New Testament, redemption stands for the forgiveness of sins (Ephesians 1:7), or, for the deliverance from "vain conversation," which means from former social and useless habits and activities (1 Peter 1:18). The body is said to be redeemed from the grave in the Resurrection (Romans 8:23); and, finally, the Day of Redemption is the day of the deliverance from all evil (Ephesians 8:23); In 1 Timothy 2:5-6, our Lord is said to be both the Mediator, and the ransom (See D. and C. 31:13).

Ether 3 14Jesus Christ. The first of these two sacred names means Savior (Matthew 1:21). It is the English form of the Name of our Lord. The Hebrew Name is Joshua, an abbreviated form of Jehoshuah (Numbers 13:16).

Ether 3 14Christ, the English form of the Greek Christos, was originally a title, the equivalent of the Hebrew Mashiah which means anointed. Gradually it became, as many other appellatives, a proper name, by which Jesus, the Anointed One, the Messiah, was differentiated from others who were named Joshua, or even Jesus.

Ether 3 14The Father and the Son is a phrase that has been regarded as difficult to understand. But the explanation is given in the Doctrine and Covenants 93:4: "The Father because he gave Me of His fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh My tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of Men."

Ether 3 14We read further:

Ether 3 14And I, John, saw that He received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace; and He received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace until He received a fulness; and thus He was called the Son of God, because He received not a fulness at the first (D. and C. 93:12-14).

Ether 3 14A further explanation of the title Father, as applied to the second person in the Godhead, is found in Mosiah 5:7-9: "Because of the covenant ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, His sons and daughters; for behold this day He hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith in His Name; therefore ye are born of Him and have become His sons and daughters."

Ether 3 14Thus, Jesus, the Anointed One, is the Father as well as the Son. (Compare Isaiah 53:10-12)

Ether 3 15Verse 15

Ether 3 15Created after Mine own image. If, as here stated, all men were created in the beginning, after the image of God, attempts to find room in the account of Creation as recorded in Genesis, for the so-called Darwinian theory of the origin of man, must be given up. In the philosophy of evolution man appears first as a germ, a one-cell organization in the ocean. This creature, origin not accounted for, began to grow and evolve until at first it became a big denizen of the sea; then a land animal, and, finally, man.

Ether 3 15In support of this theory—for it is but a theory, notwithstanding the evidence claimed for it—it is generally argued that the human body contains the same kind of matter as other bodies, and that it is, in the beginning similar in form to these in every way or detail. This is quite generally repeated as a valid argument.

Ether 3 15And yet, what does it prove? Let us attempt an illustration. On the same piece of ground there may be a modest hut and a pretentious palace. They may have been constructed of the same kind of material—wood, stone, iron, steel, glass, etc.,—but that does not prove that the palace grew, or evolved out of the hut. A plain horse car may be standing at a railroad station by the side of a luxurious Pullman sleeper. There may be a striking similarity in some of the main features of the two vehicles—wheels, axles, windows, seats, doors, etc.,—but that does not prove that they had a common origin. It does prove that the maker intended that the features mentioned perform similar functions in the two structures—wheels to facilitate movement, seats to furnish rest, windows to admit light and air, doors to give egress and ingress. But this similarity in design does not prove identity of origin. The two cars may have been built in the same factory, by the same architects, or one may have come from New York and the other from California, yet each is a separate organization, independent of the other.

Ether 3 15Logic leads us to the same conclusion when we consider the similarity of the matter of which animal bodies including the bodies of men are made; or the similarity of purpose of some of the organs of the bodies—eyes to see with, ears to hear with, organs to digest food with, to circulate blood, to utilize air, and so on. As similarities do not prove the Pullman car to have been a horse car at some stage of its existence, and still further back a wheel barrow; neither do they prove that man originally came from an insect.

Ether 3 15"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" (Genesis 1:1). "All men were created in the beginning after mine own image."

Ether 3 15That is more reasonable. It is the revealed word of God.

Ether 3 15A word from scientists. Only a short time age, a convention of scientists at Cambridge, England, were told by Oxford professors that after careful examination of a human skull, found in some remote geological formation, human beings 250,000 years ago did not differ materially from modern man. The brain, for instance, had already at that early day assumed the status it has today. Without considering the improbability of the age assigned to the skull—a mere assumption—we naturally ask, if no material change has occurred in the human brain in 250,000 years, how long time has been required for a germ in the ocean to become a statesman, an accomplished musician, an artist of note, or a Shakespeare or George Washington?

Ether 3 15Never have I shown Myself to man. In the Gospel of John 1:18, we read: "No man hath seen God at any time; the Only Begotten Son, which is in the Bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." That is, all manifestations of God to man have been through the Son. Our Lord declares: "He that beholdest Me, beholdeth Him that sent Me (John 12:45). And: "He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father" (Ibid., 14:9). Enoch saw God face to face as did Moses (Exodus 33:11), but the Patriarch explains this: "But now my own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in His presence; but His glory was upon me; and I beheld His face, for I was transfigured before Him." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:2, 11)

Ether 3 15The Prophet Joseph Smith, on a beautiful morning early in the spring of 1820, in a secluded grove, where he went and prayed for divine light, saw, after a struggle with the powers of darkness, a pillar of light gradually descending until it rested upon him. The Shekinah, the glory of God of the Old Testament sanctuaries (I Kings 8:10-11; 2 Chronicles 7:2-3; Ezekiel 9:3; 43:4) was returning. The Prophet writes: "When the light rested upon me, I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other—this is My Beloved Son, hear Him." The Prophet further says: "When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into the heavens" (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith, p. 48). The young prophet had actually been given a vision during a moment of heavenly ecstasy in which he saw the Father and the Son, and heard Them speak.

Ether 3 15The Apostle Paul had a somewhat similar experience (2 Corinthians 12:2-4). To him, whether in the body or in the spirit, the third heaven, also called Paradise, was opened, and he heard "unspeakable words, not lawful for a man to utter." St. Paul was transported to the world beyond the veil, while the vision of the Prophet Joseph, as also the manifestations to John on Patmos (Revelation 1:9-10) appeared on this side.

Ether 3 15The mission of the Prophet Joseph was to be that of a herald proclaiming the coming of the King of kings to His Millennial Kingdom, for the completion and perfection of the Plan of Salvation, from the power of the adversary and from all evil. The appearance of God, the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, on this epochmaking occasion in God's Kingdom was fully consistent with its world-wide importance. On the occasion of the baptism of Jesus at the beginning of His earthly mission in the meridian of time, a similar manifestation appeared and a similar testimony was heard.

Ether 3 15"Now it came to pass, when all the people were baptized, that, Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily form, as a dove, upon Him, and a voice came out of heaven, Thou art My beloved Son; in Thee I am well pleased." (Luke 3:21-22)

Ether 3 16Verse 16

Ether 3 16Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the Body of My Spirit. Redeemer, and he was told that, as our Lord now appeared in the Spirit so He the flesh. This vision passed. What he now saw was the spiritual body of the Moriancumer had been given a prophetic view of the appearance of our Lord in would appear in the flesh. Also, that man had been created in the image of this spiritual body.

Ether 3 16At the exodus from Egypt, the angel of Elohim went before the Camp of Israel, and when the Egyptians pursued, this divine Personage "removed and went behind them," so that He stood in the fiery cloud between Israel and the pursuers. (Exodus 14:19-20) This Angel of Elohim was Jehovah, for so we read: "And Jehovah went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way. (Ibid., 13:21)

Ether 3 16Jehovah, the great Angel, or Messenger of Elohim, the representative, in other words, of the great Council of Elohim, in which the Plan of Salvation was accepted, and on account of which He was afterwards known as the Wonderful Counselor, (Isaiah 9:6) but when Israel, after the many manifestations of His power, turned to the Golden Calf, possibly with ceremonies of which obscene practices formed a part (Exodus 32:25), then He threatened to withdraw entirely. At this critical juncture in the history of Israel, Moses went up on the mountain and pled before Jehovah for Israel, whereupon Jehovah, in answer to His faithful servant, gave him the promise that He would send His angel with him. From this time Jehovah withdrew, and left one of His angels, or representatives, in charge.

Ether 3 16Who this angel of Jehovah was, we are not expressly told, but since Daniel says that "the great Prince which standeth for the children of Thy people" is Michael (Daniel 12:1; 10:13 and 21), there can be no harm in the suggestion that Michael, our venerable ancestor, was possibly the angel of Jehovah, who already at this time had performed the mission of which Daniel speaks. But be this as it may, Jehovah withdrew, and as a sign of this, the tent in which religious ordinances were performed and which hitherto had stood in the center of the Camp, was now removed a long distance from it. The cloudy pillar in which the angel of Jehovah manifested his presence, rested there.

Ether 3 16A remarkable interview between Moses and Jehovah took place at that tent, away from the Camp. Moses reminded Jehovah that although He had commanded him to be the visible leader of the people, He had not instructed him regarding the journey ahead of them. "Show me now," Moses said, "Thy way." Jehovah answered, "My presence shall go with thee." (Exodus 33:14) That is to say, Jehovah would not entirely abandon the people. He would be near just as Jesus promised to be near His Apostles, even after He departed. In the same sense, Jehovah would be present and manifest Himself from time to time as circumstances required. This promise was fulfilled throughout the entire journey in the wilderness.

Ether 3 16After having obtained this promise, Moses said, "I beseech Thee, show me now Thy glory." In answer to that prayer, Jehovah explained to Moses that he could not see His face, but that He (Jehovah) would show him all His goodness and proclaim or explain, His Name to Him, and also permit him to see His back as He was passing by a certain place.

Ether 3 16This last expression is in all probability a misunderstanding by the translators of the Hebrew word. The word may here mean behind in point of time, afterwards, and in that case we may understand the meaning to be Moses was given the privilege of seeing Jehovah in the form in which He afterwards would appear in the flesh. This human form, we know was His glory for John says: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory (His body) as of the Only Begotten of the Father." If we understand the text in Exodus the same way, it is clear. Moses saw Jehovah, just as John saw the bodily form of the Word, all but His face. (Ibid., 33:20-23)

Ether 3 16This agrees perfectly with the beautiful narrative in the Book of Ether concerning the interview of the Brother of Jared with our Lord. The Lord showed Himself unto him in the body of my Spirit, in the likeness of which He, Jesus Christ, had created man, (Ether 3:14-16) and the Lord said: "The time cometh that I shall glorify My Name in the flesh." (v. 21) That was His glory, and that was, we may feel sure, the glory which Moses, as well as the Brother of Jared, saw.

Ether 3 17Verse 17

Ether 3 17Even as He showed Himself unto the Nephites. Moroni interrupts his narrative for a moment in order to contemplate the wonderful visions which Moriancumer had been given of our Lord, both in His spiritual and His material body as we commonly understand those terms. Now Moroni adds the information that the body in which our Lord manifest Himself to Moriancumer was, both in manner, that is to say, functions or acts, and appearance the same as that in which He showed Himself to the Nephites (3 Nephi 11:8-12).

Ether 3 17The reality of the human body. In our day and age, at the present stage of development of religious thought, the reason for the importance which Moroni evidently attached to a correct belief in the reality of the human body, including the earthly tabernacle of our Lord, may not be apparent. But when we remember that Christianity during its early days was seriously threatened by a philosophy that denied this reality, we can understand these paragraphs.

Ether 3 17According to Platonian philosophy, in the fifth century B.C., reality belongs only to general ideas of objects, such as horse, man, etc., not to individuals, viz., this horse, this man. The latter are not temporary, fleeting copies of the real existences, shadows on the wall, as it were. The species, not the individual, is the real thing. Influenced by such speculations, first the Essenes and then the Gnostics formed some strange ideas. Some of the latter imagined a duality in everything. They believed in two gods, one of which was good, omnipotent, and omniscient, while the other, the demiurge, was weak and imperfect. It was the latter that created the tangible universe and man. Matter was, therefore, imperfect and evil; something from which to be liberated, or saved. And salvation was attained, either by strict asceticism, killing natural desires by not yielding to them, or satisfying them, or, taking an opposite course and creating complete indifference to all earthly pleasures by overindulgence—libertinism. Between the supreme God and the demiurge there was a connecting chain of angelic beings called "principalities and powers," gradually decreasing in perfection and therefore approaching near enough to humanity to serve as mediators between God and man. These are the fulness, or pleroma, of the Godhead.

Ether 3 17In the imagination of some of the early philosophers, there were also two Christs, one material and one spiritual. The latter, they held, came upon our Lord in His baptism and departed from Him before His death. There was, therefore, no resurrection of the body. Others held that the birth, life, and death of our Lord were illusions, imaginary and not real historical facts.

Ether 3 17St. Paul brands all such philosophy as vain deceit. He warns against an asceticism that exaggerates the importance of abstinence from food and the observance of holidays. But he urges a life of righteousness. He warns against making angels the object of worship, because all the fulness of the Godhead—the connecting chain between God and man—dwells in Christ, who is the head of all principalities and powers—all angels, whatever their station in the divine government may be. (See Colossians 2:8-23)

Ether 3 17John brands that class of philosophers as antichrists, because they deny that Jesus is the Christ, and he says that their appearances indicate that the end of the world is near (1 John 2-18-25). St. John also testifies that he and others had seen the Lord, and heard Him, and even handled Him with their hands (1 John 1:1-2). There was no illusion. He was as real in His humanity as in His Godhood.

Ether 3 17Dr. Joseph Angus remarks (Bible-Handbook, p. 585) that the errors of Gnosticism in its many forms proved more fatal to Christianity than persecution itself. It was the serious consequences foreseen that prompted some of the Apostles, following the inspirations of the Divine Spirit, to turn the full authority of their Priesthood and their holy Apostolic calling against both the heresies and the authors thereof. No doubt Moroni, enlightened by the spirit of prophecy, foresaw the apostasy and its sources, and was thus given to realize the importance of a correct picture of our Lord in His twofold nature, the human and the divine, as well as the true knowledge of the Plan of Salvation. This, it seems, made him pause to contemplate more fully the visions of Moriancumer. [^1]

Ether 3 18Verse 18

Ether 3 18He ministered unto him. Our Lord ministered unto Moriancumer, as He, centuries afterwards, ministered unto the Nephites (III Nephi Chapters 11-28). He explained to Moriancumer the entire Plan of Salvation, bestowed upon him the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, and endowed him with the blessings and gifts of the Holy Spirit. The Jaredites were an enlightened people, living in the illumination of the patriarchal religion, as it had been taught to Noah, coming to him from Adam through Enoch, and to them by direct revelations of Himself. There is no reason for the supposition that their civilization was inferior to that of the Assyrians, Babylonians, Sumerians, or Egyptians.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Verses 19-20

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Perfect knowledge of God. In these two paragraphs Moroni stresses the importance of knowledge. It was because of his knowledge that Moriancumer was enabled to receive the divine manifestations. His faith had changed into perfect knowledge, and therefore he could not be kept from within the veil. (v. 20)

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Can God be known? If so, How? No man in his present stage of existence can have perfect knowledge of God, if by that phrase is meant the complete, finished cognition of His origin, essence, and attributes. No human being can have so perfect knowledge of anything that there is no more to learn about it. "Now we see through a glass, darkly" (1 Corinthians 13:12), and we presume that the Apostle who penned those words referred to the blurred images reflected in the polished metal plates that served as mirrors in his days, stated an exact fact. All human knowledge is, as yet, imperfect. But if perfect in this connection means sure, certain, and therein refers to a conviction of the mind that knows no doubt, then, in that sense, man can know God.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20And not only that, man must know God, in order to have Eternal Life, as our Lord Himself declares: "And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, Whom Thou hast sent (John 17:3).

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20The infinite God, with infinite attributes, is incomprehensible even to the keenest and most logical philosopher, if he depends only on worldly wisdom for his understanding of the Divine. The Infinite cannot be measured with a finite yardstick. " ... the world by wisdom knew not God" (1 Corinthians 1:21). But the humblest of human beings can be made to realize the reality of the existence of God, and to rejoice in that knowledge. The statesmanship and policy of a king, or the intricate calculations of a mathematician are far beyond the comprehension of a five-year-old child; but the reality of the existence of the king, or the mathematician, and some of their attributes, can be perceived even by the baby in the cradle. This applies also to the existence of God. In His infinite perfections He is beyond human comprehension, but we can know, and if we desire that knowledge, we will know that the existence of God is a reality.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Three philosophical proofs. Theologians at one time, when called upon to give rational reasons for their belief in the existence of God, used to reply with three propositions.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20(1) Man, it was argued, had an innate idea of a perfect Being, and, since existence is one attribute without which there cannot be perfection, this Being must exist. The name of Anselm (1033-1109), at one time Archbishop of Canterbury, is prominently connected with this argument which is known as the ontological proof. Descartes, the French philosopher (1596-1650), made use of it in his deductions.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20(2) It was argued, next, that if anything exists, there must be a cause of its existence, and a final, self-existing cause. This is known as the cosmological proof. Leibnitz, the German philosopher (1646-1716), in reply to the contention that we know nothing except what we perceive through our senses, summarized this argument in his famous statement, "Nothing if not Intellect itself." [^2] Wolff, another German, (1679-1754), popularized the position of Leibnitz on this question.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20(3) Wolff also made use of another argument asserting that the countless evidences of design are proof of an intelligent designer, a Creator. This is known as the Theological proof.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20These arguments seemed conclusive until Hume, in England, in a philosophical work published in 1779 after the death of its author; and Kant, in Germany, in 1781, denied the conclusions drawn from them. Hume held that the Cause of the universe, and Kant expressed the same thought more strikingly when he said that he could not imagine the Creator saying, "Beside Me there is nothing but that which I have made, but whence did I come from?" or words to that effect.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20That may be true, but some deductions from these propositions are not true. If anyone contends that the three famous proofs offered for the existence of the Creator, fail because they do not account for the origin of the divine Maker as well as the works of His hands, the logic of such contention is pretty near the boundary line of absurdity.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Let us imagine ourselves standing near the shore of an ocean beach. Presently a large steamship comes in sight. It draws nearer and nearer. It passes us at a distance of two or three miles. Aided by our spyglasses, we can see the gracefully sloping masts, the brightly painted smokestacks, the bridges, the people moving about on its decks, the immense hull, these with its rows of portholes and perhaps a name in golden letters. Everything we see of this passing object of our observation convinces us that we have before us the creation of an intelligent builder with vast resources at his disposal even if we have never before seen a ship. What we see may not give us any information of the family, the ancestors or countrymen of the builder, or his education, his complexion, or anything else our curiosity might desire to know or find out; but that does not weaken our conclusion that we have seen a great personality embodied in this magnificent creation of modern civilization. There is no room for skepticism as to that. Nor is it reasonable to underrate the value of an argument for the existence of God because it is silent on His divine origin.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20"The invisible things of God, His eternal power and Godhead, have been visible from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are made" (Romans 1:20).

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20"If there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore all things must have vanished away" (II Nephi 2:13).

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20(4) The Dokimological proof. [^3] But if these arguments are not convincing, there is a fourth which we shall call the Dokimological proof until a better name is suggested. Every sincere child of God knows from his own experience that there is a Supreme Being who hears and answers prayer. This is a proposition which everyone can put to the test for himself.

SCEther 3 19Ether 3 20Moriancumer had at one time neglected his prayers habitually. The Lord rebuked him. He repented (Ether 2:14-15). When he resumed his communication with God in regular prayer, his faith and knowledge increased to the extent that he could see the Lord.

SCEther 3 21Ether 3 22Ether 3 23Ether 3 24Ether 3 25Ether 3 26Ether 3 27Ether 3 28Verses 21-28

SCEther 3 21Ether 3 22Ether 3 23Ether 3 24Ether 3 25Ether 3 26Ether 3 27Ether 3 28Write these things and seal them up. This section contains instructions to Moriancumer. He is cautioned against publishing to the world the revelations given to him. He is commanded to place them on record when "ye shall come unto Me," that is, when he was about to die. He was given two stones, by means of which the records would be read in the due time of the Lord. He was now given another vision, this time of the past and the future of the human family. Finally he was directed to put this vision on record with the others; and to place them and the stones, also known as the Interpreters somewhere for safe-keeping until they were to come forth in the due time of the Lord.

Ether 3 22Verse 22

Ether 3 22In a language that they—the Records—cannot be read. The original Semitic language spoken by Noah and Shem was lost when the Tower was destroyed, except as far it was preserved by Jared and his brother, their families and a few of their friends (Ether 1:35-37). The twenty-four plates must have been written in that vernacular (v. 24). Being lost as a common mode of speech, it could not have been read, particularly in an age when reading was an art, mastered by few.

Ether 3 22Semitic languages. These at one time were spoken by inhabitants of Abyssinia, Arabia, Palestine, Phoenicia, Syria, Mesopotamia, parts of Elam, the Nile Valley, Ethiopia, and parts of northern Africa. Arabic, Hebrew, Phoenician, Moabitic, Aramean, Assyrian, Babylonian, Samaritan, Syriac, are all classed as Semitic. A Semitic dialect was at one time the official language of Persia. All these linguistic branches must have had a common stem in a tongue spoken by Noah and Shem. It was also the vernacular of the Jaredites until the dispersion, and of Jared and his friends after that event.

Ether 3 22Origin of languages. Some have suggested that words were invented in imitation of such sounds as hiss, buzz, roar, etc. Others have thought that languages were developed from interjections, such as, Oh, alas, etc. Others think that a gesture language preceded a sound language. But the Scriptures tell us that Adam could speak even before the creation of Eve. He must have been taught to use a highly developed language of none other than his Heavenly Father.

Ether 3 22Turn to Genesis 2:19-23. There we read that God brought beasts of the field and fowls of the air before Adam "to see what he would call them." Adam gave them names, but he found no help, meet for him, until Eve had been given being and life. Then he exclaimed, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh." He recognized that there was no affinity between him and the brute creation. Here Adam is represented as conversing with his divine Tutor, and as having a vocabulary sufficient for a work on Zoology.

Ether 3 22We know not how long a time our venerable ancestor and his wife, Eve, remained in the Garden of Eden, but it is evident that when they entered the world outside they were full equipped, mentally and otherwise, for their earthly mission. They even had a written language and kept a record thereby, a Book of Remembrance. This was written by inspiration in the language of Adam, which was the tongue spoken by the antediluvian patriarchs presumably down to Noah and his sons (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 6:5-6; 6:46).

SCEther 3 23Ether 3 24Verses 23-24

SCEther 3 23Ether 3 24The Two Stones. These Two Stones, which are also known as the Interpreters (Ether 4:5; Mosiah 28:20) and Urim and Thummim [^4] (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:52; Doctrine and Covenants 17:1) were, as we read here, entrusted into the care of Moriancumer, before he descended from the ever memorable scene of his vision and revelations. They were delivered to him with the admonition that they were to be sealed up, together with the sacred records that were to be kept, and thus be hidden from the eyes of the world, until they, in the due time of the Lord, were to come forth. The purpose of the Stones is stated to be to magnify, that is to say, to make clear "the things which ye shall write."

SCEther 3 23Ether 3 24According to the Doctrine and Covenants (17:1), the Sacred Instruments deposited in the Hill Cumorah and delivered to the Prophet Joseph, was the Urim and Thummim received by the Brother of Jared on the Mount. When the Prophet Joseph received the Stones, September 22, 1827, they were framed in silver bows and fastened to a breastplate (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:35). From the Doctrine and Covenants, 130:8-9, where God is said to dwell on a globe which is a Urim and Thummim, and that the Earth is to be sanctified and made immortal—made like unto a crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants thereon—we conclude that that was the nature of the Stones. They were crystals. The Prophet Joseph Smith further adds to our information that the white stone mentioned in the Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each who receives one, and that a white stone will be given to everyone who is privileged to come into the Celestial Kingdom. On the stone a new name is written. By this means things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms, even all kingdoms, will be made known.

SCEther 3 25Ether 3 26Ether 3 27Ether 3 28Verses 25-28

SCEther 3 25Ether 3 26Ether 3 27Ether 3 28All the inhabitants of the Earth. When Moriancumer had received the Urim and Thummim, the Lord opened his vision, possibly by means of these Stones; and he was shown the human race, past and future, passing as if in a panorama.

SCEther 3 25Ether 3 26Ether 3 27Ether 3 28Enoch had a similar view of many generations upon Mt. Simeon (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:2-6, 22-69). Abraham, who received a second Urim and Thummim while he was in Ur, of the Caldees (Ibid., Abraham 3:1), had marvelous visions and revelations concerning the Creation of the Universe, and the intelligences that were organized before the world was (Ibid., Abraham 1-28 and chapters 4 and 5). He was thus prepared for his mission to Egypt (Ibid., 3:15). Moses, too, who may have been the possessor of the same Urim and Thummim that had first been given to Abraham, had similar visions (Ibid., Moses, 1:1-7ff). He beheld the Earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold ... and he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned by the Spirit of God ... And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof (Ibid., Moses, 1:27-29).

PRE-EXISTENCE

Ether 3:15-16. This is the only place in the Book of Mormon where pre-existence is clearly spoken of and this was revealed before the organization of the Church, and is a doctrine which was not in possession of the Christian world; hence it shows that it was dictated by a spirit capable of revealing a doctrine unknown to the Christian world. (Orson Pratt, April 13, 1856; Journal of Discourses, Vol. 3, p. 352.)

DIVERSITY OF LANGUAGES

The wandering life of the Indians was one of the most powerful causes of the formation of dialects, which was so transformed by time as scarcely to retain a vestige of the mother tongue. The dispersion of the tribes over immense plains and almost inaccessible mountains, the sight of new objects, novel customs, the complete separation, and destruction of all kind of relation with sister tribes were causes more than sufficient to form, in a short time, a multitude of new words, and to produce an idiom which at first view would seem to be entirely distinct from the mother tongue. But the grammatical construction remains an indestructible monument, to attest the affiliation, which no circumstance of time and place can obliterate." (Rivero and Tschudi, Peruvian Antiquities, pp. 96-7.)

A COMMON ORIGIN

Mr. T. S. Denison, A.M., in "Mexican Linguistics" expressed the opinion that all American languages have a common origin in some early Old World speech. He maintains that they have retained sufficient vestiges to prove that fact. (Mexican Linguistics, p. 10.)

Students of the inspired word of God need no longer fear for their reputation as advanced thinkers, if they accept, for instance, the Biblical account of the creation as true history. For modern, scientific thought goes in that direction. Astronomy, and especially astrophysics, chemistry and experimental physics are changing the concepts of the well-informed, just as the visions, you may say, of Copernicus revolutionized the views, at one time predominant, concerning the place of man and earth in the universe.

Dr. Wayne R. Hales, of the B. Y. U., Provo, Utah, gave an enlightening address on that subject some time ago, to the students. He cited the "tidal theory" of Sir James Jeans of the formation of the earth. He said:

"According to this theory the earth came into being between five and ten million years ago as a result of the orbital intersection of two great suns.

"As the earth mass cooled, successive stages in its development were: (1) the appearance of light through the vapor surrounding the earth; (2) the separation of the atmosphere from condensed waters on the face of the planet; (3) the separation of continents and oceans on the earth and the appearance of plant life; (4) the appearance of sun, moon, and stars, due to the breaking up of thick clouds in the atmosphere; (5) the appearance of fish, reptiles and birds; (6) the appearance of mammals, and, finally, man."

As for the formation of the sun, Dr. Hales said the scientific explanation now is that billions of years ago energy was converted into electrons and protons which combined and formed the sun's mass. The sun has, since, been converting its matter back into energy and radiating it throughout the solar system. "To answer the question, 'Where did the original energy come from?' scientists," Dr. Hales said, "can find no answer except the existence and operation of God." (Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1938, p. 18.)

NOTES

Footnotes

"I believe in God, the Father Almighty;

"And in Jesus Christ, his Only Begotten Son, our Lord, born of the Holy spirit and Mary, the virgin; crucified under Pontius Pilate and buried; on the third day resurrected from the dead, ascended to the heavens, sitteth on the right hand of the Father, whence he cometh to judge living and dead;

"Also in the Holy Spirit, the holy church, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, life eternal."

This was the original form. Other phrases were added later, as the war on heresies was continued as the occasion seemed to demand. (See The Apostle's Creed, by Dr. Arthur Cushman McGiffert. On the errors of the Essenes and Gnostics, the scholarly notes and dissertations of Bishop J. B. Lightfoot, D.D. can be studied with profit.)

---
Notas:
[^1] "And now, I speak somewhat concerning that which I have written; for after I had made an abridgment from the Plates of Nephi, down to the reign of this King Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake, I searched among the records which had been delivered into my hands, and I found these plates, which contained this small account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of this King Benjamin, and also many of the words of Nephi.
[^2] The Prophet writes: "These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold; each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite as thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, part of which was sealed. (Italics are Editor's) The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God."
[^3] Convenient to the Village of Manchester, Ontario County, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.
[^4] And thus did he appoint chief captains of the Zoramites, they being the most acquainted with the strength of the Nephites, and their place of resort, and the weakest parts of their cities; therefore he appointed them to be chief captains over his armies (Alma 48:5)
