Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 4

Ether 4 1Verse 1

Ether 4 1For this cause did King Mosiah keep them. This Mosiah, the son of King Benjamin, was the last of the kings of Zarahemla, preceding the Judges. He was the translator of the contents of the twenty-four plates of gold which were delivered to him by the hands of Limhi. The translation was made by the means of those two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow. The stones, we read in the Book of Mormon, were prepared from the beginning, and were handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of interpreting languages. (Mosiah 28:11-14) They were in all probability the stones which were given to Moriancumer, and, later, to the Prophet Joseph by the resurrected Prophet of the Nephites, Moroni.

Ether 4 1How did King Mosiah get them?

Ether 4 1We turn to the Book of Omni. We read there that during the reign of the first Mosiah, the father of King Benjamin, a large stone with engravings thereon was brought to Zarahemla to the king. The king translated the text thereof by the gift and power of God, and found that it contained an account of one Coriantumr and the slain of his people. Amaleki, the chronicler, adds the explanation that Coriantumr had been found by people from Zarahemla—perhaps by hunters—and that he had lived with them nine moons (we presume months) of his life.

Ether 4 1Coriantumr was the last of the kings of the Jaredites of whom we have any historical record, as Ether was the last of their prophets. He fought his savage enemy, Shiz, at Ramah, until both their armies were annihilated. Then he ended the life of his antagonist. He, himself, was left on the battlefield apparently lifeless. But Coriantumr recovered, and began his pilgrimage which eventually ended in Zarahemla. As the head of the government of the Jaredite Kingdom, he may have had charge of the Urim and Thummim and brought them where King Mosiah at last obtained them, together with the historical stone (Omni 19-22).

Ether 4 1LIMHI AND AMMON

Ether 4 1In the first part of the Book of Mosiah (8:9-19), an interview between King Limhi and a certain Ammon is recorded. Limhi was the son of King Noah and a grandson of Zeniff. Ammon was a descendant of Zarahemla. During the conversation which followed their making known to each other the positions each held, Ammon was informed that Limhi had in his possession twenty-four plates of gold filled with engravings, and some other artifacts which must have been left by a people who were destroyed long ago. Limhi asked Ammon if he could interpret an ancient language. Ammon said that he could not, but, he added, the King in Zarahemla, Mosiah, the son of Benjamin, had wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date. If this relates to the Urim and Thummim, as it undoubtedly does, it is evident that the two stones were no part of the treasurers of Limhi, although he had the Plates, and that King Mosiah had the sacred Instruments, or Interpreters, long before he had received the Plates to interpret.

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Verses 3-7

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7All dwindled in unbelief. In this paragraph Moroni tells us that because the Nephites, the people of Christ, had dwindled in unbelief, and that the Lamanites had rejected the Gospel, he had been instructed of the Lord to hide the sacred relics in the earth; they to come forth again at some future time. These relics were, the Smaller Plates of Nephi [^1] and Mormon's abridgment of the Larger Plates of Nephi, together with some additional writings by both Mormon and his son, Moroni, which included a translation of the Twenty-four gold plates what now is the Book of Ether. There were also what constitutes, we presume, the sealed [^2] portion of the gold plates that were delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith by the Angel Moroni; [^3] the Urim and Thummim and the Breastplate. These sacred things had long been used by the Church of Christ upon this continent, except, of course, the writings of Mormon and Moroni. All these the Prophet entrusted to the motherly bosom of the earth, there to rest until the Gentiles would repent and exercise faith in the Lord. (v. 7)

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Moroni, in this Chapter gives a complete understanding of the conditions that would surround the time when the visions recorded by the Brother of Jared should come to the knowledge of the world. He makes mention of two separate times; the first had already taken place as recorded in verse two. The second is to be as the Voice of the Lord declared it to Moroni and placed on record in verses six and seven.

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7For emphasis we quote verses four and five of this chapter, and suggest to the student that in its connection he will read verses 23 to 25 of Chapter 12 of this Book. "Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the Brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than these which were made manifest unto the Brother of Jared. Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me that I should seal them up; and He also hath commanded that I seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the Interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord." (Ether 4:4-5)

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Moroni was bowed down with a burden of care. He had seen his people, the Nephites, the people of Christ, destroyed. All about him was death and nothing appeared to ameliorate the gloom that hovered over all. The Sun shone brightly but the day was dark. Far reaching lands and fertile fields, that in times past had yielded bounteous crops to the labor of the husbandman, were now desolate. The ramparts of cities, once the gardens of their citizens, had been turned into battlegrounds where unburied bodies lay seething in their own filthiness.

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7As it was in the days before the ministry of the resurrected Redeemer, the Lamanites again chose apostate Nephites to lead their armies. [^4] The hatred these apostate Nephites had of their former brethren was intense; their spite was keen and inexhaustible, and of all the passions that occupy the human heart, apostate ill-will is the most bitter and malignant. They left no stone untouched or unturned that they might throw at the crumbling bulwark and battlements of the Christian Religion. They hunted like wild beasts the few remaining Saints who still took upon themselves the Name of Christ, and who would not deny their belief in His Majesty. Wasted lands and ruined cities bore mute evidence of the barbarity of the Lamanite horde that swept over the face of the earth.

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Moroni, we may feel sure, was about to despair. However, the Lord, seeing his distress, sought to comfort him. With the faith and courage that comes to one after a life of service to the Master, Moroni's heart and mind had become attuned to the whisperings of that Still Small Voice which comes from the Father to lead and to guide and to warn of things to come. He, almost overwhelmed with sadness, and notwithstanding the sorrow in his heart, perceived a Voice. "A pleasant Voice, as if it were a whisper"; the Voice of One from On High, Who is mighty and powerful; Whose Voice is unto the ends of the Earth, even the Voice of Jesus Christ: "Come unto Me." (vv. 13 and 14)

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Moroni listened attentively to the Voice, and we, too, hear it through him. Not a voice like rushing mighty waters, not like thunder upon the distant mountain tops. But a voice like the calm of eventide with healing in its wings. Not in these exact terms, but with a meaning plain that all may understand: "The words of your prophets are the words of 'My servants whom I have sent unto you to declare good tidings.' " (Helaman 5:29) " 'Their words are My words, 'For I am He Who speaketh.' " (v. 8)

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7In no uncertain terms, but in plainness, that we may quickly comprehend, the Lord, Himself, verifies as His own, the words of His servants. And whether or not we believe their words, at the last day all will know "It is I that speaketh." (v. 10) [^5]

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7And furthermore, the Lord promises that whosoever believeth the words which He has spoken by the mouth of His servants, "him will I visit with the manifestations of My Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of My Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good." (v. 11)

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7The Voice of the Lord, Jesus Christ, in His own beautiful but simple words, proclaims the summum bonum of all existence, or in other words, the supreme or highest good from which all our blessings come: "Good cometh of none save it be of Me." (v. 12) [^6]

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7We may understand this to mean that not only does good come from Him in a personal manner or relation, but that belief in Him cause men to do only that which is good. In this way good cometh of Him. [^7]

SCEther 4 3Ether 4 4Ether 4 5Ether 4 6Ether 4 7Some people have the idea that God created evil since they say He created all things, and that by overcoming evil we progress. That is only partly true. We may progress by doing better that which is good. God did not create evil! It, as an opposite to good, always existed. [^8]

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17Verses 16-17

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17Revelations by My servant John. Moroni here predicts the unfolding of the Revelations by St. John, the beloved Apostle, as a sign of the approaching end of one dispensation and the beginning of another. "Remember," he says, "When ye see these things—that is the Revelations of John—and when ye shall receive this record—the Book of Ether—ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the land." We note that the Prophet now addresses both the Gentiles and the House of Israel, and invites them to accept the Gospel in order that their knowledge of God and spiritual things may increase. (vv. 13-14)

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17This prophecy concerning the unfolding of the Revelations of John has been fulfilled in our day and age. About March 1, 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who at that time lived in Hiram, Portage County, Ohio, received a marvelous "Key" to the Revelation by John. He and Sidney Rigdon had been studying the Scriptures since some time in December, 1830, when the latter was instructed by revelation (Doctrine and Covenants, 35:20) to act as amanuensis to the Prophet, and it was while they were thus engaged that the unfolding took place.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17The Key to Saint John's Revelations, as given to the Prophet Joseph (Ibid., 77), embraces only the first eleven Chapters of the Book. These form one continuous link of visions concerning "the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter" (Revelation 1:19). The spiritual conditions of the Church at the time of the close of the first century A.D. are depicted in letters to the churches in Asia Minor (Chapters 2:1-3:22). These are a revelation concerning the things which are.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17The scene now changes from Earth to the sanctuary in Heaven. There the Apostle had a view of the things which must come to pass hereafter. First he saw God, the Father, sitting upon His throne, surrounded by representatives of the entire Creation. There were twenty-four Elders, representing the Church; seven burning lamps, representing the "seven Spirits of God" [^9]here was a sea of glass, representing the Earth, in its sanctified, immortal, eternal state; there were four beasts, or rather living creatures, representing "Heaven, the Paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of fowls of the air, that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal." (Ibid., 77:1-2) They are the Cherubim of Ezekiel (Ezekiel 10:1-22), which he saw at the River Chebar. In the Revelation by John, these living creatures glorify God continually, saying, "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty, which was and which is and which is to come"; and when they give honor and glory to God, they are joined by the twentyfour Elders; and unitedly they exclaim, Worthy art Thou, our Lord and our God, to receive the glory and the honor, and the power, for Thou didst create all things, and because of Thy will they were, and are and were created. (See Revelation 4:1-11)

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17In the next Chapter we read the account of the vision of John, of a Book written on both sides and sealed with seven seals. This Book contained "the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of His economy concerning this Earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence"; each seal representing a thousand years. (Doctrine and Covenants, 77:6-7). The Lamb, the Son of God, receives the Book from the hands of His Father, whereupon the Elders, representing the Church, the angels, of which there are thousands upon thousands; and every created thing join in worshiping Him, as well as the Father, saying, Unto Him that sitteth on the throne, and unto the Lamb, be the blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and the dominion, for ever and ever. And the four living creatures said, Amen. And the Elders fell down and worshiped. (See, Revelation 5:12-13) That the Lamb was given the Book, to break the seals and unfold the roll, signified that our Lord was made ruler of human history, as the King of kings and the Lord of lords.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17The breaking of the seals begins in Chapter 6. The sealing of 144,000 of the Tribes of Israel enumerated, and the worship of an innumerable number of all nations are seen in Chapter 7. (See, Doctrine and Covenants, 77:8-11) In Chapters 8 and 9 events are shown that belong to the sixth millennium, immediately preceding the beginning of the seventh, which is the era of the Reign of our Lord upon the earth (Ibid., 77:12-14). In the 10th Chapter a mighty angel with a little book makes his appearance. This is evidently an outstanding feature of the history of the time of the end. The "little book" is "a mission and an ordinance for him (the angel) to gather the Tribes of Israel." "Behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things." (Ibid., 77:14)

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17"That great Prophet, Apostle, and martyr, Joseph Smith, was the Elias, the Restorer, the presiding messenger, holding the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, [^10] Yes, that extraordinary man ... was the chosen vessel to be a messenger in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the way of the Lord! For behold! He will suddenly come to His Temple." (Parley P. Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 79)

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17Concerning the Little Book, See, also, An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, p. 258. The Book of Mormon is, preeminently, a document authorizing the Gathering of Israel.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17In the last paragraph of the 10th Chapter of this Revelation, the Apostle John is told: "Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues and kings," referring to the part he, together with Peter and James, was assigned in the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17The main feature of the 11th Chapter is the testimony of the Two Witnesses, who will perform a mission among the Jews, "after they are gathered and have built the City of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (Doctrine and Covenants, 77:15)

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17This ends the main part of the Book of Revelation. The Key in the Doctrine and Covenants also ends with this Chapter.

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17The second portion of the Book contains the following additional features, placed there by the inspired author, himself: A vision of a woman and her child, persecuted by a dragon, but miraculously saved (v. 12); a beast persecuting the Saints (v. 13); the Lamb (Son of God) on Mount Zion with 144,000 worshipers (v. 14); seven last plagues (v. 15); seven vails of wrath and the Battle of Armagedden, before the coming of the Lord (v. 16); the judgment of a woman on a scarlet-colored beast (v. 17); the fall of Babylon (v. 18); the union of the Lamb and the Saints (v. 19); the Millennium (v. 20); a New Heaven and a New Earth (v. 21); and Paradise Restored (v. 22).

SCEther 4 16Ether 4 17These additions were made by the Apostle John, himself, by inspiration, in order to make his Revelation a complete and perfect picture of the history of the race. Any unauthorized elimination of some of its contents, or any additions thereto from uninspired apocalyptic literature would destroy the unity of the plan, and, by distorting it; distract from its value. Hence the solemn danger signal: "If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book; And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written in this book." (Revelation 22:18-19)

THEORIES ON THE REVELATION

There are, in the main, three theories concerning the time in history, to which the various visions and revelations in the book refer.

The Preterist Interpretation. According to this, most of the contents of the book refer to events in the early days of the Apostolic Church. Grotius, Wetstein, Eichhorn, are among the advocates of this view.

The Historical Interpretation. Others, particularly Protestants, regard the book as a prophetic history of the Church and the world, from the days of the Apostles to the end of time. Among the advocates of this view are, Mede, Sir Isaac Newton, Vitringa, Bishop John Newton, and Dr. Alexander Keith.

The Futurist Interpretation. According to this theory, the greater part of the prophetic contents of the book, if not all of it, will be fulfilled during the last days, before the second advent of our Lord. Among the exponents of this view are Maitland and Burgh. [^11]

The explanation of the Prophet Joseph Smith. By this we mean the definition in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77, revealed to the Prophet in 1832.

According to these inspired Key-Words, the sealed scroll contained the "revealed will, mysteries and works of God," during seven thousand years of the temporal existence of the Earth. The first seal contained the history and revelations of the first one thousand years, the second of the second thousand, and so on until the seventh. During these ages a conflict is raging between the forces of good and of evil. The people of God are suffering oppression again and again, but the outcome of each conflict is a triumphant victory of truth over falsehood, righteousness over sin. Persecuting Rome falls; Jerusalem, where also their Lord was crucified." (Revelation 11:9) is destroyed by an earthquake (v. 13); antichristian Babylon is thrown down as a millstone cast into the sea (Ibid., 18:21). Finally, every enemy of the Son of God will be subjected, willingly or unwillingly, to His sovereign rule.

Applying this interpretation, the prophecies in the Book of Revelation, as the events of history, repeat themselves. The denunciations pronounced against Babylon may apply to any other city, to Jerusalem, to pagan Rome, to a persecuting city that has flourished in any age, as well as to the ancient center of civilization on the banks of the River Euphrates. The angel with the little book of Revelation 10, may represent the Prophet Joseph Smith in our age, as well as the Apostle John in his time. The woman with the infant, Chapter 12, may symbolize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and not only the first Apostolic Church. For the Latter-day Saints, too, found a refuge in the wilderness under the protecting shelter of the "two wings of a great Eagle" (Ibid., 12:14).

The Doctrine and Covenants has a double interpretation of prophecies. In Section 88, the sounding of seven trumpets is the sign of the Second Advent of our Lord and the first resurrection and judgment (vv. 92-106). Then there is an interval of the Millennium, at the end of which seven angels again sound their trumpets, before the very last battle between the Hosts of Heaven under Michael, the Archangel, and the armies of hell, commanded by the adversary (vv. 108-116), "when they shall no more see death." Here it is evident that the events symbolized by the sounding of the seven trumpets in Revelation 8:7-21 and 11:15-19 are repeated first at the time of the Second Advent and then at the time of the final victory of our Lord over all enemies, including sin and death.

The Author. It is generally understood and agreed upon among Bible students that St. John the Divine, the author of the Revelation, was the Apostle John, whom Jesus loved (John 21:20). This Apostle was, as far as can be ascertained from the records, a son of Zebedee and Salome, a sister of the mother of Jesus (Matthew 27:56 and Mark 15:40), and therefore a cousin of our Lord. James, the brother of John, was also a prominent Apostle.

The Title. "The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto Him, to show His servants things which must shortly come to pass." (Revelation 1:1) When the Apostles on one occasion asked the Master to tell them something about the end of the world, (Matthew 24:3) He enumerated some of the signs, but concerning the time He added, "Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father" (Ibid., 24:36; Mark 13:32; Acts 1:6-8). Now the Father had given His Son these revelations for the special purpose of imparting to His people the knowledge needed for their comfort in times of trial. Our Lord promised through the Prophet Moroni (Ether 4:16), that John would commit the revelations to writing, and that they would be further unfolded at the time of the end of the dispensation immediately preceding His Second Advent.

One of John's first visions. The initial vision of the Revelation is that of Seven Candlesticks, representing an equal number of churches in Asia Minor. A supernatural Being is seen walking among them. He is, John says, "like unto the Son of man." He is clothed in a garment reaching the feet. He wears a golden girdle around his chest. His hair is white as wool, or as snow, and his eyes are as a flame of fire. The description reminds us of the appearance of the Ancient of Days in Daniel 7:9, who, the Prophet Joseph Smith says, is Michael, or Adam. [^12] The Apostle was so strongly affected by this vision that he fell at his feet as dead (Revelation 1:17).

It is sometimes assumed that this supernatural Being was our Lord Jesus Christ. But the text does not say so. The glorious messenger represented our Lord, "the First and the Last, He that liveth and was dead and Who liveth for evermore; He Who hath the keys of the grave and death." He spoke for Him, and the message he brought was from Him. But as for further identity, John says he was like unto the Son of man. It is true, this title was conferred upon the Second person in the Godhead, or was properly assumed by Him (Daniel 7:13; Matthew 8:24; 9:6; 24:30 and many more passages). For as our first ancestor, Adam, was the representative of the entire human race, and as such is the MAN, so Jesus, the Savior of MAN, became the Second Adam, and such is the representative of the entire race (I Corinthians 15:45-47). He bore the likeness of Adam, the representative of MAN. [^13]

We are inclined to the view that the Supernatural Being who appeared in the initial vision of this book was the Holy Spirit, and not the Son of God, Who afterwards appears as a Lamb standing as though it had been slain (Revelation 5:6). Our reason for this suggestion is a very obvious one, that this messenger instructs John to end all the dictated letters to the churches thus: He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. The natural inference is that, while the message comes from the Son, the Messenger is the Spirit. If this interpretation is correct, the Holy Spirit appeared in this vision as he made himself known to the young Prophet Nephi, who says: I spake to him as a man speaketh; for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet, nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and He spake unto me as a man speaketh with another (I Nephi 11:9-12; compare 10:11).

Beginning of history. The student of the predictions and prophetic visions concerning the seven millenniums, or seven thousand years, should be cautioned against regarding these figures as proving that the Earth was created about four thousand years before our era; that, in other words, the total age of our orb now (1960) is only about 5960 years. There is, as far as we know, no support of such a notion anywhere in the Sacred Literature of the world. On the contrary, the Scriptures give us to understand that that time is but a brief period of the life of our earthly habitation.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77:6-7, we read as follows:

"What are we to understand by the book which John saw, which was sealed on the back with seven seals?

"We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of His economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence."

"What are we to understand by the seven seals with which it was sealed?

"We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh."

Temporal existence we understand to mean being, or existence in time. We may express this thought somewhat differently, and say that the prophecies do not concern themselves with geological ages, except as far as they recognize God as the Creator and Ruler of all existence. They deal with history and historical facts, or periods. We read again from the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77:12, concerning the seven trumpets:

"We are to understand that as God made the world in six days and on the seventh day He finished His work, and sanctified it and also formed man out of the dust of the earth; even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things except that which He hath not put into His power, when He shall have sealed all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels, are the preparing, and finishing of His work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years;—the preparing of the way before the time of His coming."

Thus the limits of the prophetic vision are clearly defined. It is, as it were, only a week, from Sabbath to Sabbath, in the life of the Earth.

Chronological tables compared. As is well known, the genealogical records of Genesis begin with Adam, the first man, about 4000 B.C., as calculated by Bishop Usher. These are the Hebrew records. The tables in the Samaritan version of the Bible, and the seventy translators differ somewhat from the Hebrew figures, but we need not enter in that here. If we now add the 1960 years of our era to the 4000 preceding years, we have a total 5960 years as the age of the human race. If, further, we understand that each 1000 years represent one prophetic day, we find ourselves now living very near the close of the sixth day, there being only 40 common years before the seventh millennium, that is to see the Second Advent of our Lord.

We are not intending this as prediction; much less as an inspired prophecy; we are only trying to point out an unavoidable conclusion from the extant records, provided they have come to us as they were originally written, and provided also that our interpretation of them is correct.

Egyptian records are interesting for the sake of comparison, since Moses had his first education in Egypt. Manetho, an Egyptian historian (323-283 B.C.) allows, we are told, [^14] 3555 Egyptian, or 3553 Julian years from Menes, the first ruler in Egyptian annals, until the end of the 30th dynasty, 340 B.C. add the 1960 of our era to the 3553 of Menes, we have a total of 5853 years as the age of history. This is remarkably close to the Hebrew 5960 years from our first ancestor, Adam.

MOSIAH I

Mosiah resided in the Land of Nephi and lived there during the latter half of the third century before Christ. Whether he was originally a prophet, priest or king, the historian (Amaleki) does not inform us. Most certainly he was a righteous man for the Lord made choice of him to guide the obedient Nephites from their choice country to a land that he would show them.

The causes that led the Lord to make this call upon the Nephites are not stated but some of them can be easily surmised. Among such we suggest that:

The aggressive Lamanites were constantly crowding upon them, ravaging their more remote districts, entrapping and enslaving the inhabitants of the outlying settlements, driving off their flocks and herds and keeping them in a constant state of anxiety and dread which hindered their progress and stayed the growth of the work of God. The Lord therefore led them to a land of peace.

Again, this course of events continued for so long a period, had caused much hard-heartedness and stiff-neckedness in the midst of the Nephites. Some of the people had remained righteous, some had grown very wicked. To separate these classes the Lord called the faithful and obedient to follow Mosiah to another land.

For a third reason there was a portion of the house of Israel a few hundred miles to the north entirely unknown to their Nephite brethren. These people had sunk very low in true civilization, they were so degraded that they denied the being of their Creator, they had had many wars and contentions among themselves, they had corrupted their language, had no records nor scriptures and were altogether in a deplorable condition. To save and regenerate this branch of God's covenant people Mosiah and the Nephites were led to the place where they dwelt.

The statement made by Amaleki regarding this great migration under Mosiah is brief. We are altogether left to our imagination to picture the scenes that occurred at this division of a nation. Nor can we tell how many, preferring home, kindred and friends and the endearments and associations of their native land, faltered and tarried behind, while the faithful started on their journey northward into the untrodden wilderness. Nor are we informed what afterwards became of those who allowed the allurements of the world to prevail. It is most probable that they united with the Lamanites, were absorbed into that race and like them became darkened, bloodthirsty and savage.

The Nephite evacuation of the cities built in the land of Nephi no doubt had a beneficial effect on those portions of the Lamanite race that took possession of them. They thereby became acquainted with some of the comforts and excellencies of civilization and though very slow to learn, their experience at this time laid the foundation for a slight advance of the arts of peace in their midst.

Mosiah gathered up the willing and obedient and as directed by the Lord, started on the journey. Whither they were going they understood not, only they knew that the Lord was leading them. With preachings and prophesyings they crossed the wilderness and passed down into the land of Zarahemla.

On the west bank of the river Sidon the people of Mosiah found a populous city, of whose existence they had never before heard. Its people were a semi-civilized and irreligious race, speaking a strange language and with many habits and customs different from those of the newcomers.

The meeting must have been a perplexing one to both people, brought face to face but unable to understand each other by reason of their different modes of speech. We often read in history of the irruption of an inferior or more barbarous race into the domains of a more highly civilized one but it is seldom, as in this case, that the superior race moves in a body, occupies the country and unites with the less enlightened people. It is probable that the first feelings of the old settlers were akin to dismay as they learned of the hosts of the invaders that were marching upon them but these feelings were soon soothed and an understanding arrived at by which the two peoples became one nation. We are forced to the conclusion that this arrangement could not have been affected without the direct interposition of heaven by and through which both peoples were brought to a united purpose and common understanding.

When the Nephites began to comprehend the language of their new fellow citizens they found that they were the descendants of a colony which had been led from Jerusalem by the hand of the Lord in the year that that city was destroyed by the king of Babylon (say B. C. 589). At this time their king or ruler was named Zarahemla (about B. C. 200). The reason assigned for their departure from the worship of the true God, their degradation and the corruption of their language was that their forefathers brought with them from their ancient home in Palestine no records or copies of the holy scriptures to guide and preserve them from error in their isolated land of adoption.

When the two races joined it was decided that Mosiah should be the king of the united people though the Nephites were then the less numerous. This arrangement probably grew out of the fact that though fewer in numbers they were the more civilized and also being worshipers of the God of Israel they would not willingly submit to be ruled by those who had no knowledge of His laws.

The education of the people of Zarahemla to the standard of the Nephites and the work of harmonizing the two races were not the task of an hour. It required much wisdom, patience and perseverance. Mosiah gave stability to the new kingdom by his own virtues and wise example, by the just laws he established and by placing the service of the Lord before all earthly considerations. It is evident that he built a temple in the new land as its existence is particularly mentioned in the days of his son, King Benjamin and as the people observed the law of Moses in the matter of sacrifices and offerings a temple would be one of their very first necessities. But to the forms, types and ceremonies of the Mosaic law were added gospel principles with a clear and definite understanding of the coming and divine work of the Messiah. Mosiah was not only a divinely inspired leader and king but he was also a seer. While reigning in Zarahemla a large engraved stone was brought to him and by the gift and power of God he translated the engravings thereon. They gave an account of the rise, fall and destruction of the great Jaredite nation from the days of its founders to the time of their last king Coriantumr, who himself was discovered by the people of Zarahemla and lived with them nine moons. When Mosiah died he was succeeded by his son Benjamin.

MOSIAH II

The third king of the Nephites in the Land of Zarahemla where he was born B.C. 154; he was consecrated king by his father Benjamin, B.C. 124 and died in Zarahemla, B.C. 91, aged 63 years. He came to the throne under most happy circumstances, he had the full confidence of his subjects, who were a righteous, Godfearing people, the Lamanites were at peace with the Nephites and internal development and prosperity characterized the condition of his kingdom. Individually he proved to be one of the greatest and best of kings; his whole energies were devoted to the good of his people, who loved him with an intensity of affection scarcely equaled in the annals of any race. In the fourth year of his reign the expedition under Ammon started which resulted in the return to Zarahemla of nearly all the living descendants of the company that left under Zeniff to re-occupy the land of Lehi-Nephi. The leader of one of these companies was Alma, the elder, whom Mosiah called to take charge of the church in Zarahemla. Soon after the arrival of these fugitives from the Land of Nephi, Mosiah gathered all the people together and had them made acquainted with the vicissitudes and sorrows through which the newcomers had passed since their fathers left Zarahemla. Also taking advantage of the presence of so many of his subjects he addressed them on such matters as he deemed necessary and desirable. At his request Alma also taught them. When assembled in large bodies Alma went from one multitude to another preaching repentance and faith in the Lord; afterwards, by Mosiah's direction, he went through the land organizing and establishing churches and ordaining priests and teachers over every church. Thus were seven churches established at this time in the Land of Zarahemla.

In the course of years many of the rising generation gave no heed to the word of God. These were mostly such as were too young to enter into covenant with the Lord at the time that Benjamin anointed Mosiah to be his successor. Not only did they themselves reject the doctrines of the atonement, the resurrection and other gospel principles but they led away many who were members of the Church and sorely persecuted those who remained faithful to God and His laws. Encouraged by the fact that four of Mosiah's sons and one of Alma's were leaders in this crusade they paid no attention to the national law which guaranteed freedom of conscience to all men alike. By divine interposition, through a holy angel, these young men were turned from the error of their way and afterwards became strong pillars in the church and messengers of salvation to both Nephite and Lamanite. For the four sons of Mosiah (named Aaron, Ammon, Omner and Himni) not content with their zealous labors among their countrymen proposed to go and labor among the Lamanites. The good king, like many of his subjects, did not favorably regard this proposal. He feared for the lives of his sons but having inquired of the Lord and received assurances of heavenly protection he gladly let them go.

Mosiah now felt that it was time that the question of the succession to the throne should be settled. In his magnanimity he sent among the people to learn whom they would have for their king. The people chose his son Aaron but Aaron would not accept the royal power, his heart was set upon the conversion of his fellow-men to the knowledge of the gospel. This refusal troubled the mind of Mosiah, he apprehended difficulties if Aaron at some future time should change his mind and demand his rights. Mosiah therefore issued another address in which he proposed to retain the kingdom during the remainder of his life after which the Nephites should be governed by judges elected by themselves. In other respects also Mosiah consented to newly arrange the affairs of the people and if we may so express it, to codify the laws. This code became the constitution of the nation under the rule of the Judges which limited the powers of the officials, and guaranteed the rights of the people. This compilation was acknowledged by the people whereupon the historian remarks "Therefore they were obliged to abide by the laws which he had made" and from that time they became supreme throughout the nation. It is stated in another place that this change was made by the direct command of Jehovah. But besides being a king Mosiah was also a seer. The gift of interpreting strange tongues and languages was his. By this gift he translated from the twentyfour plates of gold, found by the people of King Limhi, the record of the Jaredites. No wonder that a man possessed of such gifts, so just and merciful in the administration of the law, so perfect in his private life, should be esteemed more than any man by his subjects and they waxed strong in their love towards him. As a king he was a father to them but as a prophet, seer and revelator he was the source from whence divine wisdom flowed unto them.

His sons having started on their missions to the Lamanites (B.C. 91) Mosiah gave the sacred plates and the associate holy things into the care of the younger Alma and the same year passed away to the rest of the Just.

Footnotes

"And these things which are upon these plates pleasing me, because of the prophecies of the coming of Christ; and my fathers knowing that many of them have been fulfilled; yea, and I also know that as many things as have been prophesied concerning us down to this day have been fulfilled, and as many as go beyond this day must surely come to pass—

"Wherefore, I chose these things to finish my record upon them, which remainder of my record I shall take from the Plates of Nephi; and I cannot write the hundredth part of the things of my people.

"But behold, I shall take these plates, which contain these prophesyings and revelations, and put them with the remainder of my record, for they are choice unto me; and I know they will be choice unto my brethren." (Words of Mormon 3-6)

(Joseph Smith, in a letter to John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, March 1, 1842. History of the Church, Vol. 4, p. 535)

It is supposed by some that the sealed part of the plates was two-thirds of the whole, and by others that it was but one-third. Both may be wrong. The above statement by the Prophet is the only declaration we have been able to find that was made by him concerning this particular point. It is alleged by those making that estimate that Elder Orson Pratt so stated it as fact; Elder Pratt was a close associate of the Prophet, and may have gleaned the information from him, but anything authentic could come only from Joseph Smith, himself, and so far nothing has been presented which would truly substantiate any claim.

Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the Plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some sort of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them.

I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time ...

(Joseph Smith, Pearl of Great Price, vv. 51-53, p. 53)

At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate ...

(Ibid., v. 59, p. 54)

And it came to pass that the Lamanites came with their thousands; and they came into the Land of Antionum, which is the land of the Zoramites; and a man by the name of Zerahemnah was their leader.

And now, as the Amalekites were of a more wicked and murderous disposition than the Lamanites were, in and of themselves, therefore, Zerahemnah appointed chief captains over the Lamanites, and they were all Amalekites and Zoramites.

And this he did that he might preserve their hatred towards the Nephites, that he might bring them into subjection to the accomplishment of his designs. (Alma 43:5-7)

And they were inspired by the Zoramites and the Amalekites, who were their chief leaders, and by Zerahemnah, who was their chief captain, or their chief leader and commander; yea, they did fight like dragons, and many of the Nephites were slain by their hands, yea, for they did smite in two many of their head-plates, and they did pierce many of their breastplates, and they did smite off many of their arms; and thus the Lamanites did smite in their fierce anger. (Ibid., 44)

And behold, there were divers ways that He did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them. (Ibid., 7:24)

And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually. (Mosiah 5:2)

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given unto every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. (Moroni 7:16)

And to bring about His eternal purposes in the end of man, after He had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter. (Ibid., 2:15)

---
Notas:
[^1] For detailed accounts of the Three Witnesses, See, Essentials of Church History, pp. 72-80, Joseph Fielding Smith. Also, An Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, pp. 47-66, Janne M. Sjodahl.
[^2] The Prophet writes: "These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold; each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite as thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, part of which was sealed. (Italics are Editor's) The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God."
[^3] Convenient to the Village of Manchester, Ontario County, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.
[^4] And thus did he appoint chief captains of the Zoramites, they being the most acquainted with the strength of the Nephites, and their place of resort, and the weakest parts of their cities; therefore he appointed them to be chief captains over his armies (Alma 48:5)
[^5] For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for He speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding. (II Nephi 31:3)
[^6] Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against Him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. (Moroni 7:12)
[^7] And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and He hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good. (II Nephi 33:10)
[^8] For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility. (II Nephi 2:11)
[^9] Meaning we believe, the Holy Ghost. The word seven always stands for something complete, perfect.
[^10] Fulness of times is, we understand, the end of the Roll, the Seventh Seal, the Seventh Millennium.
[^11] Dr. Joseph Angus, Bible Handbook, pp. 642-643
[^12] Daniel speaks of the Ancient of Days. He means the oldest man, our father Adam (Michael). He will call his children together and hold a council with them, to prepare them for the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men; and all that have the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action." (Journal of Discourses, Volume 6, p. 238)
[^13] The expression Son of Man occurs about a hundred times in the prophetic Book of Ezekiel. Son in the Hebrew sometimes means an individual of a class, and is so understood in Ezekiel. It is the same as man.
[^14] Victor Rydberg.
