Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 5

Ether 5 1Verse 1

Ether 5 1The things which I have sealed up. Authentic descriptions of the original Book-of-Mormon Plates note the fact that a considerable part of the golden record was sealed. Martin Harris so informed Professor Charles Anthon, New York, in their strange interview in 1828. In this Chapter Moroni furnishes the interesting information that he had written the words commanded him, from memory, referring possibly, more especially, to Chapters 3 and 4; and that the things he had told from memory had been sealed up. These things, consequently, formed part of the sealed portion of the Plates.

Ether 5 1I have told you. This may indicate that the wonderful story of the interview of Moriancumer, the Brother of Jared, with the Lord on the mountain, as we can read it in the Book of Ether, was part of a sermon of Moroni at some public assembly before the final conflict at Cumorah.

Ether 5 1Touch them not. Moroni addresses this admonition to future translators. They must leave the sealed portion alone, until otherwise directed by the Lord. There must be some strong reason for this precaution. Our surmise is that the exceedingly glorious manifestations of God on Mount Shelem, translated into imperfect human language, would have been incomprehensible to the world at the time of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and that ignorance and bigotry at that time would have martyred the Prophet Joseph long before the completion of his mission on Earth if these visions had been put into print.

Ether 5 2Verse 2

Ether 5 2Ye may show the Plates. Nevertheless, Moroni says, ye may be privileged to show the Plates to certain friends. This was also necessary as a corroboration of the testimony of the Prophet.

SCEther 5 3Ether 5 4Verses 3-4

SCEther 5 3Ether 5 4Moroni here predicts that three witnesses will be selected to view the Plates by the power of God. They will thereby be competent to confirm the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Moroni was familiar with the prediction in II Nephi 27:12-14, concerning the Three Witnesses, and he corroborated this prophetic utterance by revealing his own inspired vision of the future. [^1]

THE THREE WITNESSES

The translation of the Book of Mormon was completed in June 1829. Intimate friends of the Prophet had been given to understand that three witnesses, according to the record itself, would get the privilege to see the original plates (II Nephi 27:12; Ether 5:3, 4), and to testify to their actual existence, as revealed "by the grace of God"; also to the accuracy of the translation. Naturally, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, who, at various times, had befriended the Prophet, when he needed friends, were anxious to be selected for that mission. They all made it a subject of prayer, and the answer came on June 29, 1829, in a revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 17. A short time previously, it had been intimated to David Whitmer, in a revelation, that he might be called upon to be a witness to the world (Section 14:8).

A few days after the revelation, Section 17, had been received, the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris went to a secluded place in the woods, where they engaged in prayer. To begin with they felt no response. Martin Harris, listening to the voice of his own conscience, withdrew from his brethren, greatly distressed. The three renewed their petitions. Almost immediately, a brilliant light shone above them, and a heavenly messenger descended and stood before them. He had the Book of Mormon plates in his hands and turned leaf after leaf. To David Whitmer he said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps his commandments." Then a voice coming from the light above them said: "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

Shortly afterwards, Martin Harris, who had been joined by the Prophet, had a similar manifestation, whereupon he arose and cried out in joy, "'Tis enough! Tis enough! Mine eyes have beheld! Mine eyes have beheld!"

This is, briefly, the plain story of the calling of the three witnesses. Is there any rational explanation of it, except that it is true? Can it be fiction? Was the angel an impostor? Was the light a fake? Would a trick have been convincing to these three men, or to any of them?

The messenger who appeared must have been a supernatural being. A friend of Joseph, playing that part, would have been known to the others, too. They would have detected the fraud immediately. An unscrupulous stranger, who might have been induced to take a role in a tableau vivant of this nature, would not have kept his secret long, when unimpeachable damning testimony to that fact might have brought him a fortune from adversaries of the Prophet. Advocates of the impossible theory of fraud, if there are any such left, ignore the light, the fervent prayers, the peculiar experience of Martin Harris, and the unfeigned joy of the four friends after the vision.

It has been the boast of so-called sleight-of-hand performers that they can duplicate every trick of spiritists, no matter how astounding; but here is a plain divine manifestation of which no human art, or ingenuity, can furnish an imitation.

But, What about the Witnesses? Did they not apostatize and repudiate their testimonies?

Never!

Two of them parted company with the Prophet for a short time, and one for the rest of his life, but none of them ever denied his testimony, or the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph.

"So it was with David Whitmer until his death. He believed that Joseph had been led astray, first, into receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood as well as the Aaronic Priesthood. That he received the Aaronic Priesthood and was ordained under the hand of John the Baptist he admitted and believed, but he denied any ordination under the hands of Peter, James and John to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and consequently he went to work and organized a church and a presidency after the order of the Aaronic Priesthood. But never, up to the time of death, did he deny his testimony as one of the three witnesses, and in his dying words he declared that his testimony contained in this book"—the Book of Mormon—"is true." (Gospel Doctrine, by President Joseph F. Smith, p. 590.)

Oliver Cowdery. "He left the Church because he lost the love of truth; and after he had traveled alone for years, a gentleman walked into his law office and said to him, 'Mr. Cowdery, what do you think of the Book of Mormon now? Do you believe that it is true?' He replied, 'No, sir, I do not!' 'Well,' said the gentleman, 'I thought as much; for I concluded that you had seen the folly of your ways, and had resolved to renounce what you once declared to be true.' 'Sir, you mistake me; I do not believe that the Book of Mormon is true; I am past belief on that point for I know that it is true, as well as I know that you now sit before me.' 'Do you still testify that you saw an angel?' 'Yes, as much as I see you now and I know the Book of Mormon to be true.' " (Discourses of Brigham Young, Selected by Dr. John A. Widtsoe, p. 168)

Martin Harris moved to Clarkston, Cache County, Utah, where he passed away on July 10, 1875, in full fellowship with the Church. In a letter to President George A. Smith, dated July 9, that year, Martin Harris Jr. wrote:

"He was taken ill a week ago yesterday with some kind of stroke. * * * He has continued to talk and testify to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and was in his happiest mood when he could get somebody to listen to his testimony. * * * The last audible words he has spoken were something about the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon.' (Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon, p. 60)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Eskimos of North America, and the tribes in the southern part of South America, related to the peoples of the Arctic Regions of Europe and Asia. The Book of Ether, as we have it, may have been, originally, a lecture on the Twenty-four Plates, delivered by Moroni before the conflict at Cumorah. That would account for the interpolations.
