Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 7

SCEther 7 1Ether 7 2Verses 1-2

SCEther 7 1Ether 7 2Orihah. Orihah, in his office, was true to the character indicated by his name, the Light of the Lord. He ruled as a wise and righteous judge, not as a self-seeking monarch. He was happy in his family life as well as in his public administration, for he became the father of twenty-three sons, and eight daughters.

Ether 7 3Verse 3

Ether 7 3Kib was the last born of the sons of Orihah. He succeeded his father in the office of king. It may seem strange that the succession should go to the youngest son, but that also was the case in the selection of David to succeed Saul, the first king of Israel. David was the youngest of the eight sons of Jesse. (1 Samuel 6:6-13) In the family of Jacob, the patriarch, Joseph the next youngest of twelve boys, became the most prominent. We believe it is the rule, barring the exceptions that prove the rule, that children born of mature, not to say old, parents, come into the world better equipped mentally than the children of immature fathers and mothers. The brief story of Orihah illustrates the fact that righteous and wise leadership is the channel through which come the divine blessings that reach the people.

SCEther 7 4Ether 7 5Ether 7 6Verses 4-6

SCEther 7 4Ether 7 5Ether 7 6Corihor. Corihor was a son of Kib, and at the age of thirty-two decided to drive his father from the throne and take his place. With this object in view he fled from the Land of Moron, where the king dwelt, to the Land of Nehor. Here he established a family, and by the aid of feminine charms and, we may suppose, brilliant social functions, he gathered around him a considerable following. At the head of an armed force he then invaded the Fatherland and made the royal family prisoners of war. As a genuine usurper he destroyed the liberty of the people. Thus the prophecy of the Brother of Jared concerning the loss of liberty under a monarchial form of government (Ether 6:23) came true.

SCEther 7 4Ether 7 5Ether 7 6Moroni (v. 6) adds what may be called a marginal reading, or gloss, explaining that the Land of Moron was near, probably bordered on, the Land which the Nephites knew as the Land Desolation.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Verses 7-22

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Shule, Noah, Cohor, Nimrod. The story of Shule is one of revolutions and radical changes. Corihor had, it appears, united the two countries of Moron and Nehor, the latter being the land where his wife's family resided (v. 4). Also, he had moved the Capital of Moron to the City of Nehor, and here his father, Kib, was a prisoner of war.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22In his advanced age, while he was in captivity, Kib became the father of a boy whom he named Shule, a word which in all probability is related to the Hebrew shaal, meaning to ask for, and therefore, meaning, a son asked for, a child of prayer.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Years later, when Shule was old enough to take an interest in public affairs, he felt that it was his calling to force his brother to change his unnatural conduct. He began by gathering together, at a Hill called Ephraim, [^1] a number of malcontents. There they armed themselves with swords made of steel, [^2] "molten out of a hill." Properly equipped, they attacked the usurper in the City of Nehor, deposed him and restored the kingdom to their aged father who had been legally elected king.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Kib, however, feeling the weight of years, and the effect of his captivity, declined the responsibility, and placed the reigns of government in the steady hands of his son's rule. Shule was a righteous judge, and again the people prospered. He also led a happy life and was blessed with many sons and daughters. But his happiest day was, undoubtedly, that on which he could welcome his repentant brother, Corihor, to the family circle and entrust him with some office of responsibility and influence.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Corihor had many children. Two of his sons, Noah and Cohor, rebelled against King Shule, their uncle, and Corihor, their father. Noah was the leader of the secession. Soon he had all his brothers and many of the people on his side. Then he began hostilities. Success seemed to follow his banners. He gained control over the government of the land of their first inheritance. Next, the King, Shule, fell into the hands of Noah and was carried, a captive, into the Land of Mormon. However, that was the end of the career of Noah. He was slain by the sons of Shule, who was set free and again established on the throne in his own kingdom. But there were now two kingdoms; Shule was acknowledged ruler of one, and Cohor, the son of Noah, of the other. The people of Shule prospered exceedingly, with the result that Cohor, when he again began hostilities, was defeated and slain.

SCEther 7 7Ether 7 8Ether 7 9Ether 7 10Ether 7 11Ether 7 12Ether 7 13Ether 7 14Ether 7 15Ether 7 16Ether 7 17Ether 7 18Ether 7 19Ether 7 20Ether 7 21Ether 7 22Cohor had a son whose name was Nimrod. He took a course different from that of his father. He voluntarily gave up his office to Shule. Thus the breach between the two countries was healed and peace was established.

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24Ether 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27Verses 23-27

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24Ether 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27Shule's last days. The rest of the story of Shule is soon told. During his reign prophets appeared who warned the people against wickedness and idolatry. This would indicate that the king no longer officiated in spiritual functions, but that the office of the prophet had been separated from that of the king as it was in the days of Israel during the time of Samuel, the Prophet and Saul, the first King of the covenant people. It seems that when a government deteriorates and inclines toward autocracy, it necessarily leaves the Priesthood standing outside of its calculations. God can always find a prophet fit to be a king, but seldom a king qualified for the office of a prophet.

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24Ether 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27As is usually the case, the prophets of God met with the opposition of the wicked, because they spoke the truth. But the king protected them and made religious persecution a crime. Protected by law, the prophets delivered their message with great power. The people repented. Family life, a sure indication of the moral and social status of a people, flourished. The last paragraph in this chapter concerning Shule is a beautiful tribute to his memory: "And there were no more wars in the days of Shule; and he remembered the great things that the Lord had done for his fathers in bringing them across the great deep into the promised land; wherefore he did execute judgment in righteousness all his days."

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24Verses 23-24

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24Idolatry. On a certain level of culture, men and women feel the need of some visible form before which to pay homage to the Deity. They make themselves images, and their worship becomes idolatry, in the strict sense of that word. At another stage worshipers turn to the Sun, the Moon, the stars, as the life-giving and sustaining agents of the Infinite God, worthy representatives of His almighty power and boundless wisdom. This, too, becomes idolatry in the wider meaning of that term. Sometimes idolatry refers to the strange efforts of mortals to win the favor of evil powers by prayers and sacrifices. These powers are then represented by images of loathesome snakes and terrible dragons. And then again, idolatry may consist in homage to false concepts of God, causing one to "walk in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great which shall perish. (Doctrine and Covenants, 1:16)

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24It is a noteworthy fact that the Greeks, in their seeming insignificant country, as to area, developed an entirely different idea of the Deity. While other nations depicted the divine images, or beings, as bulls, lions, eagles, bears, and even snakes, or, at least made beasts their symbols, Greek poets and artists vied with each other in efforts to give their gods the most perfect, the most beautiful form in nature, the human figure, with the result that not only Greek sculpture, but other branches of art also produced inimitable patterns, almost unapproachable in latter years. The statue of Zeus by Phidias (about 500 B.C.) was ordered by Pericles to beautify Athens by public works. Among his creations were Pallas Athena, and the collossal statue of Zeus. Of the latter it has been said that it stands alone and has never been equalled. It was forty feet high, seated upon a throne made of cedar, inlaid with gold, ebony and ivory, and was studded with precious stones. The temple that was the palace of this deity was sixty-eight feet high, ninety feet wide, and two hundred-thirty feet long. The facial features of the statue, it is said, reflected power, majesty, wisdom, and goodness, and as a work of art it was admired by all. It was by means of such works that the Greek civilization rose to the highest level of which it was capable. It was by such means that it became the inspiration of the entire Roman civilization.

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24But where did the Greeks get the inspiration to clothe God in human form? Where did the Greek poets learn the great truth that man is the offspring of God? [^3] The answer is, that the Hellenes were living not far from Palestine, and that they may have obtained many valuable truths from that country, as well as merchandise. The description of the throne of Zeus, for instance, reminds one of the account of the throne of Solomon in 1 Kings 10:18-20. But we believe that Paul's answers to the questions were satisfactory.

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24The great Apostle to the Gentiles came, on his second missionary journey, to Athens. While there he was given an opportunity to address a select audience of philosophers on Mars Hill. His discourse was possibly the most eloquent and logical that was ever delivered by him. Unfortunately, he was interrupted by a very polite mob, and did not finish.

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24He began by refuting the charge that he was trying to introduce strange gods. He was not, he said. He had noticed an inscription on one of their altars, "To the Unknown God." That he said, was the God he preached. To quote: "What therefore ye worship in ignorance, this set I forth unto you. The God that made the world and all things therein, He, being the Lord of heaven and earth," etc. (Acts 17:22-23) [^4]

SCEther 7 23Ether 7 24The Unknown God was the God of Creation, the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth, and the eyes, ears, hands, mouth, etc., so happily adapted by Greek genius to their idea of the divine, was Hebrew. It could have come from no other source. But, is that not anthropomorphism? Possibly. But what then? Is there anything more perfect, more beautiful, more miraculous, in all nature than a human being free from blemishes? What else is there to which a Divine Person, who has given us permission to call Him, Father, can be compared? The fact is, that God, in Whose image we are created, is the true God, and that the Greeks accepted the idea under Hebrew influence, which at one time was strong enough at Athens to leave an altar to the Unknown God. Further, that the most advanced civilization in the world traces its origin back to this so-called anthropomorphic concept of God. To Greek philosophers, whether Epicurians or Stoics, Platonists or followers of Aristotle, the true God was both unknown and unknowable, for "the world by wisdom knew not God." (1 Corinthians 1:21) God is known only through revelation.

SCEther 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27Verses 25-27

SCEther 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27Religious Liberty. Shule established religious liberty by law, as did the framers of the American Constitution, by withholding from the Congress the authority to make laws respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and reserving that prerogative to the people. (Amendments, Art. 1) He made it lawful to hold minority opinions on religious questions and to express them in public, naturally with due regard to the rights of others, and without disturbing the public peace. There can be no greater boon to a nation than such freedom. Saint Paul assures the Corinthians (2 Corinthians 3:17) that the Lord, the real Ruler, is the Spirit, and that were the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. The law of liberty is the rule where the Spirit of the Lord rules.

SCEther 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27This freedom does not mean liberty to do anything but that which is right. It is not liberty to do wrong. (Romans 14:13-17; 1 Corinthians 7:22-24; 1 Peter 2:16)

SCEther 7 25Ether 7 26Ether 7 27The religious legislation of Shule made any outburst of hostility against the divine prophets illegal. It branded acts of intolerance as crimes. Thus the prophets were protected in the deliverance of their messages. Law can do no more, without depriving God's children of their free agency. What to believe and how to worship, are matters not of law; they are manifestations of an intelligent understanding of religion and a firm conviction which are obtained only in secret and sacred communion with God, and a conscientious performance of duty.

MORON, LAND OF

The Land where the Jaredites made their first settlements was north of the Land called Desolation by the Nephites, and consquently in some part of the region which we know as Central America. It appears to have been for a lengthy period, if not during the whole of their existence, the seat of government, the residence of the reigning monarch, and the center of Jaredite civilization. In the numerous fratricidal wars that disgraced the annals of the race, Moron was, more than any other land, the chief seat of war; for here the revolutionists attacked the King, and when successful drove him thence.

HILL EPHRAIM

A hill mentioned in the Book of Ether (7:9) from which Shule obtained iron ore with which to make swords to arm his followers in their efforts to replace his father, Kib, on the throne. We judge this hill to be located in Central America, as it is no great distance from the Land of Moron, afterwards called Desolation.

CORIHOR

Corihor was a Jaredite prince, the son of Kib, and grandson of Orihah, the first king of that people. Corihor was the first who raised the standard of revolt, which revolt caused much bloodshed in the midst of the Jaredite people. When Corihor was thirty-two years old he rebelled against his father, and went from Moron and established himself in the Land of Nehor. There he drew many to him; when strong enough he invaded the Land of Moron, took the king, his father, captive, and reigned in his stead. After many years, Shule, a son born to Kib while he was in captivity, drove Corihor from the throne and replaced their father thereon. After this, Corihor appears to have been loyal to his father and to his brother, Shule, who succeeded Kib. For this loyalty and devotion Corihor was placed in authority in the nation's councils, but one of his sons, named Noah, proved to be a traitor, and rose up in rebellion against Shule and Corihor, and eventually obtained possession of the kingdom.

NOAH

Noah was an early Jaredite leader and the son of Corihor, and the father of Cohor. Noah rebelled against King Shule and against his own father, drawing from their allegiance to them, all his brothers and many of the people. When sufficiently strong he attacked and defeated Shule, and took possession and reigned over the Land of the Jaredites' first inheritance, probably Moron (near to the Land known to the Nephites as Desolation). A second time he attacked Shule, he defeated and captured him and carried him to Moron. It was Noah's intention to put Shule to death, but before he carried out his plan to do so, some of Shule's sons crept into the house of Noah by night and slew him. They then broke down the door of the prison in which their father was confined, liberated him, and restored him to the throne, while Cohor reigned over that portion of the land originally conquered by his father, Noah.

COHOR

Cohor was one of the earliest Jaredites. He was the son Corihor, the son of Kib, the son of another Corihor who was the son of Jared who came forth from the Tower. He was associated with his brother, Noah, in a rebellion against King Shule, who was their uncle, though possibly their junior in years as he was born when his father, Kib, was very aged. The rebellion of Noah, Cohor, and their associates was partly successful, the country was divided into two kingdoms and Noah reigned in Moron, the Land of the Jaredites' first inheritance. Cohor is mentioned but once by name in the Book of Ether.

COHOR, THE NEPHEW OF THE PRECEDING

Cohor was the son of Noah, the son of Corihor. He succeeded his father as King of the Land of Moron. Making war with Shule, the King of the other portion of the country, Cohor was defeated and slain. He was succeeded on the throne by his son Nimrod, who, apparently deeming Shule the rightful monarch of the country, gave up any claims to the Kingdom to him; thus once more and again uniting the entire Jaredite people in one nation under one King.

NIMROD

Nimrod was an early Jaredite Prince, the son of Cohor. In his days the Kingdom was a divided one, Shule reigning over one portion and Cohor over the other. Cohor, desiring to obtain undivided dominion, gave battle to Shule, defeated and slain. Nimrod, recognizing the superior rights of Shule, surrendered the region his father had ruled over to that monarch. For this act and for his faithful allegiance, Nimrod found favor in the eyes of Shule, and he had authority given unto him to do "according to his desires," in the latter's Kingdom.

---
Notas:
[^1] An adversary, opposer.
[^2] An accuser, one who slanders another for the purpose of injury. The Hebrew for devil is, saweer, meaning hairy. The satyr of Greek mythology.
[^3] Paul says in his argument before the philosophers at Athens that certain also of your poets have said, For ye are also his offspring (Acts 17:28). This is supposed to be a quotation from the Stoic poet Aratus. But if St. Paul is exact in his language, more than one poet must have held the same view of the relationship between God and man.
[^4] Learned theologians have suggested that the Unknown God was some bad underground demon whose name was never mentioned in polite society; but the application of the Apostle of his discovery of the altar and the inscripion thereon makes that explanation absurd. Paul was not the messenger of a demon.
