Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 8

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Verses 1-19

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Jared rebelled. There is tragedy in this section of Jaredite history. Omer, the fifth descendant of the first Jared, saw a time of strife, bloodshed, and almost incredible wickedness. His reign was actually the beginning of the end.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Jared II was the son of Omer. Not satisfied with his position as a prince, he became possessed by an uncontrollable craving for more power and glory, and set about to dethrone his father. As a beginning he went to the Land of Heth. Here he began his agitation for followers and, by means of the contemptible tricks known to deceivers of the easy-going masses, including, no doubt, tom-toms, feasts, and above all, bold misstatements concerning the past and present and hypocritical promises for the future, he succeeded in securing fifty percent of the voters of the kingdom for his plans. People do forget that one who is a traitor to his own kin, cannot be trusted to be loyal to either God or anybody else.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Having secured a following, Jared now attacked his father with a military force. The king, unaware and unprepared, or perhaps unwilling to see his natural son slain, was captured and made a prisoner of war.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19But the apparent success of Jared did not last. Two younger sons of Omer, Esrom and Coriantumr, raised an army, defeated Jared in battle and threatened to end his life. At this turn of his fortune, he proved himself a craven at heart, as tyrants generally are. He begged that his worthless life be spared. His pitiful pleas were granted, and their father, Omer, was again seated on the throne.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Jared was still a rebel. The advantages he possessed as a prince seemed to be insignificant when compared with his boundless ambitions. He became gloomy and morose, and, no doubt, made life miserable to his family.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Jared had a daughter who is described as exceedingly expert; that is, clever and well informed. Also, she was exceedingly fair, the Sacred Record informs us. When she learned the cause of her father's trouble, she made an astounding proposition. She suggested a banquet in honor of a friend named Akish. At that function, she said, she would dance and display her feminine charms. The guest of honor would, perhaps, be fascinated and would desire her for a wife. Jared could then ask for his father's head as the price of the bride.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19Akish was an old friend of the house, perhaps a trusted confederate in the first rebellion. The expert daughter may have had a secret, tender, reason for her own villainous plot.

SCEther 8 1Ether 8 2Ether 8 3Ether 8 4Ether 8 5Ether 8 6Ether 8 7Ether 8 8Ether 8 9Ether 8 10Ether 8 11Ether 8 12Ether 8 13Ether 8 14Ether 8 15Ether 8 16Ether 8 17Ether 8 18Ether 8 19The preparations for the murder of Omer were carefully designed and very elaborate. Akish founded a secret society, the members of which were held together by contempt for, and repudiation of, all moral law and order, it being understood that they were at liberty to murder and rob, to lie and to welter in the malodorous pools of passion, while at the same time, they were bound by oath on the pain of death, not to reveal the crimes of their fellow-criminals. He, naturally, felt sure that the prospect of plunder in the royal house would, under the circumstances, appeal to these licensed assassins. Akish got the daughter for wife. Jared got the throne, but not his father's head.

SCEther 8 20Ether 8 21Ether 8 22Ether 8 23Ether 8 24Ether 8 25Ether 8 26Verses 20-26

SCEther 8 20Ether 8 21Ether 8 22Ether 8 23Ether 8 24Ether 8 25Ether 8 26They are had among the Lamanites. All associations with rituals and signs of recognition not made public are not criminal, nor condemnable. Only those which, behind a veil of secrecy commit crimes and formulate plans against their fellows, the legally established state, or any lawfully existing institution. Such societies are the enemies of mankind.

SCEther 8 20Ether 8 21Ether 8 22Ether 8 23Ether 8 24Ether 8 25Ether 8 26American Indians still have societies which may be called secret insofar as they have initiation ceremonies with which only the members thereof are acquainted. Such ceremonies they observe regularly, but no strangers, and in some cases, no women, are permitted to attend.

SCEther 8 20Ether 8 21Ether 8 22Ether 8 23Ether 8 24Ether 8 25Ether 8 26Murderous combinations. Moroni carefully explains the nature of the associations he condemns. They are, he notes, combinations organized for the selfish purpose of concentrating power and wealth in the hands of the organizers. Furthermore, they are persecutors and murderers of the Saints of God. And what is more, they are the destroyers (we are quoting Moroni) of the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries. Note that Moroni is speaking of murderous organizations in general, but he has one special association in mind to which he refers to in verse 24: "Wherefore the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you."

SCEther 8 20Ether 8 21Ether 8 22Ether 8 23Ether 8 24Ether 8 25Ether 8 26Associations such as those herein described must necessarily destroy the influence of the Saints and good religion everywhere in order to gain their object, which is to fasten the chains of serfdom on the limbs of their fellowmen. Moroni correctly states that such organizations are the instruments in the hands of the father of all lies, who, from the beginning, caused man to commit murder. (Compare the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 4:3-4) "Wherefore, because that satan rebelled against Me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God had given him, and also, that I should give unto him Mine own power; by the power of Mine Only Begotten, I caused that he be cast down, and he became satan, [^1] yea, even the devil, [^2] the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto My voice."

CORIANTUMR, THE SON OF OMER

Coriantumr, the son of Omer, was a Jaredite Prince, who was born while his father was held in captivity by his brother, Jared. When Coriantumr grew to manhood he became exceedingly angry at the course pursued by Jared, and together with another brother, Ezrom, he raised an army and made an unexpected night attack upon the military forces of Jared in which the latter was almost entirely destroyed. They then restored their father, Omer, to the throne.

KIMNOR

Kimnor was one of the early Jaredites. He is simply known to us as the father of Akish, the friend of King Omer.

ESROM

Esrom was a son of the unfortunate Jaredite King, Omer, and was born to him while he was held in captivity by the King's son, Jared. Esrom and his brother, Coriantumr, growing exceedingly angry at the treatment received by their father, raised an army and made a night attack upon the forces of the usurper in which they gained a complete victory; Jared's army being destroyed and he, himself, taken prisoner. Esrom and his associates then replaced their father upon the throne. In the rebellion of Akish, it is said that the Lord was merciful to Omer, and also to his sons and daughters who did not seek his destruction. It is therefore, altogether probable that if Esrom still lived, he accompanied his father in his exile to the distant Land of Ablom.

JARED

One of the most unscrupulous and bloodthirsty of the ancient Jaredites. In early life he rose in rebellion against Omer, his father, eventually dethroned him and held him a captive for many years, while he (Jared) occupied the throne. Some of Omer's younger sons, incensed at the treatment to which their father was subjected, raised an army and totally routed the forces of the usurper. Jared was taken prisoner and only saved his life by humble submission to his father. At first he kept his promise but his ambition would not remain dormant. He sighed and wearied for the kingly authority until his unrest became marked by all. He had a daughter who shared her father's feelings and at her instigation he sent for a friend of Omer's named Akish through whom he hoped to regain the throne. An entertainment of some kind, by which Jared's daughter could be introduced, was given. By pre-arrangement with her father she danced before Akish and so exhibited the beauties of her person and the graces of her movements that he became desperately enamored of her. As she anticipated, Akish asked Jared to give her to him as a wife. The latter consented but on most revolting conditions. The father and daughter had planned that the price of her hand was to be the head of her grandfather, the king. Did ever ambition conceive a more unnatural crime? Akish, though a friend of Omer, consented to the proposed terms and to help him in his treason Jared suggested to him, again at the instance of his daughter, the plans and oaths common among the antediluvians, originally used by Cain, by which the wicked accomplished their vile and bloody purposes. He consented, Omer was driven from the throne, though by God's mercy his life was spared; Jared was again proclaimed king and Akish became his son-in-law. Soon the latter coveted the royal dignity; possibly the woman who plotted the death of her grandfather was willing to sacrifice her father also that she might be queen; such a supposition is not improbable. At any rate Jared was slain on his throne while giving audience to his people by some of the members of the secret society of assassins that he had been the means of calling into existence and Akish reigned in his stead.

AKISH

Akish was one of the most cruel and subtle of the early Jaredites. Nothing more is known of his descent than that he was the son of one, Kimnor. The history of Akish is one with which are associated deeds of cruelty, treachery, and iniquity, that are scarcely paralleled in the annals of any nation.

When the Jaredites first reached this continent they were a righteous, Godfearing, though somewhat an unstable people. They, however, made one great mistake; they desired to be ruled by a king. Their prophet-leaders told them that this thing would lead them into captivity, but they insisted and Orihah, the youngest son of Jared, was chosen as their first monarch. The words of their prophets were quickly fulfilled, and bloodshed and internal commotions soon disgraced the history of this favored people. Orihah was succeeded by Kib, who was dethroned by Corihor, but was afterwards restored. In the succeeding reign, that of Shule, the Kingdom was rent in twain, but when he died he was succeeded by his son, Omer, who, we have reason to believe was a good man. The example of the kings and princes had thus far, as a rule, been pernicious and tended to encourage the people to live lives of wickedness.

Omer had a son named Jared; an ambitious, unscrupulous man. He rebelled against his father, and by his flatteries induced half of the people to join his standard. He established himself in a Land named Heth, and when he felt sufficiently strong he gave battle to and defeated the forces of his father whom he took prisoner and held him in captivity; and it is said that Omer remained in this condition half of his days. So long, indeed, was the time that Jared kept him prisoner that sons begotten by him during his captivity grew up to manhood before he was released. Two of these sons, named Esrom and Coriantumr, became very angry at the way their father was treated and they raised an army and attacked their brother, Jared, by night. This attack appears to have been an utter surprise to Jared for his army was entirely destroyed, and he, himself, would have been slain had he not humbly pleaded with his brothers that his life might be spared; he promising that he would surrender the Kingdom to his father. On these conditions his life was granted him.

Now Jared, though he had made this promise when his life was in peril, still longed for the glories and power of the kingly authority and his sorrow and unrest could not be hid from those near him. Among those who noticed his deepseated grief was a daughter who was exceedingly fair and was apparently as unscrupulous as her father. Whether it was because she really had great affection for him, or, like him, languished for the pomp and magnificence of the court life she no longer possessed that caused her to submit to him a plan by which he might regain the Kingdom cannot be said. Perhaps, also, she may have loved the man whom she suggested as the instrument to be used in the fulfillment of her ambition—possibly all three, for our motives are seldom single; our actions, in other words, are generally the result of a combination of motives.

The young lady's plan was this: She reminded her father that when their ancestors came across the great waters they brought with them records of the doings of mankind in the ages before the flood. And in these records was an account of how men, by secret plans and combinations, obtained kingdoms and great glory. She suggested that her father acquire a knowledge of these unholy methods and use them to regain the throne. She further proposed that he send for a friend of Omer's, named Akish, the son of Kimnor, and she, being graceful as well as beautiful, would dance so entrancingly before him that he would desire her to wife. If she did not love Akish, she simply sold herself to gratify her father's and possibly her own ambition.

Her advice was listened to; her suggestions were carried out. The old oaths and bloody mysteries were searched out, the plan was laid, Akish was invited, the suggested dance danced, Akish's passions were inflamed, and the maiden asked in marriage. The proposal was received with favor, but terrible conditions were attached, such that would have appalled any honorable man. It was that Akish obtain the head of Jared's father, Omer, the King, and to enable him to carry out this murderous design, Jared proposed that he, himself, administer to his friends, the old oaths that had come down from the days of Cain, the first murderer.

Akish accepted this terrible responsibility. He gathered his associates at the house of Jared and there made them all swear by the God of Heaven and by the Heavens, by the Earth, and by their heads, that whoso should vary from what he desired, should lose his own head, and whoso should divulge whatever he made known should lose his life. He then submitted plans to them which they accepted. The plot was so far successful that they overthrew the Kingdom of Omer, but did not succeed in obtaining his head. For the Lord was merciful to Omer, and warned him in a dream to depart out of the land. So, taking those who were faithful to him, he traveled for a great distance until he reached the shores of the Atlantic Ocean. There he and his companions tarried until the course of events permitted him to return.

Omer being driven from his Kingdom, Jared was appointed King, and his daughter was given to Akish to wife. But this did not satisfy Akish. He had learned the power of these secret combinations, and now determined to use them for his own ends. He aspired to the throne, and made up his mind to murder his father-in-law. So he assembled his followers, instructed them in his wishes and Jared was slain by them as he sat upon his throne giving audience to the people; a case of poetical retribution which, though often found in fiction, is seldom met with in real life. Akish was now made King and under his cruel rule wickedness became almost universal. The secret societies by which he obtained power had corrupted the hearts of nearly all the people. As well may be supposed with such a condition of society his throne was not a stable one. He became jealous of one of his sons. What cause, if any, he had therefor, we are not told, but he shut him up in prison and slowly starved him to death. This cruel act greatly incensed another of Jared's sons, named Nimrod, and he, gathering a few followers, fled to the Land of Ablom where Omer dwelt.

Now Akish had other sons and though they had sworn to support him in all his doings they were not true to their oaths. They found that the hearts of the Jaredites were consumed with the love of gain, and they bribed the greater portion of the people to join them in a revolt against their father. So corrupt had the people become that their extinction appears to have been the only remedy; they would not repent, they seem to have reached the point where human wickedness cannot pass.

A war of the most horrible character broke out, which lasted for several years, and ended when nearly every soul was slain. Of the Kingdom of Akish, for which he had sinned so much, there remained but thirty souls. All the rest—men, women, and children, had been swept by bloody hands into untimely graves. The people of Akish having been thus destroyed, Omer, with his friends, returned from his exile and reigned over the feeble remnant of a wasted people.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See, Gibbon's portrait of Emperor Phocas, whose few years of murder and tyranny ended in the shameful death of a criminal, in the year 630 A.D. (Decline and Fall of Rome, Vol. 4, p. 454)
[^2] There is no a priori improbability in regarding the name Sinae as referring to the inhabitants of Eastern Asia in the time of Isaiah * * * for it is certain that at that time an inland commercial route connected the extreme east with the west, and that traffic was maintained on the frontier of China between the Scytians and the Sinae, in the manner that is still followed by the Chinese and the Russians at Kiachta. If any name for these traders traveled westward, it would probably be that of the Sinae. (Sinim, Smith's Bible Dictionary)
