Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 9

SCEther 9 1Ether 9 2Ether 9 3Ether 9 4Ether 9 5Ether 9 6Ether 9 7Ether 9 8Ether 9 9Ether 9 10Ether 9 11Ether 9 12Ether 9 13Verses 1-13

SCEther 9 1Ether 9 2Ether 9 3Ether 9 4Ether 9 5Ether 9 6Ether 9 7Ether 9 8Ether 9 9Ether 9 10Ether 9 11Ether 9 12Ether 9 13They did overthrow the Kingdom. With the aid obtained from the secret combinations which they had established, Akish and his followers usurped the government, but Omer escaped with his life.

Ether 9 3Verse 3

Ether 9 3Omer departs. Akish had promised to give Jared, Omer's son, his father's head in exchange for his daughter's hand in marriage. But Omer, the royal parent of Jared, was warned in a dream and fled the intended assassins. He took with him his loyal sons and daughters to a place called Ablom by the seashore. They reached this refuge by traveling many days. They passed the Hill Shim, where Amaron later deposited "all the sacred engravings concerning the Nephites." (Mormon 1:3) They also passed the Hill Cumorah in the Land Cumorah, where Mormon concealed the sacred plates after having made a synopsis of them for the benefit and blessing of future generations. (Mormon 6:1-15)

Ether 9 3Prehistoric Americans were good travelers and covered vast areas of country during their nomadic excursions, although they had no, what to us, are rapid means of transportation. This seems to verify the accounts in the Book of Mormon of its people making long treks over little-known terrain. Certain impressions known as footprints, have long been puzzling scientists. They are found in some ancient lime formations, and of them, Mr. David I. Bushnell, a Smithsonian ethnologist, now offers the explanation that they are the work of former Indians. He has traced these footprints all the way from the falls in the James River, Virginia, to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. They are, he says, always found near water, and he believes that they were hewn in the rock by nomadic tribes to indicate to others who might come the same way, that near such a print, they would find a watering place. If this explanation is correct, we may conclude that the American aborigines were good travelers, and the records of the Book of Mormon concerning great journeys become quite intelligible.

Ether 9 4Verse 4

Ether 9 4Anointed by the hand of wickedness. Jared became king. He was even anointed, but by the hand of wickedness,—some kind of blasphemous ceremony in initiation of the sacred ordinance.

Ether 9 4Anointing with sacred oil is a very ancient rite. It is depicted on early Egyptian monuments. Kings were called the anointed of the gods. Those who held the Priesthood were confirmed in their office with the application of sacred oil. Jacob poured consecrated oil upon the stone pillow at Bethel, consecrating it to God. (Genesis 28:10-19)

Ether 9 4Jared gave his daughter to Akish for wife. But that was a union without divine blessing and without the sanction of the Priesthood. It did not bring happiness.

Ether 9 5Verse 5

Ether 9 5Jared slain. A subordinate place in the wicked government did not satisfy Akish. His ambition was to be king. Murder was to him a means to an end. So he hired assassins, belonging to his secret society. They slew Jared while he was seated upon his royal throne, and Akish was then anointed king. That was retribution. The arch-assassin now became the ruler.

Ether 9 5It may be observed here that criminals never quite trust each other. A criminal does not trust, much less love, a partner in sin. He views him with contempt, knowing that he is as contemptible as he himself is. Respect, friendship, brotherly love, are gorgeous and fragrant flowers which thrive only in a soil of truth and righteousness; they need the sunshine of humble communion with God, and a good conscience.

Ether 9 5Nemesis on the track of Akish. Akish, suspicious of his own son, imprisoned him and caused him to starve to death. A brother of the victim, Nimrah, gathered a small company of men and fled to Ablom, where Omer, the rightful King, lived in exile. In the meantime, other sons of Akish gained the confidence of the people. A civil war, which raged in murderous fury for years, broke out. At the end of the slaughter which took place, the kingdom was almost depopulated. Akish must have been slain in that conflict. The exiles in Ablom returned to their inheritances, and Omer again reigned as king.

SCEther 9 14Ether 9 15Verses 14-15

SCEther 9 14Ether 9 15Emer made king. Omer began to feel the weight of many years, and anointed his last born son, Emer, to fill his place. Two years afterwards Omer passed away in peace.

SCEther 9 14Ether 9 15It is not easy to imagine human beings as depraved as Jared and Akish; so utterly devoid of conscience and human instincts. But more recent history knows similar character. The assassination of Licinius, the brother-in-law and political rival of Constantine (306-337 A.D.), is branded as an "atrocious and unprovoked breach of faith" by this famous potentate, who is also charged with the murder of his own son, Crispus, who, his father thought, had won too great a degree of popular favor. [^1]

SCEther 9 16Ether 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Ether 9 20Verses 16-20

SCEther 9 16Ether 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Ether 9 20Prosperity under Emer. It is said of Emer, that he walked in the steps of his father, and that the people prospered. Peace always means prosperity to a nation, while war means financial as well as moral and intellectual ruin. History is decisive on that point. We read that the Jaredites under Emer had an abundance of fruit, grain, silks, fine linen, gold, silver, oxen, cows, sheep, swine, goats, horses, asses, elephants, cureloms, and cumoms, all of which were useful to man, and more especially the elephants and cureloms and cumoms.

SCEther 9 16Ether 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Ether 9 20Such assets as those here enumerated were useful. They, and not money, are the real wealth of a nation. Money is only a medium of exchange, convenient but not absolutely necessary. But if there were no food, no clothing, no needful commodities and luxuries to exchange, money would be useless. The Jaredites under Emer had all these things, they had the real wealth.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Verses 17-19

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Precious things and animals. Students of the Book of Mormon will agree that these verses constitute one of the few difficult passages in that volume, as long as recognized authorities on early American culture insist that the aborigines of these continents had neither silk, nor oxen, cows, or sheep, except the wild mountain variety; and certainly no horses until the arrival of the Spaniards; and no elephants. There seems to be a serious discrepancy between the statement of Moroni and the findings of science. But we have no doubt that there is a satisfactory answer or explanation of the seeming contradiction, if it can be found, by which the difficulty may be removed. As to what that explanation is, we can, as yet, offer only a few suggestions.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Silks and fine linen. The Jaredites came from Asia, presumably across China, the reputed home of the silk industry. Just when that occupation began is uncertain. A Chinese tradition says that the wife of Emperor Hoan-ti started it in the year B.C. 2609. That would be before the time of Noah, in Ussher's chronology. As far as tradition goes, there is no reason for believing that silk was unknown to Jared and his Brother. If they did not have silk worms, or eggs of the mother insect, as well as swarms of bees (Ether 2:3), they more than likely had silk in the form of skeins, or woven fabrics, or both, in abundance.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19However, the reading in our text is silks, in the plural. That is best understood as a collective noun, silk goods, analogous to, for instance, silver-ware, glassware, etc. If so understood, it means not only genuine silk, but any article resembling that material, soft, glossy, and elegant enough to be used as a substitute for it. That is the literal meaning of silks even today. Every one knows that our markets are flooded with elegant silks which are nothing better than the mercerized imitation of the genuine fabric. The spinners and weavers of the Jaredites would have produced such woven materials as soon as the country became settled for peaceful industrial pursuits.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Lehi and his family, who emigrated from Jerusalem about 600 B.C., must have known both the material and the Hebrew name for it (meshi, Ezekiel 16:10, 13). In all probability, King Solomon, who had commercial connections with many faraway countries, imported silk from eastern Asia. In the prophecies of Isaiah (B.C. 811-750) reference is made to the land of the Sinim (Isaiah 49:12), generally understood to mean China. If the Hebrews at that time traded with eastern Asia, they certainly imported silk among other luxuries. [^2] And the conclusion appears reasonable, that Moroni, who was a student of Isaiah, and knew the traditions of his ancestors from Lehi, had knowledge of silk, as handed down from generation to generation. He might, therefore, naturally and very properly, have called the fine fabrics of the Jaredites, silk.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19That the American Indians of later times were unsurpassed masters in the fine art of producing cloth of cotton or wool, will not be disputed by any well-informed Americanist.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Our text, as we understand it, does neither prove, nor disprove, the opinion that the Indians anciently had the genuine Chinese silk cloth. It leaves that question open for future discoveries. It does inform us that the Jaredites were acquainted with that kind of material, and that they became experts in manufacturing imitations of it.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Fine Linen. This may have been material a shade coarser than the silk, and yet fine, as compared to the linen in common use.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Cattle, Oxen, Cows, Sheep. Scholars who are committed to the theory that man in America, and elsewhere, gradually rose from a brute beginning to the level of savagery, then to that of barbarism, and finally, to the dizzy heights of civilization, must of necessity deny the occurrence of civilized pursuits among the American aborigines as far back as four thousand years ago. [^3]

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19But if we accept the Book of Moses as the word of the Lord, we cannot admit that the Jaredites came here as savages. They had a certain degree of civilization, in some respects more advanced then we moderns, in our haughty estimation of ourselves, care to express. They knew something about agriculture when they selected the fertile Plain of Shinar, in Mesopotamia as their home. They knew how to burn and make bricks and to build cities with towers. [^4] They were astronomers, and they must have had some knowledge of geography to have been able to travel as they did. They had, above all, the religious knowledge that enabled them to hold communion with God and to receive revelations. That alone placed them well within the boundaries of civilization. And because they were a civilized race, the statement of Moroni, if correctly understood, is far from incredible.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19When the Jaredites came here they found a variety of animals.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The musk ox. In the extreme north the musk ox roamed; an animal that still is of importance in the Arctic Regions.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The Caribou. Farther south, the American reindeer, commonly known as the caribou, must at that time have been plentiful. During historic times that animal has been found inhabiting the wooded districts of Canada and adjacent parts of the United States. In northern Europe the reindeer serve their owners, chiefly Laplanders, as both cows and horses. They give rich milk. They furnish meat, clothing, bones for tools, etc., and they are an invaluable means of speedy transportation. If the caribous of antiquity were anything like their now-known European kindred, and if Jaredite hunters succeeded in capturing and domesticating some, they would certainly have found them as valuable to their national prosperity as we do the cattle.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The Bison. Farther south the bison, or American buffalo, was grazing, in immense herds, on the plains between the Mississippi and the Rockies, from Canada to New Mexico. The buffalos, or rather bisons, are indigenous to America. As close relatives of the ox family they may properly be regarded as cattle. They certainly were useful animals. They provided juicy meat, including the pemmican, indispensible to hunters and explorers. They gave fat and tallow for various uses; skins for leather, clothing, tent covers, canoes, etc., and hair of which to manufacture material for cloth. The Jaredites may have kept small herds of them for domestic purposes, as we now do on reservations in several places, in order to save the species from extinction. Such herds would account for the oxen and cows mentioned in the Book of Ether.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Sheep. The Jaredites may not have had the merino, as bred and developed in later times in Spain, France and the United States. But they must have come across the Rocky Mountain sheep, generally known as the Bighorn. Varieties of this animal inhabited the western mountain regions from Alaska and the shores of the Bering Sea in the north to Mexico in the south. To what extent the Jaredites utilized these animals we do not know, but they must have been known by this enterprising people.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Under "Mexico" in Encyclopedia Britannica, the author relates that one of the ancient Aztecs, in a prayer, called the attention of his god, Tezcatlipoca, to the fact that the had sacrificed a sheep to the deity. The author thought that Spanish influence was in evidence in the use of the word "sheep," but Mr. Denison, who quotes the Britannica article, says the Aztecs appear to have had a name for sheep always, and that in the prayer mentioned a wild sheep may have been meant. He also mentions that bones of the Canadian sheep have been found in Arizona ruins. [^5]

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The Peccary. This animal, resembling the swine family, is about three feet long, with fewer teeth than the boar or pig. One variety has been found from Arkansas in the north to Patagonia in the South. A larger variety is said to be found in Central America and South America as far south as Brazil. Peccaries may have been the "swine" of the Jaredites. That would account satisfactorily for the name in our text.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19However, that the Jaredite people, Semitic descendants, had swine is surprising. During the Mosaic dispensation those kind of animals were unclean, because they do not ruminate, Noah, the father of Shem, knew this division of living creatures to be a divine arrangement, for the Lord commanded the patriarch to save both clean and unclean beasts from destruction in the flood (Genesis 7:2, 8). In view of the Mosaic Law concerning unclean animals (Leviticus 11:7, 8), which, undoubtedly, was patterned after a previous patriarchal statute, the mention of swine among the edible animals of the Jaredites is unexpected.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19But, probably, these pilgrims from Asia, during their wanderings through uninhabited deserts, could not always select their food with strict regard to legal rules of fitness. Probably they were under the necessity, frequently, to live on whatever they could find. Thus, the regulations observed when they lived in settled communities, may have been set aside by the force that is said to "know no law," and when they, finally, after years of traveling, formed settlements in the new country, some laws and rules, once deemed important, may never again have been enforced, even if they were not entirely forgotten. Such cases might be found even in the history of the immigrations into the United States in our own day.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Goats. The Rocky Mountain goat is an animal about the size of a large sheep. It has a coat of long, soft and warm, white hair, and an undercoat of fine wool. Domesticated, the goat is a useful animal. The wild species live in family groups on high mountain sides, where only experienced mountaineers can follow them. Jaredites had evidently captured some of them.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Many other kinds of Animals. Among these may be mentioned the deer, the moose or American elk, the bear, the beaver. The Jaredites must have found these and many other useful species. There were, besides, birds, migratory as well as permanent inhabitants of forests and canyons; fish in the streams and lakes and in the waters of the oceans, and shellfish and mussels in great abundance, as shown by the shellheaps on the coasts around the American continents, and in some places inland. Dogs are not mentioned among the assets of the people, but they must have had those faithful friends of man. They may even have brought dogs with them from their home land.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Horses. As a contribution to the discussion of Jaredite culture, it may be mentioned that press dispatches dated June 13, 1936, announced the discovery, by explorers, of a cave under a ledge in the mountains near Albuquerque, New Mexico, in which there were a hearth of stone, a flint tool and bones of prehistoric animals, such as horses, camels and mastodons, which, scientists say, disappeared from this continent thousands of years ago. A conservative conclusion from these and similar finds is, according to Dr. D. D. Brand, head of the anthropology department of the University of New Mexico, that so-called pleistocene animals; that is to say, animals that lived during the glacial period, may actually have continued their existence for some time after the withdrawal of the great ice sheets which marked the end of the pleistocene period. If this logical conclusion obtains confirmation, we may suppose that some of the horses of the previous ages survived and were found by man during historic times. The Jaredites may on that theory, have had horses. The equines, as other early living creatures, may not have become totally extinct until after the dawn of historic times. The Jaredites, we know, destroyed their own culture during historic times, and came near enough to exterminating each other. Some domesticated animals may have shared their fate. On March 21, 1938, the Associated Press announced that explorers in Death Valley had come across footprints of camels, pigs, one-toed horses and wading birds. Not even a guess was offered concerning the probable remoteness of the time at which those marks were placed where now found.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Asses. We need not say a great deal about those useful creatures here. The Jaredites had the animals known in the wild state as asses, and, domesticated, as donkeys, even if we do not know how they got them.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19To those who insist that donkeys were unknown in America during the early years of the Jaredites, we offer the suggestion that the small horses may have reminded them of the asses of their own country. The two branches of the equine family are closely related and resemble each other very much. This resemblance may have suggested the name for the small horses. In that case, the asses would be the same as our "ponies."

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Elephants. While Dr. John A. Widtsoe, the Apostle, was presiding over the European mission, he received a clipping from the Sheffield, England, "Weekly Telegram," of Nov. 4, 1933, in which the statement was made that there were pictures of elephants among Maya pictographs, which must have been carved by Asiatics who knew the Asiatic elephant. The paper asked, "How did these people cross the ocean? Was a native boat journey of two thousand miles possible?"

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Well, a Chinese historian, writing in the 7th century of our era, states that a Chinese expedition long ago discovered a country 20,000 li [^6] to the east of Tahan, which was called Fusang. Tahan, says Bancroft, [^7] is generally supposed to be Kamchatka, and Fusang the northwest coast of America, California or Mexico. The story is, of course, not accepted as true. It has a great many fantastic details. But it is by no means impossible that, hidden among the embellishments, there is a modicum of historic facts. And they may point to the possibility of migrations over eastern Asia of people who carried to America the knowledge of both elephants, horses and other animals. About three thousand years ago, during the time of King Solomon, the oceans were highways, on which Hebrew and Phoenician navigators may have reached America and visited the islands on their perilous course.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Marquis de Nadaillac says that among the ornaments of a certain wall at Uxmal, an ancient Maya city, were details supposed to be elephant-trunks. This, he says, would be a curious fact, if true. For the elephant was certainly not living in America at the time of the erection of the monuments of Uxmal.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19It all depends. The Mayas, according to some authorities, entered Yucatan during the 6th century A.D., from Guatemala, Mexico and British Honduras. If the ornaments in question are of a later date, the elephants may have been extinct when the frieze of which they form a detail was fashioned. But even in that case, Maya artists would have known elephants by hearsay, just as educated people in our day know something about mastodons and dinosaurs, although they may never have seen one, not even in a museum. But if the structures of Uxmal, which for centuries have been only ruins, are pre-Mayan, elephants may still have inhabited favorable localities in America, when those buildings were new. Giants from prehistoric times may still have swung their long muscular noses, their "big sticks," fuzzily warning enemies of danger.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The Mastodon. This extinct animal is known to have survived into the historical period. According to Mr. M. R. Harrison, curator of the Los Angeles Museum, the earliest inhabitants of California, the "Folsom" people, hunted both bisons and mammoths, the latter being also known as extinct elephants. Obsidian spearheads and knives, we are informed, have been found among bones of those extinct animals on the shores of a pond in Clear Lake Park, where the people mentioned seem to have had a favorite camp.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Cureloms. We note that the animals enumerated are divided into three classes:

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19(1) Cattle, oxen, cows, sheep, swine and goats, and also many other kinds "were useful for the food of man."

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19(2) Horses, asses, elephants, cureloms and cumoms "were useful unto man," but not for food.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19(3) Elephants, cureloms and cumoms were "more especially" useful.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19The elephant is a marvelously intelligent creature, and if the question is of transportation, or the carrying of burdens, or even of military service in primitive warfare, he cannot be surpassed, when properly trained. But what of the cureloms and cumoms?

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19There is a Hebrew verb, "garal," meaning to roll forth, or, roll off (a burden, for instance). The Semitic or Jaredite ancestor of that word may have been, "karal," having the same meaning. Curel or Kurel can have been formed from karal, to denote an animal with a characteristically rolling motion, such as the camel has. The sounds represented by g and k are interchangeable, or the letters are. The motion of the camel, the "ship of the desert," is peculiar. When walking, he lifts both feet simultaneously, first on one side and then the other, causing a rolling motion unpleasant to those not accustomed to it. The "om" in curel-om we consider a plural termination, as "im" in the Hebrew. Curel-om would, according to this conjecture, mean camels. The South American llama belongs to the camel family. The curel-om of the Jaredites may have been relatives of those proud-looking and useful creatures if not their ancestors.

SCEther 9 17Ether 9 18Ether 9 19Cumoms. If we eliminate the American plural "s" and understand the "om" to be equivalent to the Hebrew plural "im," the word in the singular would be "cum." But the Hebrew "kum" means to rise up, to stand up. [^8] It may be for either friendly or unfriendly purposes. The bear shows that characteristic. He rises up on his hind legs to fight an enemy, and also, at least in zoological gardens, to beg visitors for tidbits. Being a hibernating animal, he goes to sleep in the fall and rises in the spring as from the dead. Bears may possibly be the cum-om of the Book of Ether, [^9] because of these peculiarities. Their skins would certainly be "more especially" useful in areas where the summers are hot but the winters cold.

Ether 9 22Verse 22

Ether 9 22Son of Righteousness. This is one name of the Son of God, denoting a divine attribute. The Prophet Malachi (4:2) refers to Jesus as the "Sun of Righteousness," to express His equality with the Father. Speaking of the Lord's day, the Hebrew prophet says it shall burn up all the proud and all that do iniquity; they shall be stubble; but unto those who fear the Lord's name, "shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in His wings." Malachi seems to have borrowed a figure of speech suggested by the winged sun in Egyptian mythology, especially the Osiris myth; and in other eastern religions featuring sun worship. The Jews at the time of Malachi must have been familiar with those religious concepts and symbols. Moroni here uses an original name, Son of Righteousness, which reminds us of Jeremiah 23:6: "And this is the name whereby He shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." This is His name. The Sun of Righteousness is only the symbol of the Name. Commentators have suggested that the expression of Malachi does not refer to the Lord, or any other person, but to a principle. In the text before us it is made clear that the Son of Righteousness is none other than our Lord, Jesus Christ, Himself.

Ether 9 23Verse 23

Ether 9 23The Reign of Coriantum. The king walked in the footsteps of his father Emer. He built many mighty cities, and devoted his entire life to the welfare of the people. His wife passed away at the age of 102 years. Coriantum, although having reached a high age, married a young girl and became the father of several children. His biographer gives the impression that his second marriage prolonged his life. Moroni says, "Wherefore he lived until he was 142 years old." (v. 24)

Ether 9 25Verse 25

Ether 9 25Com. One of his sons, Com, probably the youngest, succeeded him.

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Verses 26-35

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Heth. One of the sons of Com was named Heth, a noun that means "terror." It was the name of the progenitor of the Hittites, the children of Heth, in Genesis, who were the inhabitants of Palestine during the time of Abraham. Ephron, of whom the Patriarch bought the field of Machpelah, with the cave in which he interred the remains of his wife Sarah, was a Hittite. (Genesis 23:1-20) [^10]

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Heth, the son of Com, was what his name signified, a terror. He joined some criminal, secret organization, murdered his father and usurped his office. (v. 27)

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35The wickedness of the king had its corrupting influence on the people. His subjects imitated him. Lawlessness in high places is particularly contagious. As a rule, the moral status of a nation is at the level of the leading and ruling classes. The Jaredites under Heth became as wicked as he was.

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35The Lord sent prophets, or missionaries, who called upon them to repent and who predicted a great famine if they persisted in wrong-doing. They rejected the message and persecuted, and even killed, the messengers, at the instigation of the king. (vv. 28, 29)

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35The famine came. God withheld rain. The gardens and fields became parched. Water supplies dried up. Prosperous farms were desolated by the scorching rays of the sun. Trees died. Nowhere any cooling shade. Hot sandstorms added terror to other calamities. People perished by famine. Some were killed by the poisonous reptiles that multiplied in the deserted land. Domestic animals, being without the wanted human care and protection, followed their instinct and began a gradual trek southward toward the country of Zarahemla, away from the burning desert and the loathesome snakes. But many of these perished on the road. Some reached the land southward. (vv. 30-32)

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Time passed. The snakes disappeared from the land still occupied and multiplied along the main roads of traffic, where they became a deadly menace to traders and travelers. The country became isolated as well as desolated. The inhabitants hunted carcasses of animals that had been killed by snakes, and when that source of food had been exhausted, death seemed to be the only alternative. (vv. 33, 34)

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Then the people repented. They turned to the Lord. He sent rain. The country was resurrected to life and became prosperous again. (v. 35)

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35The apostate Jaredites may, possibly, have turned to serpent worship in their blind efforts to escape God. That may have been one tenet of their secret society. If so, the punishment by snakes was a method of divine instruction as well as retribution. It proved to the people that the death-dealing reptiles were anything but divine, and that God in Heaven is the supreme Ruler in the world.

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35The children of Israel had, at one time, a similar demonstration in the wilderness. At Mt. Horeb they became rebellious and accused Moses of having led them out into a desert to perish of hunger. Then their camp became infested by serpents which killed many of the agitators. The people were frightened and turned to God. Moses was instructed to make a serpent of brass and raise the image up on a pole. Anyone who was wounded would be healed by looking at this brazen figure.

SCEther 9 26Ether 9 27Ether 9 28Ether 9 29Ether 9 30Ether 9 31Ether 9 32Ether 9 33Ether 9 34Ether 9 35Many of the Israelites, no doubt, had the eastern idea that the serpent had healing power. Among Assyrians, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Phoenicians and others, the serpent was supposed to bring health and good fortune. Moses by directing the wounded to look upon the brazen image hanging lifeless on a pole, demonstrated that healing comes from God, by faith, not from contact with a coiling reptile. (Numbers 21:4-9) The vindication of the supremacy of God, we think, was the object lesson of the experience of Israel in the wilderness, and of Jaredites in the Land of Moron.

GENERAL NOTES

Scholars hold that the widespread veneration of snakes began in fear inspired by violent thunderstorms. The reptiles became the symbols of the lightning, they believed, and thereby also of the god of thunder and rain. Thus, the Tlaloc of the Aztecs held in one hand a piece of gold supposed to represent lightning. Huracan of the Quiche legend is "the strong serpent," the thunderer. Quetzalcoatl, Gucumatz, Cuculcan, Bancroft says, are all titles of the god of the air, signifying, "Bird-Serpent." This may be so. For when man, through neglect of communion with God and the indulgence in sin sets aside his knowledge of the true Ruler of Heaven and Earth, he may even believe that a golden calf is the image of Him who led Israel out of Egypt. (Exodus 32:8)

But the serpent is also the symbol of evil among some. The Apaches are said to believe that the rattlesnakes are inhabited by the souls of bad men, and that they are the emissaries of evil spirits. The Piutes believe, it is said, that the existence of a demon in the form of a serpent was in the waters of the Pyramid Lake. But whether symbols of good or bad spiritual forces, the serpents occur with many of the gods revered by the aborigines of the American continents.

Concerning some interesting antiquities discovered in California, Mr. Bancroft has this to say:

"The existence of the works of human hands buried hundreds of feet beneath the many successive layers of different rocks and earths, might not necessarily imply a greater age than one dating a few centuries before the coming of the Spaniards; although few would be willing to admit, probably, that natural convulsions so extensive have taken place at so recent an epoch. But when the work of human hands is shown to be discovered in connection with the bones of mastodons, elephants, horses, camels and other animals long since extinct, and that they have been so found, there seems to be sufficient proof, it is hardly possible with consistency to deny that these implements date from a remote antiquity." (Native Races, Vol. 4, p. 697)

AGRICULTURE IN AMERICA

According to a press dispatch dated Dec. 28, 1938, Dr. Donald D. Brand, an anthropologist of the Smithsonian Institution, has recently made the statement that civilization in America is older than that of Egypt, if agriculture is taken as evidence. He pointed out that the wide spread of plants which require cultivation for their propagation, such as maize, kidney beans, pumpkins and potatoes, indicate a long period of development. The prehistoric inhabitants of Mexico and Central America, Dr. Brand said, had more domesticated plants than any people in a similar area anywhere in the world.

ABLOM

A place on the Atlantic Seaboard of the northern continent, east of the Hill Cumorah. The Lord in a dream warned Omer, King of the Jaredites, to flee from his native land at the time his Kingdom was overthrown by Akish and his friends. This he did and after a long journey settled at Ablom. Nimrah, a son of Akish, with a number of adherents afterwards joined Omer at Ablom. After many years Omer was restored to his Kingdom and returned to his own land.

CUMOM

The Cumom was a useful animal known to the Jaredites. By some it is supposed to be the Mastodon, by others, the Alpaca or Llama.

CURELOM

The Curelom was a useful animal known to the Jaredites. By some it is supposed to be the Elephant, by others, the Llama or Alpaca. (Ether 9:19)

Footnotes

According to the chronology of Bishop Ussher, Peleg and Joctan lived B.C. 2247. Add 1960 A.D., the present year, and we get the date of the migration of Jared, the son of Joctan. 4207 years ago.

---
Notas:
[^1] See, Gibbon's portrait of Emperor Phocas, whose few years of murder and tyranny ended in the shameful death of a criminal, in the year 630 A.D. (Decline and Fall of Rome, Vol. 4, p. 454)
[^2] There is no a priori improbability in regarding the name Sinae as referring to the inhabitants of Eastern Asia in the time of Isaiah * * * for it is certain that at that time an inland commercial route connected the extreme east with the west, and that traffic was maintained on the frontier of China between the Scytians and the Sinae, in the manner that is still followed by the Chinese and the Russians at Kiachta. If any name for these traders traveled westward, it would probably be that of the Sinae. (Sinim, Smith's Bible Dictionary)
[^3] Bancroft, speaking of the skill of Indians of later periods in manufacturing cloth, says: "The Zapotecs, Miztecs, Mayas, and others, since the conquest, have long been justly celebrated for the manufacture of cotton stuffs, a fact that is all the more surprising when we consider the very imperfect implements they possessed with which to perform the work. Burgoa speaks of the excellence and rich quality of their manufactures in cotton, silk and gold thread, in 1670, and Thomas Gage, writing about the same time, says 'it is rare to see what works these Indian women will make in silk, such as might serve for patterns and samplers to many schoolmistresses in England.' All the spinning and weaving is done by the women." (Native Races, Vol. 1, p. 657) I suspect that the silk mentioned was not all the Chinese output. And I believe that what the Indians could do in 1670, the Jaredites could do.
[^4] Called Ziggurat by the Sumerians. There was a great Ziggurat in the City of Ur, where Abraham lived. It was built, no one knows how long ago. Probably shortly after the dispersion. These towers had a religious character. They were built in terraces, representing the realm of the dead, the Earth and the Heaven. In the language of Genesis concerning the Tower of Babel, "whose top may reach into Heaven" (Genesis 11:14), the top represented Heaven. It was the place of worship of the builders; their temple, where they received revelations from on high. Or, rather, that was the intention of the religious leaders of the people.
[^5] T. S. Denison, "Mexican Linguistics," pp. 23, 24
[^6] A "li" is supposed to equal a third of a mile.
[^7] Native Races, Vol. 5, p. 33.
[^8] Comp. "Talitha cumi," damsel arise!" (Mark 5:41)
[^9] When the Lord had formed every beast of the field, he brought them before Adam "to see what he would call them." And whatsoever Adam, naturally after careful observation of their characteristics called them, that became their name. (Genesis 2:19) The Hebrew name for bear is, "dob." But that, it is said, refers only to the species peculiar to Syria.
[^10] At the time of Joshua, northern Palestine was part of a Hittite empire which the Lord gave to the children of Israel. (Joshua 1:4)
