Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 13

Ether 13 2Verse 2

Ether 13 2They rejected all the words of Ether. In the first part of this chapter, the message of Ether is briefly recorded. It bears a marked resemblance to the prophecies of Enoch, as preserved in the Pearl of Great Price. The mission of Enoch was to warn the people who lived before the flood of their wickedness. Ether was sent to the Jaredites with a similar word of warning. The Ante-diluvians rejected Enoch. The Jaredites refused to listen to the words of Ether.

Ether 13 2In his pleas that they abandon their iniquities and turn unto righteousness, Ether explained to them the Plan of Salvation from the beginning to the end of all things. The Gospel that Ether preached was the Gospel of Adam, of Enoch and the Patriarchs. It was also the Gospel of Noah, handed down through his sons to Eber, Peleg and his brother, Joktan, and to Jared. It was the same Gospel that was entrusted by our Lord to His Apostles for dissemination throughout the world. It was, in one word, the Everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Ether 13 2From the beginning of man. Enoch says: "The Heavens He (God) made; the Earth is His footstool; and the foundation thereof is His ... an host of men hath He brought in upon the face thereof." (Moses 6:44) Moses, in the first, or the opening statement of his great work, The Book of Moses, gives what is, perhaps, the most sublime sentence ever penned by man: "In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth." (Genesis 1:1) A philosopher who has become lost in the midst of the wonders and riddles of Nature, as in a labyrinth, without an Ariadne-thread by which to find the way out, may ask, bewildered: Where am I? Who am I? The Gospel answers: You are, O mortal! in God's Universe, in God's house. He has placed you here. Not as a stranger, but as a child in His home and your own. As such you have His care, His protection, His Fatherly love and responsibility; all on condition of filial trust and obedience. "For a wise and glorious purpose," He "has placed us here on Earth."

Ether 13 2The Flood. It is not necessary to discuss, here, any controversial questions relating to the deluge. Many nations and many tribes have traditions in which the story of some such catastrophe has been preserved. There are, besides the account of it in Genesis and reference to it in other parts of the Bible, Ovid's Greek story of Deucalion and Pyrrha, who were saved in an ark when Zeus destroyed all other inhabitants of Hellas by a flood; also the stories of the Hindus, and the Persians, who say that the waters washed away the evils of Ahriman, the Evil One; further, traditions or legends by Babylonians, Assyrians, Scandinavians, Mexicans, Peruvians, and others. The point that Ether makes is this, that the Lord, after the deluge, declared the American Continents to be a "choice land above all other lands," and that all who dwell thereon are under obligation to serve Him. (Compare Ether 1:42-43) And this directs the attention of Moroni to the revelation given through Ether on the New Jerusalem (vv. 3-13), an element of the Everlasting Gospel of Salvation evidently of first importance to the compiler of the works of the last Jaredite Prophet.

Ether 13 3The place of the New Jerusalem. For a better understanding of this section, one is referred to the visions of Enoch recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:60-62.

Ether 13 3Enoch, it will be remembered, ascended a high mountain, where the Lord revealed to him the future of the human family. The advent of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, was shown to him. At that time, the Lord declared: "As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfill the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah."

Ether 13 3Enoch had asked, "When shall the Earth rest?" and the Lord answered, that the day of rest would come, but it would be preceded by a period of deep night and destructive revolutions. We read:

Ether 13 3"Before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but My people will I preserve; and righteousness will I send down out of Heaven; and truth out of the earth, to bear testimony of My Only Begotten; His resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the Earth as with a flood, to gather out Mine elect from the four quarters of the Earth unto a place which I shall prepare, an holy City, that My people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of My coming; for there shall be My tabernacle, and it shall be called ZION, a New Jerusalem." (Moses 7:61-62)

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4Two Cities. In the account of the life of Enoch, as recorded in the "Writings of Moses," Pearl of Great Price, two cities of outstanding prominence are mentioned, viz., the City of Zion, and the New Jerusalem. Concerning these we note the following information:

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4The City of Zion. As a fruit of the missionary labors of Enoch among the Ante-diluvians, the righteous of all nations were gathered together. They were the people of the Lord, and He called them Zion, "because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18) Then Enoch undertook to build a city as the chief center thereof, we may suppose, of the country of the gathering place, and that city became known as "The City of Holiness, even Zion." (v. 19)

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4Zion, the Abode of the Lord for ever. This done, Enoch expressed the hope that the organization of the people of Zion, and their magnificent city might remain forever. "Surely," he said, "Zion, the City shall dwell in safety forever."

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4The Lord answered, in substance, that it would, "Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed." His answer was amplified by a vision of the future of the inhabitants of the Earth. "And lo, Zion, in process of time was taken up into Heaven." There it would remain in safety forever with its perfect organization, its palaces and temples, and there the Lord would dwell: "And the Lord said unto Enoch: Behold mine abode forever." (v. 21) If it has pleased the Lord to establish His permanent home, His Royal Residence, in the City of Zion on the other side of the veil, then that City is the Capital of the Kingdom of God forever.

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4Missionary work after the removal of the City of Zion. The Patriarch now was shown that missionary work was continued among the Ante-diluvians after he and his City were taken unto Heaven. "And Enoch beheld angels"—Gospel messengers—"descending out of Heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and Son; and the Holy Ghost fell on many."

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4What about these on whom the Holy Ghost fell?

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4"And they were caught up by the powers of Heaven." So they, too, became citizens of the heavenly Zion, of which Enoch says, "And Thou hast taken Zion to Thine own bosom, from all Thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity."

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4Thus the righteous of the Ante-diluvians were saved from destruction. The impenitent perished in the Flood. And the work of Enoch, as seen in the results attending his city and its people on the other side of the veil, far surpassed in magnitude and importance anything that the Patriarch could ever have hoped for.

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4A New Jerusalem. Enoch had glorious visions of the advent of the Only Begotten in the meridian of time. Also visions of His Second Coming in the last days. A New Jerusalem is closely connected with this great event yet future.

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4The place revealed. In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and six elders at Kirtland, Ohio, September 22, 1832, we read:

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4"Yea, the word of the Lord concerning His Church, established in the last days for the restoration of His people, as He has spoken by the mouth of His prophets, and for the gathering of His Saints to stand upon Mount Zion, which shall be the City of the New Jerusalem. Which City shall be built, beginning at the Temple Lot, which is appointed by the finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries in the State of Missouri, and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom the Lord is well pleased." (Doctrine and Covenants 84:2-3)

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4A wonderful reunion. The Lord told Enoch about the marvelous destiny of this City to be built in Missouri. In the first place, our Lord, Himself, and Enoch and the inhabitants of Zion, the City of our Lord before the Flood, are to meet the Saints in the New Jerusalem, in a most affectionate reunion. In the second place, the Lord will make it His abode temporarily, "It shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made"; the affairs of the Kingdom of God will be directed from there, and the Earth shall rest for a thousand years. Enoch saw that the Lord would come in the last days to dwell in the New Jerusalem on the Earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years. That is the glorious hope and expectation of the people of God. They know that the last word in the controversy between the agents of good and evil; the final word of triumphant victory, will be spoken, not by any slave of Lucifer, but by the Son of God, the Savior and the Redeemer of mankind.

SCEther 13 3Ether 13 4A Jerusalem from Heaven. Note that the New Jerusalem mentioned in verse 3 as coming down out of Heaven and the holy sanctuary, is the City of Zion, which had been taken up into Heaven. (Moses 7:19-20) It is the heavenly pattern of the city yet to be built upon the Earth.

Ether 13 4Upon this Land. The New Jerusalem of this paragraph is the City that is to be reared in Jackson County, Missouri. Here the Saints of God will meet the Saints of the last days. President Brigham Young may have had this marvelous reunion in mind when he told the Saints:

Ether 13 4"About the time that the Temples of the Lord will be built and Zion is established—pretty nigh this time, you will see, (those who are faithful enough) the first you know, there will be strangers in your midst, walking with you, talking with you; they will enter into your houses and eat and drink with you, go to meeting with you, and begin to open your minds, as the Savior did the two disciples who walked out in the country in the days of old.

Ether 13 4"About the time the Temples are ready, the strangers will be along and will converse with you, and will inquire of you, probably, if you understand the resurrection of the dead. You might say you have heard and read a great deal about it, but you do not properly understand it; and they will then open your minds and tell you the principles of the resurrection of the dead and how to save your friends; they will point out the Scriptures in the Old and New Testaments, in the Book of Mormon and other revelations of God, saying, 'Don't you recollect reading so-and-so, that saviors should come up on Mount Zion?' etc., and they will expound the Scriptures to you. You have got your temples ready; now go forth and be baptized for those good people. There are your father and mother—your ancestors for many generations back—the people that have lived upon the face of the Earth since the Priesthood was taken away, thousands and millions of them, who have lived according to the best light and knowledge in their possession.

Ether 13 4"Many of the elders of Israel in Mount Zion will become pillars in the Temple of God, to go no more out. They will eat and drink and sleep there; and they will often have occasion to say, 'Somebody came to the Temple last night; we did not know who he was, but he was no doubt a brother, and he told us a great many things we did not before understand. He gave us the names of a great many of our forefathers that were not on record, and he gave me my true lineage and the names of my forefathers for hundreds of years back. He said to me, 'You and I are connected in one family; there are the names of your ancestors; take them and write them down, and be baptized and confirmed, and save such and such ones, and receive the blessings of the eternal Priesthood for such and such an individual, as you do for yourselves." (Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, pp. 294-295. Also See, Discourses of Brigham Young, Widtsoe, pp. 627-628.)

Ether 13 4The reason why the Saints of Enoch's Zion will visit the Saints of the Zion in the Last Days, during the Millennium, appears clearly in the remarkable sermon just quoted. The personal calls of the "strangers" are in the interest of the Temple Service, in which both the Heavens and the Earth are equally interested.

Ether 13 5The Jerusalem of Lehi. Having spoken of the New Jerusalem, Ether turns, in his prophetic discourse, to the City from which Moroni, the abridger of the translation King Mosiah made of the twenty-four gold plates which contained Ether's record, says that Lehi should come; that is, Jerusalem in Palestine. That City is to be built up again, and become a "holy City unto the Lord, and it should be built unto the House of Israel."

Ether 13 6The New Jerusalem. This City, as explained, will be upon the American Continent "unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type."

SCEther 13 7Ether 13 6There has been a type. If we understand, correctly, these paragraphs, the thought is there conveyed that the exodus of Jacob with his household from Canaan, at the instance of his son, Joseph, was a prototype of the migration of Lehi and his little company from the Land of Jerusalem, in compliance with a divine command; for, as the father of Joseph was brought to Egypt in order that he and his house might be saved from perishing in an almost universal famine, so Lehi and his family were led to the New World, in order to escape the Babylonian siege and destruction of Jerusalem. In both these instances of notable migration, the purpose of the Lord was the salvation of a "remnant of the House of Joseph" from annihilation.

Ether 13 8They shall build a city. The reason for the miraculous preservation of a "remnant of the Seed of Joseph" is here stated. That remnant has a special mission to perform in the Kingdom of God. They are to build the New Jerusalem on this Continent. We read in verse eight: "The remnant of the House of Joseph shall be built upon this land." That is to say, "It shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a Holy City unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old." That is the mission of the remnant of Joseph's seed.

Ether 13 9A new Heaven and a new Earth. The preceding sentence (v. 8) refers to a certain time "when the Earth shall pass away." In verse nine it is asserted that there will be a new Heaven and a new Earth, and that the new creations are to be "like unto the old," except for the fact that they are new.

Ether 13 9This, if modern phraseology alone is considered, might be regarded as a prediction of the end, literally speaking, of the entire universe. But the context does not permit such a sweeping interpretation. The passing away of the Heaven and the Earth is not the end (finis) of either; it is the continuation of their existence, but under such entirely new conditions and circumstances as to enable the people of God to build both the New and the Old Jerusalem on this Earth.

Ether 13 9In the ancient writings, the expression "heaven and earth" sometimes means the entire universe as in Genesis 1:1. But sometimes it is a figure of speech, referring to the existing order of things; that is for example, the organization of a kingdom, its rulers and subjects. So used, the Sun, moon, and the stars are the symbols of kings and governors, while the earth stands for the common people. Our Lord, undoubtedly, referred to the kings and governors, when He said that immediately after the tribulation preceding His coming, "The sun shall be darkened and the moon not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the power of heaven shall be shaken." (Matthew 24:29) Compare Revelation by John, 8:10; and 9:1 for the figurative meaning of "star."

Ether 13 9In Isaiah 51:13 and 16, we find the literal meaning, and also the figurative. Our Lord, in this prophecy, first reminded Israel of the fact that He had "stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth," literally, in the Creation. He then said that He had put His words in the mouth of Israel, and preserved the people, in order to "plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the earth"—that is, create a new heaven and a new earth, figuratively speaking—and say unto Zion Thou art My people.

Ether 13 9In the text under consideration (v. 9) "heaven" and "earth" are to be understood in this figurative—we may even call it political—sense. The true meaning, therefore, is this, that before the coming of the new era, with a New Jerusalem in Jackson County, Missouri, and the Old Jerusalem in Palestine rebuilt, the entire social and political organizations of mankind will be radically changed as to make the establishment of the Kingdom of God among men possible. In that sense there will be a new earth under a new heaven.

Ether 13 9Let us now pause a moment and ask whether this change has not been going on for some time. Is the Earth today what it was, say a hundred years ago, speaking socially and politically? Look at the automobiles in streets where formerly ox teams and horses took care of the traffic. Listen to the planes in the air that have made it possible to breakfast in San Francisco and dine in New York the same day. Consider the radio, by means of which a speaker, or singer, in Salt Lake City may entertain an audience in Australia; or a politician in Washington D.C. can converse with a colleague in London, Berlin, or Rome, as if the two were face to face with each other in the same room. Consider the changes affected in the industrial world—agriculture, for instance, with its costly and intricate machinery, or in the conditions of the laboring man generally. Think of the progress made in engineering, in the medical sciences, in education, and the discoveries made by means of the microscope on one hand and the telescope on the other. Our earth is indeed new, if we compare it to that of our ancestors. Were some of them to arise in our midst, they would not know or recognize their old home town, or their farms. They would be in strange surroundings, where miracles would be to them an every-day occurrence. We are already now living on a "new" earth, and further changes are going on daily.

Ether 13 10Then cometh the New Jerusalem. When this change of the earth has been completed, then the New Jerusalem will be built in Jackson County, Missouri. (See paragraph 4, this chapter)

Ether 13 10Through the blood of the Lamb. The inhabitants of the New Jerusalem are they "who are numbered among the remnant of the Seed of Joseph," or, in other words, "the House of Israel." That is, the Saints of the latter days, whose "garments are white through the Blood of the Lamb." (Compare Revelation 7:13-17) The white garments were a sign of victory. Those who wore them had overcome every trial during the tribulation of the last days. But their victory was, properly considered, the triumph of the Lamb of God who offered His Atoning Blood on Calvary. In other words, the victory of the white-robed Saints in the New City was due to the conquest by the Savior of the powers of hell, or all evil, which was made manifest in the lives of His faithful followers. To Him, therefore, be all honor and glory for ever.

Ether 13 11Jerusalem of Old. At the time when the New Jerusalem is coming into existence in Jackson County, Missouri, Jerusalem in Palestine will be restored to a magnificence and importance never before attained by that City. Even the glory of the period of David and Solomon will be far surpassed. The inhabitants thereof, we read, "Have been washed in the Blood of the Lamb." That is, they have accepted our Lord as the Messiah, who, by His Atoning Sacrifice on Calvary, became "The Lamb of God, Which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29-36) And thus were they washed, or made clean, in the Blood of the Lamb.

Ether 13 11Scattered and gathered. The inhabitants of the restored City of Jerusalem are, further, described as having been "scattered and gathered in from the four corners of the Earth"; that is, from the entire globe. Up to this time, the mission of Israel and Judah, as the custodians of the divine promises to Abraham, by which all nations of the Earth are to be blessed, required them to live in dispersion. Now that mission is ended. A new era, one of consolidation of the scattered descendants of Abraham into political unity and importance is about to begin. The restoration of Jerusalem is one of the signs of the new era.

Ether 13 11From the North Countries. The best understanding of this not-quite-definite expression may be gathered from the revelations on the subject.

Ether 13 11On April 3, 1836, Moses appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple, and committed to them the "keys of the Gathering of Israel from the four parts of the Earth, and the leading of the Ten Tribes from the land of the north." (Doctrine and Covenants 110:11) This makes it plain that the "north countries" are the regions where the Ten Tribes found a refuge after having escaped the Assyrian captivity.

Ether 13 11Here historic research may come to our aid. According to the Apocryphal II Esdras 13:40-50, the Ten Tribes were deported across the Euphrates by the Assyrian Shalmaneser. This was about 722 B.C. But this ruler had trouble of his own, and in the political confusion prevailing, the captives, for such they were, found an opportunity to recross the great river, and then to turn northward to reach an uninhabited country, where they were safe from pursuit. Esdras says that they traveled a year and a half to a region called Arsareth, and there, he adds, "They dwelt until the latter time, and when they came forth again, the Most High shall hold still the springs of the river again, that they may go through."

Ether 13 11Here, then, we learn that the exiled Tribes traveled a year and a half to reach their new home, the "north countries."

Ether 13 11Lieutenant C.A.L. Totten [^1] refers to Herodotus as follows: "He tells us that in his day (450 B.C.), a warlike, virtuous, and powerful race, called Cumbri, lived around the northern coasts of the Black Sea, and centrally at the Crimea.... Herodotus further tells us that this people had originally come from Media, the which, he adds, however, had not been their birthplace, and he puts them there, in Media, as sojourners only. (Circa 600 B.C.) "Mr. Totten concludes from this information by the "father of history" and from numerous other references, that the Ten Tribes gradually emerged fom the region of the Caucasus and appeared in northern and western Europe as Angles, Jutes, Saxons, Danes, Normans, Goths, etc. All, he says, were kindred, all Cimri, all Scythians, all Scots, all from Crimea and the Asia Minor and Black Sea region of Herodotus.

Ether 13 11If these statements are historically correct, we may look for the "north countries" in the regions where these nationalities are liberally represented, especially Great Britain, the German States, and the Scandinavian countries. Northern mythology, which, as preserved in the exquisite Icelandic poetry, especially the Older Edda, reminds one of a kinship with the early parts of the Old Testament, and seems to lend some support to this view.

Ether 13 11The following modern revelation (Doctrine and Covenants 133:23-30) should be studied in this connection:

Ether 13 11"He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the Land of Jerusalem and the Land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the Earth shall be like it was in the days before it was divided. And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of His people, and shall reign over all flesh. And they who are in the North Countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear His voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the sea shall flow down at their presence. And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep. Their enemies shall become a prey unto them. And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land. And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, My servants."

Ether 13 11This is all highly figurative language, but the general meaning seems to be clear.

Ether 13 11Partakers of the Covenant. This Covenant was made with Abraham. See a previous paragraph headed "Scattered and Gathered." God, Himself, was He Who made the Covenant with the Father of the Faithful:

Ether 13 11"I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all those countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the Earth be blessed." (Genesis 26:4)

Ether 13 11This Covenant was repeated to Jacob, the grandson of Abraham and the son of Isaac:

Ether 13 11"And thy seed shall be as the dust of the Earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the Earth be blessed." (Genesis 28:14)

Ether 13 11Such is the mission of the descendants of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob. (Genesis 15:1-6 and 18) "In Isaac shall thy seed be called." (Genesis 21:12; Hebrews 11:18)

SCEther 13 13Ether 13 14Verses 13-14

SCEther 13 13Ether 13 14In the cavity of a rock. Moroni here explains that he was about to write more of Ether's predictions, but he was restrained from doing so. Ether prophesied many things that to Moroni were "great and marvelous," and, no doubt thought that the future readers of his account would be impressed as he was with them.

SCEther 13 13Ether 13 14A prophet not only foretells the future, but also he interprets the past, and explains and makes clear the Scriptures. Ether told the wicked Jaredites "of all things from the beginning of man." (v. 2) He saw "the days of Christ," and testified of His mission. (v. 4) This great land in which we now live, he told them, was a "chosen land of the Lord"; and made the solemn declaration that "the Lord would have that all men should serve Him who dwell upon the face thereof." Ether took this awe-inspiring proclamation, of which he was the herald, as a basis for his call on them to repent. Because the Jaredites had been chosen by God to dwell in this favored land, they, we may assume he argued, were under obligation to serve Him. And right here let us say that we, in living upon this same land, are, too, commanded to serve Him. Well we may say: "Thy will, O God, is my command," and we will remember God's gracious promise to Nephi of Old; it is to us as it was to him, a pledge given by the Lord: "And inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments, ye shall prosper" in the land. This land is to us a "Land of Promise." The promise is sure! It is a land which God has prepared for us as much as for Nephi and his seed, "Yea, a land which is choice above all other lands." Then, we may argue, why should not we, who enjoy a liberty of which He is the Author and for which the Nephites fought and bled, serve Him, and make manifest our appreciation of His great love; for is He not the loving Father of all men? (See, I Nephi 2:20; also, Alma 53:17)

SCEther 13 13Ether 13 14But, we have pointed out that the Jaredites rejected Ether's voice of warning, "they esteemed him as naught," and sought to take away his life. Knowing his work was not yet finished, and the account of his people that he was making was not complete, he took every precaution that presented itself to protect and preserve his life. "He hid himself in the cavity of a rock by day, and by night he went forth viewing the things which should come upon the people." It was while protecting himself thusly, he "made the remainder of" his record.

SCEther 13 15Ether 13 16Ether 13 17Ether 13 18Ether 13 19Ether 13 20Ether 13 21Ether 13 22Ether 13 23Ether 13 24Ether 13 25Ether 13 26Ether 13 27Ether 13 28Ether 13 29Ether 13 30Ether 13 31Verses 15-31

SCEther 13 15Ether 13 16Ether 13 17Ether 13 18Ether 13 19Ether 13 20Ether 13 21Ether 13 22Ether 13 23Ether 13 24Ether 13 25Ether 13 26Ether 13 27Ether 13 28Ether 13 29Ether 13 30Ether 13 31The great war. The warning voice of Ether aroused bitter enmity among the people of Moron against the chosen prophet of God. He was cast out, and as we have said, found refuge in a cave. There he finished his record.

SCEther 13 15Ether 13 16Ether 13 17Ether 13 18Ether 13 19Ether 13 20Ether 13 21Ether 13 22Ether 13 23Ether 13 24Ether 13 25Ether 13 26Ether 13 27Ether 13 28Ether 13 29Ether 13 30Ether 13 31The prophet having found a place of safety, the momentous war broke out in all its fury. Coriantumr, the King, had many enemies. After three years of civil struggle he was made a prisoner of war by Shared. But in the fourth year, his sons succeeded in liberating him. But the people sunk deeper and deeper in corruption, and the war flames continued roaring. Shared was slain in the Battle of Gilgal. Coriantumr was wounded so seriously that he was unfit for active military service for two years. However, this did not deter the people from shedding each other's blood, "and as there was none to restrain them," the whole face of the land lay festering in its own wantonness and filthiness.

THE NEW JERUSALEM, A RESUME

We have now read the principal Scripture passages relating to this subject. A brief resume of the points noted is now offered.

Enoch, before the flood, gathered a considerable number of converts in a place to which the Lord gave the name of Zion. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:18) Enoch built a city in this place. It was called, "The City of Holiness," or "The City of Zion." In course of time, the inhabitants of this gathering place and this City were taken up into Heaven, whereupon the Lord declared: "Behold Mine Abode forever." We naturally infer that the Saints of the Zion of Enoch, had, beyond the veil, the same perfect social organizations that they had here; that, in other words, they had a heavenly gathering place and City of Zion, and that the Lord graciously selected the latter to be the permanent Capital of His Kingdom, on both sides of the veil. (v. 32) See, also, v. 47, where Enoch, in his vision, seeing the Lamb of God slain on Earth, took comfort in the thought that Zion still existed: "Behold Zion is with me." The absence of the King was only temporary.

In his vision concerning the second advent of our Lord, Enoch saw a new City of Zion, a New Jerusalem, on this (the American) Continent. (v. 62; also, Doctrine and Covenants 84:3) He saw that Jesus, the King, that he himself (Enoch), and many Saints from the City of Enoch beyond the veil, were to meet the Saints of the latter days in this City of New Jerusalem in America. Those Saints of the Zion of Enoch and the Saints gathered from every part of the Earth are to be the inhabitants of the New Jerusalem in Jackson County, Missouri, (v. 63; Ether 13:3)

Here the Lord will dwell for a thousand years, governing His Kingdom on both sides of the veil, and completing the Plan of Salvation. (vv. 64-65; Revelation 21:1-5)

OUR RELATIONSHIP TO ABRAHAM

"Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you, for I called him alone and blessed him, and increased him.

"For the Lord shall comfort Zion: He will comfort all her waste places; and He will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody." (Isaiah 51:2-3.)

These sacred words were spoken or written about seven hundred years before the birth of the Savior, and they point unmistakably to the latter days. Who was this man, Abraham, of whom the prophet tells? He was the father of the faithful, the friend of God, the great progenitor of the House of Israel; and the exhortation of the prophet is unto Israel in modern times. He is endeavoring to turn the hearts of the children to their father, their ancestor, the rock from which they were hewn.

How do we trace our lineage—we Latter-day Saints—back to Abraham, or from Abraham down? Briefly thus: Abraham had a son named Isaac; Isaac had a son named Jacob; Jacob had twelve sons, the head of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and one of those sons was Joseph, who was sold into Egypt. Joseph had two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and we are of Ephraim, the "first-born of God in the great work of Israel's conversion and gathering in the last days." (From a sermon by Apostle Orson F. Whitney, March 9, 1924; Deseret News, March 15, 1924)

SHARED

A Jaredite military commander opposed to Coriantumr during a part of the great series of wars that ended in the destruction of that race. Nothing is said of him until he comes to the front as the leader of an army which gave battle to Coriantumr and defeated him. This appears to have been a lengthy campaign and not one solitary fight for we are told that "in the third year he (Shared) did bring him into captivity. And the sons of Coriantumr, in the fourth year, did obtain the kingdom again unto their father." The war, at this period, would seem to have grown beyond control of the military leaders and to have degenerated into a condition of affairs in which every man's hand was against his neighbor and mobs, instead of disciplined armies, carried bloodshed and devastation far and wide, throughout the land. Bands of brigands and robbers committed all manner of outrages and the whole country was the scene of anarchy and horror from one end to the other. After a time, Coriantumr, being exceedingly angry, gathered his forces and met Shared in the Valley of Gilgal. The fight, which lasted three days, was a desperate and stubborn one. Shared was beaten and retreated as far as Heshlon where he again withstood Coriantumr, and this time he was victorious, driving his foe back to their former battleground—the Valley of Gilgal. Here another fierce battle was fought in which Shared was slain and his troops defeated. In after years, Gilead, a brother of Shared's, took his brother's place and continued the bitter conflict with Coriantumr.

GILGAL, VALLEY OF

A valley mentioned as the locality of several desperate battles in the last Jaredite war. The first of these battles was between the armies of Shared and those of Coriantumr; it lasted three days. The losses on both sides were exceedingly heavy and ended in a victory for Coriantumr who pursued his enemy as far as the Plains of Heshlon. There another hotly contested fight took place, in which the tide of battle turned and Coriantumr was driven back to the Valley of Gilgal. Here a third conflict ensued in which Shared was killed and Coriantumr wounded. Nothing more is said in the Book of Ether that gives any clue to the locality in which Gilgal was situated.

NEW JERUSALEM

The City spoken of by John in the Book of Revelation; but ages before that time, prophesied of by Ether, the last seer of the Jaredites. (Ether 13:3-10) Among the other things of which he prophesied, Ether foretells that this blessed City shall be built upon the American Continent. Jesus, in His teachings to the Nephites, confirms the truth of this prophecy. (III Nephi 20:22; 21:23-24)

CORIHOR

Corihor was a prominent Jaredite of the latest generation (between 700 and 600 years before Christ). He appears to have been an associate of Coriantumr's, and to have had many fair sons and daughters. Further than this nothing is known of him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Our Race, Study Number 3, p. 73. We may not agree with all the conclusions of this author, but his quotations can always be accepted.
