Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 14

Ether 14 1Verse 1

Ether 14 1There began to be a great curse upon all the land because of the iniquity of the people. Some of the demoralizing influences of war upon a nation are noted in these paragraphs. In the murderous conflict between Shared and Coriantumr, and their followers, the walls of civilization were broken down, and a tidal wave of immorality, notably dishonesty and violent savagery, destroyed all signs of decent culture. We believe that history proves every great war has been followed by just such a wave of crime, degradation, and filth, especially violence, destruction of mutual confidence among neighbors, and therefore of human happiness.

Ether 14 1But that is not all. In a great war millions of beings are slaughtered as so many no consequence, loss, however, of which, post-mortem empty orations and useless pyrotechnics are no compensation. According to Professor L. Hersch, a Swiss statistician, 41,435,000 were slain in World War I. These were, generally speaking, the physically and intellectually strong and fit, in their best age. Their prospective careers as leaders in civilization and progress were cut short in the unspeakable mud puddles of modern battlefields. Many survivors, as has been made evident in after years, lost during the years of "military discipline," their personal will power and initiative, to such a degree that they became the blind, deaf and dumb, victims of calculating adventurers.

Ether 14 1The cost of a great war in the loss of valuable property, pensions, bonuses, taxes, etc., can never be ascertained except approximately. It has been estimated that the United States, since 1865 until a few years after World War I, has paid no less than $14,500,000,000 in pensions alone. And that is only one item. The total cost is incalculable. But the World War of which we have spoken taught us that whatever it is, both parties are the losers. Both pay the price of blood. National hatreds are revived. Expenditures on account of armaments have been ruining both victors and vanquished, and it has been found that no restitution in cash or trade can be enforced without lessening the chances of prosperity everywhere.

Ether 14 1War is nothing but a curse!

Ether 14 8Verse 8

Ether 14 8Now the brother of Shared, whose name was Gilead. The first notable engagement of the great Jaredite war, after the death of Shared in the Valley of Gilgal, was fought in the sparsely-settled Wilderness of Akish. After Gilgal there was peace for two years. But at the expiration of that time, Gilead, the brother of Shared, attacked Coriantumr unsuccessfully, and fled to the Wilderness of Akish, closely pursued by his antagonist. This notable place of conflict must have been close to the border of Moron.

Ether 14 8Kish is a Jaredite word. It was also the name of an important city in Mesopotamia thousands of years ago. It is a Hebrew word, said to mean a "bow," or a "horn." It was the name of the father of King Saul. (I Samuel 9:1)

Ether 14 8For an account of Akish, the son of Kimnor, and the daughter of Jared, the son of Omer, See Ether 8:9-18 and 9:1-12. The Wilderness may have been his homeland and so named after him.

Ether 14 8The fortunes of war are always uncertain. In the first period of this war, Coriantumr lost a large part of his army, and also his throne. Gilead took charge of the government of Moron, and Coriantumr established himself in the Wilderness of Akish. Two years later, the brother of Shared was murdered by his chief ecclesiastical officer.

Ether 14 8Retaliation. The patriarchal law, given through Noah for the protection of human life, never revoked, is this: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made He man." (Genesis 9:6) In the case of this blasphemous murderer retaliation came before long. He was assassinated by another aspirant to the throne, Lib.

Ether 14 8Lib, and Coriantumr. Coriantumr attacked Lib in the Land of Moron with so much savage impetuosity that the false king, that is Lib, and his confused army fled "to the borders upon the sea shore," pursued by his antagonist. There Lib rallied and drove Coriantumr back to the Wilderness of Akish. On the Plains of Agosh the two armies again met.

SCEther 14 16Ether 14 17Ether 14 18Ether 14 19Ether 14 20Ether 14 21Ether 14 22Ether 14 23Ether 14 24Ether 14 25Ether 14 26Ether 14 27Verses 16-27

SCEther 14 16Ether 14 17Ether 14 18Ether 14 19Ether 14 20Ether 14 21Ether 14 22Ether 14 23Ether 14 24Ether 14 25Ether 14 26Ether 14 27Shiz, the brother of Lib, pursues Coriantumr. At the Battle of Agosh Lib fell (v. 16), but his brother took his place as commander of Lib's army, and the slaughter was continued until Coriantumr fled. The war now became a general massacre of men, women and children. The entire country was drenched in blood. A terrible battle was fought at the "borders of the sea shore."

SCEther 14 28Ether 14 29Ether 14 30Ether 14 31Verses 28-31

SCEther 14 28Ether 14 29Ether 14 30Ether 14 31Two Camps. After three days of carnage on the sea shore Shiz established his camp in the Valley of Corihor, while Coriantumr gathered his forces on the Hill Comnor, in the Valley of Shurr. Shiz attacked Coriantumr three times in vain. The loss of lives on both sides was terrific. Coriantumr was wounded and carried away as dead. But Shiz commanded his army not to risk further bloodshed at that particular time, then they also went into camp.

GILEAD

A Jaredite military commander who contended with Coriantumr for the throne. He succeeded his brother Shared in the command of the armies opposed to Coriantumr. Their first battle occurred in the wilderness of Akish, when many thousands were slain. Gilead remained for a time in the wilderness, watched by Coriantumr; but eventually he made a night attack on the enemy, and the latter, being drunken, suffered great loss. Gilead, then placed himself on the throne of Coriantumr, and both commanders busied themselves in gathering men to strengthen their respective armies. Gilead, who had the sympathy of some of the secret combinations, received great strength during the two years they were thus engaged but he was slain by his own high priest as he sat on the throne; an evidence of the intensely corrupt state of society among the Jaredites of that time (towards the close of the seventh century B.C.).

SHIZ

Shiz was the last of the great military commanders opposed to King Coriantumr in the final war between the Jaredite factions. Shiz was the brother of Lib, another mighty warrior who did battle with Coriantumr. In one of the many engagements fought duing this series of wars, Lib was slain and Shiz took command of his brother's forces and routed Coriantumr following him in quick pursuit from the Plains of Agosh where the battle took place, to the seashore. Shiz's march was one of horror and terror to the people along his way. As he swiftly pressed forward he destroyed everything within his reach, burning the cities and slaying their inhabitants, sparing neither man, woman or child as he swept along, and the cry of despair went up through all the land. "Who can stand before the army of Shiz?" So rapid were the movements of the contending armies that the slain remained unburied, and the stench from their rotting bodies filled the air with a devastating omen of coming pestilence. Those yet alive hastened to join one or the other of the contending hosts, either from predilection or because they were forced into its ranks. Shiz was filled with the spirit of murderous revenge. He swore that he would avenge the blood of his brother whom Coriantumr had slain. When he caught up with the latter's armies he threw himself upon them with all the energy that hatred inspires. The battle lasted for three days and ended in the repulse of Shiz, whose warriors fled to the Land of Corihor, sweeping off the inhabitants of the lands they passed through who would not join them.

In the Valley of Corihor, Coriantumr again sought battle. He challenged Shiz, from the Hill Comnor, by the sound of the trumpet, and Shiz was in no temper to disregard the summons. Twice Shiz attacked his over-confident foe with the hordes that followed him and twice he was repulsed. On the third occasion he bore so heavily upon Coriantumr that the latter was wounded and fainted from loss of blood. Their leader stricken, his motely following of old and young fell back, but Shiz was in no condition to take advantage of his victory. Both had lost so heavily that they were unable to renew the contest. Two millions of men, with their wives and children, had already fallen in this inhuman, relentless war.

At this point the heart of Coriantumr was touched with the miseries of his people, so he wrote to Shiz stating that he would surrender the Kingdom if the lives of his followers would be spared. Shiz's brutal soul was yet untouched, he replied that if Coriantumr would give himself up so that he (Shiz) might slay him with his own sword, he would spare the lives of the people. To this proposal, Coriantumr would not accede. With rekindled anger and hatred both armies prepared for renewed hostilities. Shiz was victorious in the battle and Coriantumr with his army retired to the neighborhood of the Great Lakes. Another furious battle followed and Coriantumr triumphed, while Shiz retreated southward to a place called Ogath, near the Hill Ramah. Here the two commanders gathered their hosts for the final struggle. All, babe and grandsire, men and women, had to join one side or the other. The spirit of bloody vengeance filled every heart. Into the trembling hands of the aged and the feeble grasp of children alike were thust the sword and spear, while shield and breastplate defended the body strong enough to bear their weights. When once begun, the dwindling fight kept on from day to day, while night was made hideous by the yells and lamentations, the curses and oaths of the survivors, who were frenzied with anger, even as a man is drunken with wine. Thus they fought, struggled and fell with utter exhaustion until one night there remained of all the soldiers of Coriantumr but fifty-two, and sixty-nine of the followers of Shiz. But they did not rest. The next morning or during the following day, thirty-two of the adherents of Shiz confronted twenty-seven of Coriantumr's. Next day the battle was continued until the remnants of the two great armies grew faint from exertion and loss of blood. After three hours' desperate fighting the men of Coriantumr attempted to flee, but Shiz and his warriors prevented them from doing so. And so they continued until the two commanders remained alone on the battlefield, all their followers having been slain, and Shiz, himself, had fainted. Then Coriantumr, having rested to gain sufficient strength, smote off the head of Shiz who in his dying throes raised himself on his hands and knees as if to renew the contest, fell over, struggled for breath and died.

LIB

A commander of the opposing forces to Coriantumr in the great series of wars that ended in the destruction of the Jaredite Race. In size, he was a giant, being the largest man in the nation. He was also high in authority among the members of the secret associations that at that time had almost unbounded power among the people. He came to the throne through the murder of his predecessor, having himself committed the vile deed. In the first year of his reign Coriantumr came up against him and drove his forces to the borders of the sea. In this battle, however, Lib and Coriantumr met in single combat, and the latter was severely wounded by his adversary. A second battle took place on the seashore in which Lib was victorious and his enemies retreated to the Wilderness of Akish and thence to the Plains of Agosh. Here Coriantumr made another stand and in the battle Lib was killed. His brother, Shiz, took command, continued the fight and obtained a decisive victory.

COMNOR

A hill near the Valley of Shurr, location unknown, but apparently nearer the Atlantic than the Pacific Seaboard of North America. In one of the last great wars that took place among the Jaredites, Coriantumr massed his soldiers upon this Hill, and there challenged them to battle, the armies of Shiz by the sound of trumpets. A series of battles then ensued which, in the end, resulted disastrously for Coriantumr.

AGOSH, PLAINS OF

A place, locality unknown, in North America, where a great battle was fought in the last Jaredite war. The commanders of the contending armies were Coriantumr and Lib. After a victory by the latter in the Wilderness of Akish, he pursued Coriantumr as far as the Plains of Agosh when another battle was joined in which Coriantumr was victorious and Lib was slain. Shiz, the brother of Lib, assumed command of the place his brother had held and attacked and defeated Coriantumr. Probably about B.C. 600.

CORIHOR

LAND AND VALLEY

The Land and Valley of Corihor was the scene of some of the most hotly-contested battles between Shiz and Coriantumr in the last great Jaredite war. Its locality is not known, but evidently on the northern continent. Shiz having failed to conquer Coriantumr and in turn was defeated by him, retreated to this valley, sweeping before him the inhabitants who would not join him. There his army pitched tents, and when the armies of Coriantumr were sufficiently rested, challenged Shiz. Three battles ensued. Shiz was, in the end victorious, but so weakened were his followers that they could not follow up their victory, and from sheer exhaustion ceased for a time.

AKISH, WILDERNESS OF

A place in North America, apparently not far from the Atlantic Coast. Here a severe battle was fought in the last great war which ended in the extinction of the Jaredite Nation. The conflict was between the armies of Gilead and Coriantumr, in which many thousands were slain. It appears to have been indecisive as Gilead remained in the wilderness and Coriantumr lay siege thereto. But one night Gilead unexpectedly sallied forth and slew a part of the army of his enemy, they being drunken. This, for the time being gave him the advantage. In a later campaign, after Gilead had been assassinated, a battle was fought between Coriantumr and Lib in which the latter was victorious, and the former fled to the Wilderness of Akish, but being pursued by Lib, Coriantumr continued his retreat to the Plains of Agosh where another desperate conflict occurred.
