Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 6 ( 1961)

CHAPTER 15

SCEther 15 1Ether 15 2Ether 15 3Ether 15 4Ether 15 5Verses 1-5

SCEther 15 1Ether 15 2Ether 15 3Ether 15 4Ether 15 5Coriantumr began to remember the words of Ether. The miserable monarch, slowly recovering from the ugly wounds of primitive weapons, found time to reflect upon the situation into which his country had been placed. The words of the prophets had been fulfilled. Two million mighty men, many with their wives and children, had perished during the insane conflict. The government had, of course, been neglected. No doubt, anarchy prevailed, and neither life nor property was safe. Sorrow filled the heart of the suffering king, and he refused to listen to false comforters. (v. 3) In this frame of mind he offered his rival, Shiz, the kingdom as the price of peace.

SCEther 15 1Ether 15 2Ether 15 3Ether 15 4Ether 15 5A generous proposition from his point of view, but had King Coriantumr abrogated his throne in favor of Shiz would it have righted any wrong already done? It appears that the legally-elected king was Coriantor, the father of Ether, and that he had been held as a prisoner all his life, presumably by Coriantumr. (Ether 1:7; 11:23) In that case Coriantumr ought to have set the prisoner free and placed him on the throne, a position Coriantor justly was entitled to. The kings of the Jaredites were elected by the people. They could not be made or unmade by politicians, nor by commanders of insurgent armies. (6:24-30)

SCEther 15 1Ether 15 2Ether 15 3Ether 15 4Ether 15 5Coriantumr began to remember. The words of the prophets, although rejected, were not lost on Coriantumr. His awakening conscience repeated them, and caused him to fear and tremble. Shiz, however, rejected the proposition. He demanded the life of Coriantumr.

SCEther 15 6Ether 15 7Ether 15 8Ether 15 9Verses 6-9

SCEther 15 6Ether 15 7Ether 15 8Ether 15 9The Waters of Ripliancum. The first onslaught of Shiz after the peace offer was rejected was so viciously violent that Coriantumr fled for his life. He halted at the Waters of Ripliancum, and prepared for defense. The name Ripliancum means large or to exceed all. Orson Pratt in early editions of the Book of Mormon remarks in a footnote: "Supposed to be Lake Ontario," but he does not indicate his authority for this. That some large inland lake is referred to is, however, probable. The unfortunate fugitive was closely pursued by his irreconciliable enemy, and in the conflict which ensued, he was again severely wounded.

SCEther 15 10Ether 15 11Ether 15 12Verses 10-12

SCEther 15 10Ether 15 11Ether 15 12Shiz defeated. The success of Shiz was of short duration. The forces of Coriantumr, determined to revenge the apparent loss of their leader, redoubled their efforts and drove Shiz and his supporters from the field. These fled to a place called Ogath, southward from the battlefield at the lake shore. (v. 10) This, Orson Pratt says: "Brought them into the region, near the Hill, called by the Nephites, Cumorah."

SCEther 15 10Ether 15 11Ether 15 12Coriantumr selected the country close by this Hill, which the Jaredites called Ramah, as his military headquarters. "It was there," Moroni says, "where my father, Mormon, did hide up the records unto the Lord, which were sacred." (v. 11)

SCEther 15 10Ether 15 11Ether 15 12There are now two great military camps, or headquarters, one at Ogath and one at Ramah. There the preparations were made for what was the last historic struggle.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Verses 13-32

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Elaborate Preparations. It took the two military leaders four years to prepare for the final duel. And then the end came.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32The Battle of Ramah lasted for eight days.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32First Day. The two forces engaged all day in their sanguinary butchery. At evening both were exhausted and retired. But before they closed their eyes in sleep, "they took up a howling and a lamentation for the loss of the slain of their people; and so great were their cries, their howlings and lamentations, that they did rend the air exceedingly." (vv. 15-16) The lines quoted should be noted, for they are important as evidence of the authenticity of the record.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Mourning, anciently, was an important and elaborate ceremony. When a person died, his relatives rent their garments and gave vent to their feelings in loud lamentations. Hired mourners often added to the noisy expressions of grief their own vocal efforts. (Jeremiah 9:17-19) It is absolutely certain that just such a scene as here described ended the day of death.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Second Day. The terrible slaughter continued, and the evening was again made hideous by noisy mourning.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Coriantumr again offered Shiz the Kingdom for peace, but the offer was rejected. "Satan had full power over the people." (vv. 17-19)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Third Day. The armies fought all day and retired without disarming themselves.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Fourth Day. By this time the armies fought as if they were drunken, or insane, in their anger. They did not disarm at night. (vv. 21-22)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Fifth Day. The battle was resumed, and at evening it was found that only fifty-two of the supporters of Coriantumr and sixty-nine of the people of Shiz survived. They slept on their arms. (vv. 23-24)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Sixth Day. In the evening of this day, Shiz had only thirty-two and Coriantumr but twenty-seven survivors. They prepared for death on the morrow. (vv. 24-26)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Seventh Day. After three hours of combat they were all exhausted. Coriantumr's men, although weak, endeavored to save themselves by flight, but Shiz prevented them doing so and swore that he would have the life of his enemy. (vv. 27-28)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Eighth Day. This day began with another grim struggle between the survivors. All died except the two principal actors of the drama. Shiz was lying in a stupor on the ground. Coriantumr was leaning for a moment's rest on his sword. After this short period of rest "he smote off the head of Shiz. And it came to pass that after he had smitten off the head of Shiz, that Shiz raised upon his hands and fell; and after he had struggled for breath, he died. And it came to pass that Coriantumr fell to the earth, and became as if he had no life." (vv. 29-32)

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32Unfriendly critics of the Book of Mormon have objected to this account of the death of Shiz as incredible. A decapitated human body cannot, in their opinion, have acted as here represented. The obvious reply is that the case may be exceptional, even unique, but that is not a reason why we should doubt the veracity, or accuracy, of the chronicler. Exceptions to well-known rules are of daily occurrence.

SCEther 15 13Ether 15 14Ether 15 15Ether 15 16Ether 15 17Ether 15 18Ether 15 19Ether 15 20Ether 15 21Ether 15 22Ether 15 23Ether 15 24Ether 15 25Ether 15 26Ether 15 27Ether 15 28Ether 15 29Ether 15 30Ether 15 31Ether 15 32But the question may be raised legitimately whether the fatal wound of Shiz consisted in the complete severance of the head from the body. Is that the fact that Moroni conveys? Coriantumr was almost exhausted when he perceived his victim on the ground. His primitive sword, which certainly was not keen Damascus blade, but must have become blunted during the preceding combat. Did Coriantumr, in his weak condition have physical strength enough to perform so great an operation with a blunt instrument? May we not rather suppose that the fatal wound which he inflicted on his enemy was a ghastly gash in the head, or the neck, causing Shiz to struggle for breath, as stated? Moroni could properly say: "He smote his head off," borrowing that expression from popular, colloquial language and using it in a figurative rather than strictly literal sense.

SCEther 15 33Ether 15 34Verses 33-34

SCEther 15 33Ether 15 34His work finished. Ether finished his record. That was part of his life's work, or mission. Then he left this "Last word,"

SCEther 15 33Ether 15 34"Whether the Lord will that I be translated, or that I suffer the will of the Lord in the flesh, it mattereth not, if it so be that I am saved in the Kingdom of God. Amen."

OGATH

A place in North America not far from the Hill Ramah, and consequently in the modern State of New York (Ether 15:10-11). Here Shiz, for four years, gathered those of the Jaredites, men, women, and children, who sympathized with his cause, and there prepared for the final struggle which ended in the utter destruction of the Jaredite Nation.

HILL RAMAH

The Jaredite name for the Hill Cumorah. In its immediate vicinity both the Jaredite and Nephite people were destroyed. Ramah is Rahath, Hebrew meaning hill Samson, after his battle with the Philistines, threw away his unique weapon, the jaw-bone of an ass, and called the place of combat Ramath-Lehi, "the Hill of Lehi."

THE JAREDITES

For some time after the deluge, how long neither revelation nor history informs us, the people of the whole earth were of the same language and had the same speech. And it so happened in the course of the years, that many journeyed from the east, and in their journey they found a plain in the Land of Shinar, [^1] and there they rested.

Then, we are told of them, they said one to another, Come, let us make brick and burn them thoroughly; for they had brick for stone and slime for mortar. They further decided to build a city, and in it a tower whose top would be high, nigh unto heaven.

Their reason for attempting to build this tower was, we are informed, they desired to make them a name lest they be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth. But the Lord came down, and beholding the tower which the children of men were building, He said, Behold the people are the same, and they all have the same language; and this tower they begin to build, and now, nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined, except I, the Lord, confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So I, the Lord, will scatter them abroad from thence, upon all the face of the land, and unto every quarter of the earth.

And they were confounded, and left off building the city. But they hearkened not to the Lord, therefore the name of it was called Babel, because the Lord was displeased with their works, and did there confound the language of all the earth, and from thence did He scatter them abroad upon its face.

There are widespread traditions which connect Nimrod, the grandson of Ham, with this tower. By some it is asserted he was the leader or king of the people who essayed to build it. Certainly it was not earlier than his day, for when Jared and his people first began their journey they passed northward into a valley named after this same Nimrod.

But the date that Nimrod dwelt on the earth is quite uncertain. Tradition has it that he was born to his father, Cush, in the latter's old age, and some Rabbinical and Mahometan traditions make him a contemporary of the Patriarch Abraham. As men in those early days lived to be several hundred years old, this is not impossible, though it would bring the confusion of tongues to a much later date than is given in the generally accepted chronologies.

Too much trust must not, however, be placed upon chronologies dealing with those times. Two varying ones, now before us, give the building of Babel at 2247 and 2207 B.C. respectively, and the birth of Abraham at B.C. 2056 and B.C. 1996. [^2] We incline to the opinion that the first named event occurred at a greater distance from the universal flood than is generally asserted.

Having no fixed date upon which we can depend for the confusion of tongues, we cannot with any exactness compute the length of time that the Jaredites occupied this continent. It also prevents us forming any trustworthy estimate of who among these people were the contemporaries of the Hebrew patriarchs and prophets and the Israelitish kings. When we reach the latter ages of their history we can form some slight idea by tracing backward from Coriantumr and Ether, who evidently lived at the same time as Lehi and Nephi, Zedekiah and Mulek. On the other hand, while Abraham and Jared may possibly have lived simultaneously on the earth, the probabilities, almost amounting to a certainty, are that Orihah, the son of Jared and the first king of the Jaredites, was either in his early or later years, a contemporary of the father of the faithful.

At first sight there appears to be a ready way by which a rough estimate can be formed of the dates when each and every one of the Jaredite kings lived. It is by comparing the genealogies given by Ether and Matthew. Matthew, in his genealogical list of the ancestors of the Savior gives twenty-eight generations from Abraham to the days of the Babylonish captivity; Ether gives twenty-nine generations from Orihah to himself, and he dwelt among mankind at the time that the king of Babylon carried the people of Judah captive. But the genealogy given by Matthew, as it has reached us, is open to so many questions, and disagrees so widely with other genealogies in which the same names are introduced, that it cannot be altogether trusted. The genealogy given by Mark names many more generations during that period, and consequently does not help us in making a comparison.

JARED AND HIS BROTHER

Among the builders of the Tower of Babel were two brothers, named respectively Jared and Mahonri Moriancumer. [^3] How they came to be associated with this impious work does not appear of record, and to make guesses is very unsatisfactory and also somewhat perplexing, as they were righteous men and furthermore held the Holy Priesthood, which authority was vested in the descendants of Shem, while the builders of the tower appear to have been the posterity of Ham, who were cursed in this regard. [^4] Abraham's family, however, dwelt in Ur [^5] of the Chaldees, which was not far distant. It is therefore not stretching the probabilities to suggest that they were of the same branch of Shem's posterity as was that Patriarch.

We judge from the record of Ether that the confusion of speech among the builders of the tower did not come upon them in an instant, suddenly, but developed somewhat gradually. As the disorder increased from the mutually unintelligible jargon, Jared and his brother held a consultation in which they decided to beg the Lord that He would not confound their words so that they could not understand each other. At Jared's request, his brother, who was highly favored of the Lord, was mouth in offering this petition. Their prayers were heard, their request was granted; the language of Jared and his brother and a few of their friends was not confused, and the original tongue which Noah spoke remained with them on the earth.

Again, at the instance of Jared, his brother pled before the Lord. This time he begged that if they were driven out of the land, as others were evidently scattering in anger and dismay, that the Lord would show them whither they should go. Because of their faith, a most gracious answer was given to their prayers. The Lord told them to gather their flocks, herds and substance, and with their families and friends start on a journey to a land to which He would lead them. Regarding this land He said, "I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the land of the earth; and there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth."

In obedience to this call the company started on their journey. Mahonri Moriancumer was appointed by the Lord to be their leader. At their head he guided them northward into a valley, known by the name of Nimrod. Here they made the final preparations for the toilsome and lengthy pilgrimage before them. Already they had gathered their flocks, male and female of every kind; and now they secured the fowls of the air, and made a vessel in which to carry fish. Swarms of honey bees, (known to them as deseret), also formed part of their outfit, while seeds of plants and trees of every kind were collected. The fact was they were going, under divine guidance, to a new land; or what amounted to the same to a land whose surface had been swept bare by the waters of the flood; it had been bereft of its animal life, and the seeds of grains and fruits no longer germinated in the soil, and they took with them everything they deemed desirable to restock it with animals and vegetables. Before the flood the American continents had been the home of humanity. When Noah's ark rested it was on a new continent. From that ark went forth the creatures who replenished the earth with animal life. Many of these, especially those useful to man, were brought back to this land by Jared's colony. They also brought with them fruits and grains good for food for man and beast.

When in the Valley of Nimrod, the Lord came down and talked with the brother of Jared. But the brother of Jared saw him not, for the Lord remained concealed in a cloud. And God directed that the company should go forth into the wilderness, into that quarter where man had never yet been. As they journeyed the Heavenly Presence went before them in the cloud, instructed them and gave directions which way they should travel. In the course of their journey they had many waters—seas, rivers and lakes, to cross, on which occasions they built barges, as directed by the Lord. [^6] It must have been an arduous labor, requiring much time and great patience to transport their flocks and herds, with all the rest of their cumbrous freight, across these many waters. As they advanced to a great distance from the center of population in western Asia, it is possible they traveled beyond the limits to which the larger animals had by that time scattered; and if so, they were entirely without the aid of the food obtained by the chase; on the other hand, it is probable that the fish in the lakes and rivers formed a valuable source of food supply; yet it must also be remembered they carried fish in a vessel with them.

Led by the Lord personally, instructed by His own mouth, protected by His presence, the colony at last reached the borders of the great sea which divides the continents. To the place where they tarried they gave the name Moriancumer. [^7] Here they remained for a period of four years, at the end of which time the Lord again visited the brother of Jared in a cloud, talked with him for the space of three hours, and chastened him and his brethren, because of their neglect to call upon His name. Repentance followed this reproof, and because of their repentance their sins were forgiven them.

The brother of Jared was then commanded by the Lord to build eight barges, after the same pattern as those he had previously constructed. This command he obeyed with the assistance of the company. The vessels were small, light in construction and water-tight.

These barges were so constructed that they were not only water-tight but almost air-tight and dark. They were thus compactly built that they might be able to withstand the force of the waves, when storms arose, and for the same reason the Lord permitted no windows to be cut in their sides. But He gave permission that the builders might make one hole in the top and another in the bottom of each barge, so that when the passengers began to suffer for air, the hole in the top could be opened and a fresh supply obtained. If it so happened that any water came pouring through this upper hole with the air, they could then unstop the lower hole and let it run out. The absence of windows or port holes would leave the people inside the boats in intense darkness, and as the Lord would not permit them, for some reason not given, to use artificial light, the brother of Jared felt deeply concerned to know what they should do to get over this difficulty. For it was evident that the discomforts of a long and stormy voyage would be almost unbearable in vessels filled with men, women and children, birds, beasts, insects and fishes, if they were compelled to make it in utter darkness. It is almost impossible to conceive the miseries and in all probability consequent disease, to say nothing of accidents that would doubtless happen, if they had to make the voyage without light. So Mahonri Moriancumer went up to a high mountain called Shelem, and did moulten out of the rock sixteen small, transparent stones, which had the appearance of glass. These he spread out before the Lord with an earnest and pathetic prayer that He would touch them. Said he, in part:

"Behold, O Lord, thou hast smitten us because of our iniquity, and hath driven us forth, and for this many years we have been in the wilderness; nevertheless, thou hast been merciful unto us. O Lord, look upon me in pity, and turn away thine anger from this thy people, and suffer not that they shall go forth across this raging deep in darkness, but behold these things which I have moulten out of the rock. And I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man; therefore touch these stones, O Lord, with thy finger, and prepare them that they may shine forth in darkness; and they shall shine forth unto us in the vessels which we have prepared, that we may have light while we shall cross the sea."

This prayer, so simple, so fervent and so full of faith, was immediately answered. The Lord stretched forth his finger and touched the stones one by one, and as he touched them they shone with such exceeding brilliancy that the light they shed forth was afterwards sufficient to lighten all the barges, when one was placed at the fore and another in the aft of each vessel.

When the Lord put forth His finger the faith of the brother of Jared was so great, that his eyes were opened, the veil was removed from before them, and to his surprise he beheld the finger of God and that it was like unto that of a man. For before this he had not understood that man was made in the image of God. Then summoning courage, when he found that the hand of the Lord did not smite him, but instead thereof he heard words of encouragement and commendation, he begged the Lord to show Himself unto him. And because of his faith the Lord did so, and told him that He it was who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem His people; that He was Jesus Christ, in whom all mankind should have light, and that eternally. Further He said:

"Behold, this body which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit, will I appear to my people in the flesh."

And then, as Moroni informs us, Jesus administered unto the brother of Jared, "even as he ministered unto the Nephites."

All things being prepared, Jared and his people, with their animals, fishes, bees, seeds and multitudinous other things, went on board; a strong, yet favorable wind wafted them from shore, and they gradually crossed to the American coast. At the end of a somewhat stormy voyage of three hundred and forty-four days the colony reached this continent. It is generally understood that the place where they landed was south of the Gulf of California and north of the land called Desolation by the Nephites, which was north of the Isthmus of Panama. [^8]

No sooner had the people of Jared landed than they humbled themselves before the Lord, many of them shedding tears of joy because of the multitude of His tender mercies in bringing them so safely to this new land of promise. Their next duty was to prepare for the future. They commenced to till the soil and perform the other labors incidental to founding a new home. In these efforts they prospered greatly. They began to grow and increase in numbers and in wealth; and even better than this, they were a righteous people, being taught directly from on high.

RULERS OF THE JAREDITES

In the course of time Jared and his brother grew old, and perceiving that their mortal lives were nearly finished, the latter proposed that they gather the people, number them, give them necessary teachings, and learn their wishes. This was done; but to the grief of the brother of Jared, the people desired that a king be anointed to rule over them. He saw, by the spirit of prophecy, that this action would lead to many evils, and he was inclined to refuse their request, but Jared pled that the wishes of the people be granted, and his brother finally consented. It was the first step in the wrong direction, and led to much sin, misery, contention and captivity. The people having the privilege granted them, chose Pagag, [^9] the eldest son of their prophet. But he resolutely refused the honor, sensing, perhaps, the evils which would follow the adoption of this form of government. The people desired that his father should compel him, but he would not do so, and commanded that they should constrain no man to be their king. The result was that all of Pagag's brothers and three of the four sons of Jared followed his example, and when chosen refused to accept the proffered dignity; at last, Orihah, the fourth son of Jared, accepted.

Soon after this assembling of the people the brother of Jared died, full of years and honor. Like Enoch, he had been privileged to enter the presence of the Lord, and to have revealed to him the history of the world in all its generations. He was also a seer, having received the priceless gift of a Urim and Thummim. His faith was never exceeded by the sons of men; he laid hold of the promises of the Almighty with unshaken confidence. By that faith he performed miracles; Moroni tells us that by its power he "said unto the mountain Zerin, [^10] remove, and it was removed," (Ether 12:30) but of the circumstances that attended this manifestation of divine power, we have not the slightest details. The brother of Jared is also said to have been "mighty in writing"; the uncorrupted language which he used being unquestionably most favorable for expressing niceties of thought in written characters. He was a "large and mighty man" in personal appearance, and undoubtedly as strong in his integrity to God, and in his moral courage, as he was in physical characteristics. Altogether, we deem him one of the greatest prophets and leaders of God's people that ever graced this earth. He left behind him twenty-two sons and daughters.

About this time Jared died also, and was buried in the Land Moron. Of Jared's private character we are told but little, but he appears to have been more conservative, more pliable and less energetic than his brother. The race was named after him, we presume, because one of his sons became its first king, and Jared's thus became the royal family. Jared had four sons and eight daughters: the names of his sons were Jacom, Gilgah, Mahah and Orihah. The names of his daughters are not given.

Orihah, [^11] the first king of the Jaredites, reigned in righteousness, executing judgment in justice, walking humbly before heaven and instructing his subjects in the ways of the Lord. He lived to a very great age, was the father of thirty-one children, twenty-three of whom were sons, and when he died he was succeeded on the throne by his son Kib. The Jaredites prospered and multiplied greatly under his wise and beneficent reign.

Kib was born in his father's old age, and therefore would, in all probability, be quite young when he became king. The early years of his reign appear to have been peaceful and prosperous. But he had an ambitious son, named Corihor, who became the first to fulfill the gloomy forebodings of the brother of Jared that the establishment of a monarchy would lead to trouble, bloodshed and captivity. When Corihor was thirty-two years old he rebelled against his father, and went from Moron and established himself in the Land of Nehor. There he drew many to him; when strong enough he invaded the Land of Moron, took the king, his father, captive and reigned in his stead. Kib remained in captivity many years, but during that time he had born to him a son, who he named Shule. When Shule grew to manhood he became mighty in judgment and bodily strength, and being angry with his brother, Corihor, for rebelling against their father, he raised an army, armed them with swords made by himself, gave battle to his brother at a city named Nehor, defeated the latter's forces and restored their father to the throne. Kib, being very aged, placed the sovereign power in the hands of Shule who reigned in righteousness and extended the borders of his growing people in all directions. Corihor, repentant of his former treason, received many favors from Shule and was placed in high power in the nation, the trusts whereof he faithfully performed. But as he had rebelled against his father in his early days, so in like manner one of his sons, named Noah, rebelled against him and against the king, and in this rebellion drew away all his brothers. At first, Noah was successful. He obtained possession of the Land of Moron, and reigned king in that region of Central America. Again he attacked Shule, and this time took him prisoner, carrying him captive to Moron, with the intention of putting him to death. But before he had carried out his bloodthirsty design, his cousins, the sons of Shule, broke into his house and killed the usurper. They then went to the prison, where their father was held, released him from his confinement and replaced him on the throne of that part of the country now retained by Cohor, the son of Noah.

There were now two kingdoms, both of which were growing, while that one under the government of Shule "did prosper exceedingly and waxed great." After a time Cohor commenced war with Shule, in which he was deservedly unsuccessful, and in the conflict which ensued, he was slain. Cohor was succeeded by his son Nimrod, who, apparently deeming Shule the rightful monarch of the whole country, gave up his kingdom to him; thus once again uniting the entire Jaredite people in one nation, under one king. For this act and for his faithful allegiance, Nimrod found favor in the eyes of Shule, and he had authority given him to do "according to his desires" in the latter's kingdom.

Though the Jaredites were highly prospered at this time, they gave way to idolatry and grew hard in their hearts. This condition was no doubt intensified by the bad example of the reigning family and the miseries and cruelties of the wars which their quarrels brought about. During Shule's days the Lord sent many prophets to this people, who warned them of His impending judgments. For a time these prophets were rejected and reviled. But the king made a law that the prophets should have free access wherever they wished to go, and further decreed a punishment for all those who persecuted and reviled them. The preaching of these holy men eventually brought the Jaredites to repentance, and because of their penitance the Lord spared them and turned away His judgments, and the people prospered again. In his old age Shule begat Omer, who succeeded him on the throne. Shule's days were full of trouble and sorrow, but he reigned in righteousness, was faithful to the Lord, and executed judgment in justice towards his subjects.

KINGS OF THE JAREDITES

Shule was succeeded by his son Omer, one of the best and, in some respects, one of the most unfortunate monarchs who reigned over the Jaredites. Amongst his children was a son named Jared. This prince rebelled against his father, and by his flatteries led away the people of half the kingdom. He then gave battle to his father and took him prisoner, holding him in servitude half his days. While thus in bondage Omer begat several children, among whom were two sons named Esrom and Coriantumr. When these young men grew to manhood they espoused the cause of their father, raised an army, attacked the forces of Jared by night and utterly routed them. Jared retained his life by renouncing his rights to the throne, and Omer was reinstated in the kingly authority. But Jared's ambition would not remain dormant. He sighed and wearied for the kingly authority, until his unrest became marked by all. He had a daughter who shared her father's feelings, and at her instigation he sent for a friend of Omer's named Akish, through whom he hoped to regain the throne. An entertainment of some kind, by which Jared's daughter could be introduced, was given. By pre-arrangement with her father, she danced before Akish, and so exhibited the beauties of her person and the graces of her movements that he became desperately enamored of her. As she anticipated, Akish asked Jared to give her to him as a wife. The latter consented, but on most revolting conditions. The father and daughter had planned that the price of her hand was to be the head of her grandfather, the king.

Akish accepted this terrible responsibility. He gathered his associates at the house of Jared and there made them all swear by the God of heaven, and by the heavens, by the earth and by their heads, that whoso should vary from what he desired should lose his head, and whoso should divulge whatever he made known should lose his life. He then submitted his plans to them, which they accepted. The plot was so far successful that they overthrew the kingdom of Omer, but did not succeed in obtaining his head. For the Lord was merciful to Omer and warned him to depart out of the land. So taking those of his family who were faithful to him, he traveled for a great distance to a land called Ablom, on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean. There he and his companions tarried until the course of events permitted him to return.

Jared was again proclaimed king and Akish became his son-in-law. Soon the latter coveted the royal dignity; possibly the woman who plotted the death of her grandfather was willing to sacrifice her father also that she might be queen; such a supposition is not improbable. At any rate, Jared was slain on his throne while giving audience to his people, by some of the members of the secret society of assassins that he had been the means of calling into existence; and Akish reigned in his stead.

Under the cruel rule of Akish wickedness became almost universal; the secret societies by which he obtained power had corrupted the hearts of all the people. As may be well supposed, with such a condition of society his throne was not a stable one. He became jealous of one of his sons. What cause, if any, he had therefor, we are not told; but he shut him up in prison and slowly starved him to death. This cruel act greatly incensed another of Jared's sons, named Nimrah, and he, gathering a small number of men, fled to the exiled king, Omer, in the Land Ablom.

Now, Akish had other sons, and though they had sworn to support him in all his doings, they were not true to their oaths. They found that the hearts of the Jaredites were consumed with the love of gain, and they bribed the greater portion of the people to join them in a revolt against their father. So corrupt had the people now become that their extinction appears to have been the only remedy; they were past repentance.

A war of the most horrible character broke out, which lasted several years, and only ended when nearly every soul was slain. Of the kingdom of Akish, for which he had sinned so much, there remained but thirty souls, all the rest—men, women and children—had been swept by bloody hands into untimely graves. The people of Akish having been thus destroyed, Omer, with his friends, returned from his captivity and reigned over the feeble remnant of a wasted people. He lived to be exceedingly old, and two years before his death he anointed his son Emer to reign in his stead. His days were many and full of sorrow.

Thus has gross iniquity brought the almost entire destruction of the Jaredite race. The words of God through their forefathers had been fulfilled, that whatsoever people dwelt on this land should serve the true and living God. The few who were left had to commence the peopling of the western world anew. What a sorrowful, gloomy existence theirs must have been. Their cities tenantless, the open country deserted, and they for mutual comfort huddling together in one neighborhood, all the rest of the land but one vast sepulchre—desolation and a howling wilderness everywhere.

KINGS OF THE JAREDITES, CONTINUED

Emer, the son of Omer, was one of the best kings of his race, he executed judgment in righteousness all his days. In his reign the people greatly increased in numbers and in wealth, becoming the owners of large herds of useful animals, and rich in agricultural and mineral products, in gems and fine manufactured goods. The curse, also, which had come upon the land during the days of Akish, because of the iniquity of the people, began to be removed as they were now living more righteously. Emer's was a lengthy reign; sixty-two years are mentioned; but it is not evident whether this period covers the whole of his reign or not. When he died, full of years and honor, he was succeeded by one of his numerous sons, named Coriantum, whom he had anointed king four years before his death. It is recorded of Emer that he saw the Son of Righteousness, and did rejoice in His day.

Coriantum was a righteous, just and vigorous ruler, and in his days the Jaredites were greatly prospered and many large cities were built. But he had no children until he was exceedingly old; his wife died when she was one hundred and two years of age, after which he married a young maid, who bore him sons and daughters. He lived until he was one hundred and forty-two years old, when he died, and was succeeded on the throne by his son Com.

Com was evidently born when his father was very aged. He ascended the throne with the prospects of a bright future; but the leaven of iniquity was again beginning to work. Great prosperity, with attendant riches, was alienating the hearts of the Jaredites from God. During the peaceful and lengthy reign of Emer and Coriantum they had increased marvelously in numbers and during Com's reign this increase continued and they spread far and wide over the continent.

Com had not been long on the throne before the old murderous associations, that had well nigh destroyed the race in the days of his great-grandfather, Omer, were revived. In the forty-ninth year of his reign he had a son born whom he named Heth. This son when he grew to manhood became a leader in these unholy societies. He rose in rebellion against his father, slew him with his own sword, and became king in his stead. The Lord then sent many prophets, who called upon the people to repent, declaring that if they did not, a desolating famine should oversweep the land. The people, led and inspired by the parricide, Heth, rejected the warning of the servants of God, and cruelly abused them, some they cast out, some they threw into pits and left them to perish. Before long the rains from heaven ceased, and there was a great drouth over all the land; and poisonous serpents made their appearance and killed many people. These serpents also attacked the flocks of the Jaredites and drove them in vast bodies towards the southern continent. Many perished by the way, but some reached the land known to the Nephites as Zarahemla. Restrained by the power of God, the serpents stopped at the Isthmus of Panama, where they formed a cordon, preventing the Jaredites from further following their scattered flocks. The carcasses of the beasts which fell by the way were revenously eaten by the famished people, until they had devoured them all. We can scarcely imagine the horrors that must have attended this famine, when the people consumed the poisoned flesh of the creatures thus killed. Disease in its most terrible forms must have followed famine. Before long even this loathsome food was all consumed and the people rapidly perished. Thus a second time was the race almost utterly destroyed. God's word was again vindicated—the people of this land must serve Him or they would be consumed by His judgments. In Omer's day it was fratricidal war that accomplished the purpose; in Heth's, famine and pestilence were the weapons of God's wrath.

When thus brought to the brink of the grave, the few that remained turned in their utter misery to heaven. When they had sufficiently humbled themselves the Lord sent the long-needed rain, and the remnants began to revive. Soon there began to be fruit in the north country and the regions round about. All the royal family had perished except Shez, a son or descendant [^12] of Heth, who, when the crops again began to grow, commenced to build up his desolate race. He was a virtuous man, and taught his people righteousness, and the sun of prosperity shone upon them. His peace, however, was marred by the treason of his son Shez, who rebelled against him. This son, however, was slain by a robber, and peace was restored. In the later years of his lengthy reign, Shez built many cities, and the rapidly increasing people spread out in various directions. This monarch lived to an exceeding old age, was blessed with numerous children, and when he died was succeeded on the throne by his son Riplakish, who was apparently the youngest of his family.

Riplakish was unfortunately an unrighteous man. He greatly afflicted his people by imposing upon them grievously heavy taxes, and when they could not, or would not pay these exactions he cast them into prison, where he compelled them to labor continually to sustain him in his whoredoms and abominations, and in the erection of costly and magnificent edifices that conduced to his luxury; if any prisoner refused to labor he was put to death. In this way he greatly adorned his kingdom, but he also filled it with prisons. For forty-two years the people groaned under his oppressions, when they rose in their anger, slew Riplakish and drove his descendants out of the land. What form of government immediately followed is uncertain, we have no information on this point, but we are told that after many years one of his descendants, named Morianton, gathered an army of outcasts and invaded the Jaredite country.

The war that followed was an exceedingly severe one, and lasted a number of years. One by one the cities of the Jaredites fell into the hands of Morianton, until he had made himself master of the entire country. When established in power, he conciliated the people by lightening their burdens, so that they anointed him king. During his mild though energetic reign the people were greatly prospered, many new cities were built, and the nation grew exceedingly rich. He lived to a very great age, and when too old to hold the reigns of government, he abdicated in favor of his son Kim, Morianton surviving this action for eight years. His character is thus summarized in the Book of Ether: "He did do justice unto the people, but not unto himself, because of his many whoredoms; wherefore he was cut off from the presence of the Lord."

KINGS OF THE JAREDITES, CONTINUED

As stated previously, Kim reigned for eight years before his father's death. He, however, did not reign in righteousness, and by his wickedness he displeased the Lord, so that He permitted the brother of the monarch to rebel against him, dethrone him and hold him in captivity all the remainder of his life. During his captivity Kim begat sons and daughters, the only one of whom whose name is mentioned is Levi, who was born to him in his old age.

Levi remained in captivity until forty-two years after the death of his father, when he rose in rebellion against his uncle, who occupied the throne, deposed him, and reigned in his stead. During his reign he did right in the sight of the Lord, and his people were greatly prospered. He lived to a good old age, was blessed with a large family, and when he died his son Corum succeeded him as king.

Corum was one of the most righteous of the Jaredite kings. It is said of him that he did good all his days, and they were many upon the earth. Nothing is told us of the events of this reign in the sacred records, so it is consistent to believe that no very important social convulsions marred the kingdom's peace. When crowned with the glory of many well-spent years Corum passed away to his reward, leaving numerous sons and daughters to emulate his example. One of these sons, named Kish, then came to the throne. Of the events of his reign and of his character, not a word is said. All that is recorded is that he reigned and died.

Lib was the son and successor of Kish. In his beneficent reign the nation prospered and multiplied greatly. As will be recollected in the reign of a former monarch, named Heth, the Lord had deeply afflicted the people because of their sins; and among other things He had caused numbers of poisonous serpents to occupy the regions adjacent to the Isthmus of Panama, and thus prevented the people from gaining access to the southern continent. In Lib's reign these venomous creatures were destroyed and the land southward was found to abound with beasts of the forest. That region was preserved as one enormous hunting ground for the nation, Lib himself becoming a mighty hunter. He also built a large city near the narrowest portion of the isthmus, apparently for the purpose of preventing an exodus into the regions south, so that it might be the source of their meat supply, for the country northward was covered with inhabitants.

In this reign the people greatly developed in the arts of civilization, they prosecuted mining with much vigor, improved in the manufacture of textile fabrics, agriculture made marked advance through the invention and application of improved machinery in the cultivation of the earth and the harvesting of their crops. They also made all manner of weapons of war, though, as this was a time of profound peace, this can only be regarded as a precautionary measure. In fact, to use the words of the sacred historian: "never could be a people more blessed than were they, and more prospered by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land that was choice above all lands, for the Lord had spoken it." Lib lived many years, was blessed with a numerous posterity, and when he died he was succeeded by his son Hearthom.

When Hearthom had reigned twenty-four years the kingdom was wrested from him, and he was held in captivity by the triumphant party all the remainder of his days. In his captivity he begat a son named Heth. Heth was held in captivity all his days by the usurping dynasty; and so was his son Aaron, his grandson Amnigaddah, and his great-grandson Coriantum.

Of the history of the Jaredites under the new dynasty we have not a glimmer of light. They were not of the ancestry of Ether, the historian, and he treats them with silent disregard. We are not told if the monarchs of this family were righteous or wicked, if the people prospered or diminished. The record simply confines itself to the genealogy of Hearthom until it reaches Com, the son of Coriantum, when a few meager statements are given.

In Com's days the reigning monarch was named Amgid. Com, like his predecessors, was born in captivity. How he managed to obtain his liberty and inaugurate a successful rebellion is not told. But when he attained manhood "he drew away half the kingdom." When he had thus reigned forty-two years he made war with Amgid, and after a desolating conflict of many years he gained power over the whole realm. While he was king, robber bands, like the Gadiantons among the Nephites, began to appear, who administered secret and damnable oaths, after the manner of the ancients, and sought again to destroy the kingdom. Com fought these robbers with vigor, but without success, for they had the sympathy of the masses of the people, who were rapidly ripening for destruction. Many prophets came in these days, who foretold the impending destruction of the race, if the people did not repent and turn unto the Lord. But the voice of mercy and warning was rejected, and sin-sunken Jaredites sought the lives of the heaven-inspired messengers. The prophets fled to Com for preservation, and he appears to have valiantly protected them. While with him they prophesied many things for his comfort and edification, and he was blessed of the Lord all the remainder of his days. He lived to a great age, and begat Shiblom, who at his death reigned in his stead. [^13]

In Shiblom's [^14] day, because of the iniquity of the people many prophets appeared and foretold the woes that would attend the extinction of the race. Wars and grievous calamities also marked the reign of Shiblom. First, his brother inaugurated a bloody civil war, which extended throughout all the land. The wicked combinations, akin to the Gadianton robbers, did their part to render anarchy more complete. Famine and pestilence followed rapine, until "there was a great destruction, such an one as never had been known upon the face of the earth." In the extreme of their misery and degradation, the people began to repent and then the Lord had mercy upon them. Finally Shiblom was slain and Seth, his son, was brought into captivity. Of Shiblom's private character we have no record; but his rebellious brother issued the infamous mandate that all the prophets who prophesied of the destruction of the people should be put to death.

Seth was held in captivity all his life, but his son, Ahah, regained the kingdom and reigned over the people until his death. He did all manner of iniquity, by which he caused the shedding of much blood, but providentially his reign was but a short one. His son, Ethem, succeeded him.

In Ethem's days many prophets came and prophesied that unless the Jaredites repented the Lord would utterly destroy them from the earth. But the people hardened their hearts and repented not; and the prophets mourned over their depravity and withdrew from among them. Ethem was as his people, and did wickedly all his days; and when he died he was succeeded by his son Moron, who was like unto his father.

During Moron's reign the Gadianton-like bands which at that time flourished among the Jaredites, led a rebellion against the king and succeeded in wresting from him half the kingdom; but after many years Moron succeeded in recovering his lost provinces. Soon after, a descendant of the brother of Jared, who is described as "a mighty man," headed another revolution against Moron, and was so successful that he took possession of the whole of the kingdom, and held Moron in captivity all the rest of his days. In captivity Moron begat Coriantor.

Coriantor, son of Moron, was held a prisoner all his days. This period of Jaredite history is a particularly sad one; it is an epoch of sin and war. Many prophets appeared, who proclaimed that the Lord would execute judgment against the Jaredites to their utter destruction, and that He would bring forth another people to possess the land, as he had their fathers; but the people rejected all the words of these servants of God, "because of their secret societies and wicked abominations"; nevertheless, in that and the succeeding generation these prophecies were all fulfilled—the Jaredites were destroyed and the land was given to a branch of the house of Israel.

Coriantor was the father of the Prophet Ether.

THE FINAL WAR OF EXTINCTION

We now come to Coriantumr, the last of the Jaredites. We are introduced to him as king of all the land, but we are not told how long he had been so. At any rate, he must have then been of middle age, for he had sons old enough to fight in his defense. He was a mighty man of war, cunning and bold, diplomatic and learned, but withal, like the great majority of his people, exceedingly corrupt. He was as fit an instrument to execute the wrath of God as ever led a debased and decaying race to slaughter and destruction. But before the great crisis came, God in His mercy, sent another messenger to warn the Jaredites for the last time, of their impending doom, their utter desolation. This messenger was Ether, the son of Coriantor. Few greater prophets than he have graced our earth, few have had so sad, so terrible a tale to tell of human depravity, of divine mercies despised, of the overwhelming retribution that followed.

Great and marvelous were the prophecies of Ether. He saw the days of Christ, and the great work of the last dispensation, even to the coming of the New Jerusalem. Indeed, he appears to have had revealed to him a complete history of the dealings of the Lord with the inhabitants of this earth, from his own day to the end of time. He also proclaimed the near destruction of the entire Jaredite race (a prophecy which many of his predecessors uttered) with this exception, that Coriantumr should outlive all his subjects and meet another race whom God had brought to occupy the land. But the people heeded not his words, and ultimately grew weary of his threatenings and drove him from their midst. He hid himself in a cavity of a rock, coming forth in the night time to view the course of events, and occasionally appearing and repeating his warnings.

In the first year of Ether's concealment a war commenced which grew to be one of the most bloodthirsty, savage and vindictive that ever cursed this fair planet. It began in a powerful revolution against Coriantumr led by some of the most influential men in the kingdom, who were leaders of the secret, Gadianton-like bands that overspread the nation. In that year much blood was spilt, Coriantumr's own sons being among the foremost in the defense of their father's rights.

There was then a lull in the tempest for a short time, the combatants rested to gain strength, and Ether again came forth to plead the cause of heaven in their deadened ears. It was then that he announced the strange message regarding Coriantumr's preservation. But the people heeded not his warnings but sought to slay him, and he again retired to his place of concealment.

The next year, a leader of the revolutionists named Shared of whom no previous mention is made, defeated Coriantumr, and held him a prisoner. In the fourth year, the sons of Coriantumr released their father and placed him again on the throne. Then bloodshed extended over all the continent, every man with his band, fighting for that which he desired. The war at this period would seem to have grown beyond the control of the great leaders, and to have degenerated into a condition of affairs in which every man's hand was against his neighbor, and mobs instead of disciplined armies, carried bloodshed and devastation far and wide, throughout the land. Bands of brigands and robbers committed all manner of outrages, and the country was a scene of anarchy and horror from one end to the other. After a time Coriantumr, being exceedingly angry, gathered his forces and met Shared in the Valley of Gilgal. [^15] The fight which lasted three days, was a desperate and stubborn one. Shared was beaten and retreated as far as the Plains of Heshlon, where he again withstood Coriantumr, and this time was victorious, driving his foe back to their former battleground—the Valley of Gilgal. Here another fierce battle was fought, in which Shared was slain and his troops defeated.

In his last battle with Shared, Coriantumr was so severely wounded that he did not go to battle again for two years, during which time the people in all the land were shedding blood, and there was none to restrain them. Two years after Shared's death his brother Gilead rose up to take his place. But he was defeated by Coriantumr and his forces driven into the Wilderness of Akish, where another exceedingly bloody battle was fought, and many thousands were slain. Gilead remained for a time in the wilderness, watched by Coriantumr; but eventually he made a night attack on the enemy, and the latter, being drunken, suffered great loss. Gilead then placed himself on the throne of Coriantumr, and both commanders busied themselves in gathering men to strengthen their respective armies. Gilead who had the sympathy of some of the secret combinations, received great strength during the two years they were thus engaged, but he was slain by his own high priest as he sat on the throne; an evidence of how intensely corrupt society among the Jaredites had, at that time grown.

If we understand the record aright, this murderous high priest assumed the kingly authority. But he held it only a few short weeks or months for the same fate befell him that he had brought upon his predecessor. He was assassinated in a lonely pass, by a member of one of the dominant secret societies who desired to be king. This murderer was named Lib. He was a giant in size, being the largest man in the kingdom.

In the first year of his reign, Coriantumr came up against him, and drove his forces to the borders of the sea. In this battle, however, Lib and Coriantumr met in single combat, and the latter was severely wounded by his adversary. A second battle took place on the seashore in which Lib was victorious, and the enemy retreated to the wilderness of Akish, [^16] and thence to the Plains of Agosh. [^17] Here Coriantumr made another stand, and in the battle that ensued Lib was killed.

Lib slain, his brother Shiz, assumed command of his forces. He completely routed Coriantumr, following him in quick pursuit from the Plains of Agosh, where the battle took place, to the seashore. His march was one of horror and terror to the people. As he swiftly pressed forward, he destroyed everything within his reach, burning the cities and slaying their inhabitants, sparing neither man, woman nor child as he swept along, and a cry of despair went up through all the land, "Who can stand before the army of Shiz? Behold, he sweepeth the earth before him!" So rapid were the movements of the contending armies, that the slain remained unburied, and the stench from their bodies filled the air with pestilence. Those yet alive hastened to join one or the other of the contending hosts, either from predilection or because they were crowded into the ranks. The pursuit did not stop until Coriantumr was forced back across the continent to the seashore. Here they fought for three days, when Coriantumr's star was again in the ascendant, and he drove Shiz back to the Land of Corihor. [^18]

In the Valley of Corihor, Coriantumr again sought battle. He challenged Shiz from the Hill Comnor [^19] by the sound of the trumpet, and Shiz was in no temper to disregard the challenge. Twice he attacked his over-confident foe, with the horde of men, women and children who followed his banner, and twice he was repulsed. On the third occasion he bore so heavily upon Coriantumr that the latter was wounded and fainted from the loss of blood. Their leader stricken, his motley following of old and young fell back; but Shiz was in no condition to take advantage of his victory. At this time some four or more years before the final battles around and near the Hill Ramah, two millions of warriors had been slain besides their wives and children. How many millions actually fell before the last terrible struggle ended, when Coriantumr stood alone, the sole representative of his race, it is impossible to tell from the record that has been handed down to us, but we think we are justified in believing that for bloodshed and desolation no such war ever took place before, or ever occurred since in the history of this world; if the annals of any nation have the record of its equal, it is not known to us.

When Coriantumr sensed how great was the slaughter of the people, he wrote to Shiz, offering to withdraw from the conflict that bloodshed might cease. But Shiz refused, unless Coriantumr surrendered, that Shiz might have the gratification of slaying him himself. So the war was renewed with intensified bitterness. Shiz was victorious and the defeated army fled as far as the Waters of Ripliancum. [^20] In this region another hotly contested battle was fought, in which Coriantumr was once again severely wounded, but his troops were the victors. Shiz retreated southward to a place called Ogath, near the Hill Ramah. There the two commanders rested for four years while they gathered their hosts for the final struggle. All, babe and grandsire, man and woman, had to join one side or the other. The spirit of bloody vengeance filled every heart. Into the trembling hands of age and the feeble grasp of infancy alike were thrust the sword and spear, while shield and breastplate defended the body strong enough to bear their weight. There, filled with the spirit of demons, they confronted each other, and when once the dwindling fight began it continued from day to day, while night was made hideous by the yells and lamentations, the curses and oaths of the survivors, who were frenzied with anger, even as men are drunken with wine. Thus they fought, struggled and fell, until one night there remained of all the race but fifty-two of the people of Coriantumr and sixty-nine of the followers of Shiz. But they rested not. The next evening, thirty-two of the adherents of Shiz confronted twenty-seven of Coriantumr's. Next day the battle was continued, until the remnants grew faint from exertion and loss of blood. After three hours' desperate fighting the men of Coriantumr attempted to flee, but Shiz and his warriors prevented them. And so they continued until the two commanders remained alone in the field, all their followers having been slain, and Shiz himself, had fainted. Then Coriantumr having rested to gain sufficient strength, smote off the head of Shiz, who in his dying throes raised himself on his hands and knees as if to renew the contest, fell over, struggled for breath and died. [^21]

THE PEOPLE OF MULEK

Shiz slain, Coriantumr stood alone, the last of the hosts of the Jaredites. Probably the horrors of his solitary condition then took possession of his mind and overcame him, for we are told that he "fell to the earth and became as if he had no life." It is difficult to conceive the agonies of his soul as he reviewed the scenes of turmoil, carnage and woe which had ended in the destruction of his race; and combined with these mental throes was the fact that he was weak from excessive exertion and excitement, and from the loss of blood by reason of wounds received. By and by he came to himself again, and then he wandered forth the sole remnant of a continent. Companions he had none; they all had moistened earth's soil with their life's blood. The savage beasts alone remained to terrify him with their hideous cries as they held high carnival over the bodies of the unnumbered slain. Whither should he go? It mattered little, there were none to bid him tarry or depart. Aimlessly he staggered on, passing through each deserted valley, each tenantless town; in neither was there a human voice to greet or curse him; the homes of his own people and those of his enemies were alike—a silent desolation; all the land was a wilderness.

How long Coriantumr wandered to and from, wretched, comfortless and forlorn, we know not; but at last he reached the southern portions of the northern continent, and there to his great surprise, and doubtless to theirs also, he found the people of Mulek. [^22] With them he spent his few remaining days, and when nine moons had waxed and waned, he passed away to join the hosts of his people in the spirit world.

Coriantumr's solitary pilgrimage of so many hundred miles has appeared to some almost an impossibility. [^23] But he had no enemies to impede his journey whichever way he traveled. The only seeming difficulty is the manner in which he obtained the food necessary to sustain his life; but being a soldier this would be only a slight trouble, the game he could slay and the wild fruit he could gather would be ample for his sustenance. There are a number of recorded instances of men who have made, without companions, journeys as lengthy and certainly more perilous than Coriantumr's, because they were exposed to the danger of falling into the hands of murderous savages. We will cite one of the best authenticated cases. In October, 1568, Sir John Hawkins, one of Queen Elizabeth's slave-trading admirals, by reason of the scarcity of food, felt compelled to land about one hundred men on the Mexican coast, near the Rio de Minas, and there leave them to their fate. Most of these men, in all probability, perished in the wilderness. Some who took south-westerly trails found their way to the city of Mexico, where, as "vile, Lutheran dogges," they received but little kindness at the hands of the dominant Spanish Catholics. Others took north-easterly trails, and one of them, David Ingram, made his way from Texas to Maine, and beyond to the St. Johns River, where he was picked up by a friendly French ship and carried to France; thence he made his way to England. The overland journey took him about eleven months; but one of his comrades, Job Hortop, was more than twenty years in getting back to England. Ingram told so many marvelous yarns that he was subjected to a searching investigation before Sir Francis Walsingham, [^24] in 1582, the record of which is to be found in the British Museum, while a Ms. copy is in the library of Harvard University. The journey from the Hill Ramah to Central America is much of the way parallel to that from the Rio de Minas to the St. John's River, and we should judge not longer, making the comparison between the two the more consistent.

Thus were fulfilled the prophecies of Ether. Neither Coriantumr nor his people had repented, and speedy destruction had befallen them. He simply lived to witness the complete fulfillment of the words of the prophet and to receive a burial at the hands of the new people whom God had called to occupy the land.

JAREDITES AND THEIR CONTEMPORARIES

It is a somewhat peculiar though now generally acknowledged fact that geographical knowledge has not advanced among men with steady, orderly and ever-increasing strides; but to the contrary there have been periods of activity in geographical discovery followed by ages of inertia. Lands have been discovered, occupied, abandoned, forgotten and then, centuries after, rediscovered. The Egyptians and Ph&oeligcians were the great navigators of early civilization. When their power waned and Rome became mistress of the world, many of their discoveries were lost sight of, the policy of the latter people being consolidation and a strong central government. Their realm formed one solid mass, reached, as a rule, by overland roads, not of remote and isolated colonies located far and wide over Europe, Asia and Africa, as did those of the Ph&oeligcians. Thus it came that geographical knowledge was much further advanced six hundred years before Christ than at the time of the Redeemer's birth. Between the years B.C. 611-605 Africa was circumnavigated; all recollection of such a feat had passed away in His time.

It is worthy of note that this decrease in maritime activity is coincident with the era of the departure of the colonies of Lehi and Mulek for America, and of the promise which the Lord gave to the first named that as long as his seed were faithful in keeping the laws of heaven the land that had been given to them "should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations." [^25]

If Diodorus Siculus and other ancient writers are to be believed, the Carthagenian Senate, in the year B.C. 460, to stop emigration, passed a decree condemning to death any man, woman or child who should embark for "The Lands of the West." We do not understand why so extreme a penalty should be attached to the attempt to emigrate to the Lands of the West; but the decree certainly would have the effect, so far as Carthage was concerned, of preventing any of its citizens landing in America, and in this way aiding in a most remarkable manner in the fulfillment of the Lord's promise of isolation to the seed of Lehi. And that promise was fulfilled in its completeness, for if the ancients had any knowledge of this continent it became to them a vague tradition and most certainly the people of no other nation reached its shores until long after the descendants of Lehi had turned from the Lord and had fallen nigh into the lowest depths of savagery and idolatry. [^26] The existence of this era of geographical ignorance is a very interesting, though incidental, evidence of the truth of the Book of Mormon.

But were the ancient Ph&oeligcians, Carthagenians and Egyptians acquainted with America? did they know anything of the Jaredites? We believe they did. In the first place there is nothing inconsistent in having this belief, in the second place there is direct testimony in its favor.

Surely so far as probabilities are concerned there is nothing startling in believing that the people who circumnavigated Africa, traded with China, and penetrated north, at least, as far as the Hebrides, and apparently into the Baltic, crossed the South Atlantic and landed in Brazil. To do so with their vessels and with the favorable winds usually blowing would have been no extraordinary feat. In fact we have the account of such a thing being done. A few years ago some slaves, working on a farm in the parish of Parabyba (Brazil) discovered a stone covered with Ph&oeligcian characters. These characters were translated by Senor Ladesloa Netto, director of the museum at Rio Janeiro, and gave an account, in substance, as follows:

The stone was a commemorative one, erected by some Sidonian, or as they call themselves Canaanite exiles or refugees, between the ninth and tenth years of the reign of a king named Hiram. They left the port of Eziongeber or Akaba, on the upper waters of the Red Sea and for twelve lunar months sailed along the coast of Africa. The number of the vessels and the members of the party, both male and female, is given; these details being placed between the invocations to their protecting gods and goddesses. The inscription is in eight lines of beautiful Ph&oeligcian characters, but there is no separation of the words, neither vowel points, nor quiescent letters.

There were two Ph&oeligcian kings named Hiram; one, the friend of Solomon, reigned from about 980 to 947 B.C., the other occupied the throne from 558 to 552 B.C.; the inscription does not say which of these Hirams is referred to. From this silence we conclude it was the earlier one; as if it had been the second it would have probably so stated, as long as there was only one there was no necessity to particularize. Again it could not have been in the time of the second Hiram as that was after the date of the promise made by God to Lehi that this land should be kept from the knowledge of other nations.

Diodorus Siculus [^27] makes the following statement, as a fact of authentic history:

"Over against Africa lies a very great island, in the vast ocean, many days sail from Lybia westward. The soil there is very fruitful, a great part whereof is mountainous, but much likewise flat, open country, which is the sweetest and pleasantest part, for it is watered by several navigable streams and beautified with many pleasure gardens, planted with divers sorts of trees and an abundance of orchards. The towns are adorned with stately buildings and banqueting houses, pleasantly situated in their gardens and orchards. * * * The Ph&oeligcians, having found out the coasts beyond the Pillars of Hercules, [^28] sailed along the coast of Africa. One of their ships, on a sudden, was driven by a furious storm far off into the main ocean. After they had lain under this violent tempest many days, they at length arrived at this island." [^29]

We ask here how could the Ph&oeligcians have given such an exact description of the geographical position and appearance of this continent if they had never seen it? Does it not take a much greater stretch of credulity to believe they guessed so well than that they actually told the truth; besides how well their description agrees with the high state of civilization existing among the Jaredites, according to the Book of Ether, eleven hundred years before the advent of the Savior, which is the time this voyage is said to have taken place. On the other hand how admirably this account bears testimony to the genuineness of Ether's record!

"Greek writers inform us that the Ph&oeligcians and Carthagenians knew the way to a country beyond the Atlantic." The Egyptians knew of an island, far to the west, known as Atlantis, which sustained a great population. These people finally became desperately wicked, and the island was swept away by a deluge. Plato mentions it in his TimÃ¦us. [^30] On old Venetian maps, Atlantis is put to the west of the Azores and Canaries.

Here appears to be a precise knowledge of the destruction of the Jaredites and the causes therefor; while the deluge which swept the island away would be a very convenient explanation why they could not find it after the Lord had placed His inhibition on further intercourse between the peoples of the two continents.

Dr. Hyde Clark [^31] says:

"It is very questionable whether at any time there was regular intercourse over the Atlantic. * * * In what we know of the historical period, under the Greeks and the Romans, a lively knowledge of America was lost; the Greeks could not reach it from the west, and the Romans, when they settled on the shores of the Atlantic, had other cares than to risk the wide sea. A dead knowledge lingered, not only of the geography of the Americas, but of Australasia. * * * There must at one time have been men in the olden world, men who could bring back this knowledge of the Americas from their Nineveh to its Nineveh and Babel, where the empire of the four worlds got centered, and where one language was spoken and written for the government of the earth. How truly was it then said of Babel, 'And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech.' (Genesis XI:1) The fall of that power was indeed confusion of nations and of tongues. * * * The intercourse in times of yore between the new world and the old, now again brought to light, rests upon no slight evidence."

Another gentleman [^32] remarks:

"There are proofs that there must have been repeated intercommunication between the new and the old worlds prior to the days of Columbus. So evident is this conclusion that some writers have tried to establish that the origin of the religions and the civilization of the old world must be sought in America."

On April 23rd, 1843, some citizens of Kinderbrook, Pike County, Illinois, while digging in a mound found about six feet from the surface of the earth the skeleton of a very tall man. On his breast were six bell-shaped brass plates, covered with engrayings. These plates were taken to the Prophet Joseph Smith and he tanslated a portion of the characters. He states they contained the history of the persons with whom they were found, who was a descendant of Ham, through the loins of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and that he received his kingdom from the ruler of heaven and earth. [^33]

Here than we have the statement of the Prophet of God that, at any rate, one royal Egyptian came to America; but it is scarcely to be supposed that he, being of the royal blood, would come alone.

From the very meager details given us by the Prophet we may perhaps be justified in drawing the following deductions:

That as he could not have come to this land during the time of the divine inhibition, when the faithful Nephites occupied it, it is altogether more probable that as a Hametic Pharaoh, he came in the days of the Jaredites.

Evidence is accumulating that the reigning dynasty of Pharaohs in the days of the oppression and exodus of Israel were of Chaldean origin, who apparently had driven the previous dynasty, descended from Ham and Egyptus, from the throne. In this way the scriptural statement that there arose another Pharaoh, who knew not Joseph is accounted for. That the Egyptian ruler whose skeleton was found in the Illinois mound did not quietly succeed his father in the kingly authority may be surmised from the statement that he received his kingdom from God. We therefore think it not improbable that he belonged to the family of Pharaohs dethroned by their Chaldean successors, that he fled from his native country, with a certain following came to this country, and by the grace of heaven built up a kingdom here. The time of his coming would be somewhere between the days of Ephraim and Moses, and also that as he would very naturally be buried near the seat of his government we may reasonably conclude that his kingdom was situated in the great valley of the Mississippi.

From the testimony presented above we think we are justified in believing that the Jaredites were known to their contemporaries on the eastern continent.

ANCIENT RUINS FOUND IN AMERICA

We now come to the consideration of the question, Are any of the ruins found upon this continent the remains of Jaredite cities and buildings? Individually, we think that few, if any, of the ruined cities of ancient America are of Jaredite origin; indeed, we will go farther and say we believe but few of them date as far back as the days of the Nephites. This conclusion will doubtless surprise many of our readers, it is therefore due to them that we give our reasons,

The writers and explorers to whom English speaking people are indebted for their information regarding the ruins of this continent, the largest, best preserved and most important of which are to be found in Central America and contiguous regions, drew their conclusions from conditions which do not exist in the regions where these ruins most largely exist. The vast overgrowth of vegetation conveyed to their minds an idea of antiquity which the facts did not warrant, an error to which they were predisposed from the prevailing tendency among modern students to dabble in eons instead of centuries, and to give every thing and every event whose date was not determined a remote and indistinct antiquity. When in this frame of mind an explorer from the temperate zone discovered in Yucatan a tree which had five hundred rings, growing on a house-top, he argued that that tree must be at least five hundred years old, as in his native land the trees only added one ring a year to their growth, and if the tree was five hundred years old the house underneath must be much older. But the mistake made was this, that in that heated climate, some trees added ten or twelve rings, instead of one, a year, and consequently were only one-tenth or one-twelfth as old as he imagined.

Professor John Fiske, of Harvard College, cites the following example:

"The notion of their antiquity was perhaps suggested by the belief that certain colossal mahogany trees growing between and over the ruins of Palenque must be nearly two thousand years old. But when M. de Carnay visited Palenque in 1859, he had the eastern side of the 'palace' cleared of its dense vegetation in order to get a good photograph; and when he re-visited the spot, in 1881, he found a sturdy growth of young mahogany the age of which he knew did not exceed twenty-two years. Instead of making a ring once a year as in our sluggish and temperate zone, these trees had made rings at the rate of about one a month; the trunks were already more than two feet in diameter; judging from this rate of growth the biggest giant on that place need not have been more than two hundred years old, if as much."

M. Charnay himself speaking on this subject says:

"I may here remark that [the] virgin forests have no very old trees, being destroyed by insects, moisture, lianas, [^34] etc., and old monteros [^35] tell me that mahogany and cedar trees, which are most durable, do not live above two hundred years."

Another reason is that cities of the same class and description, having the same characteristics and style of architecture as the neighboring ruins, were inhabited at the time of the Spanish invasion by the people who built them. Some indeed were decaying, others were growing cities. This fact is attested by the Spanish Chroniclers. But more than this, some of the now ruined cities, generally supposed to be very ancient, have lately been proven to have also been inhabited at this period. A native chief of Yucatan, named Nakuk Peoh, wrote about the year 1562, a brief history of the Spanish conquest of that country. This chronicle, which has been translated into English, refers directly to Chichen-Itza and Izamal as inhabited towns during the time of the Spanish invasion, from 1519 to 1542. Mr. Fiske is inclined to consider the highest probable antiquity for most of the ruins of Yucatan and Central America as the twelfth or thirteenth century of our era; [^36] while M. Charnay says, "Copan and Palenque may be two or three centuries older, and had probably fallen into ruins before the arrival of the Spaniards." [^37]

A third reason is that ruins found in Central America, etc., in no wise agree with what we should naturally expect would be built by a people such as the Jaredites or the Nephites are represented to have been in the sacred writings of their prophets, but they are not inconsistent with a barbarous, idolatrous race of builders such as the Lamanites, after the destruction of the Nephites undoubtedly were. The Nephites were of the house of Israel and Christians. As Israelites they were forbidden by God Himself to make to themselves the likeness of any thing in the heavens above, on the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. [^38] These ruins are full of images and representations of human beings and other animate things. As Christians, the Nephites would not indulge in the class of grotesque statuary and reliefs that so largely abound in many of these cities, especially in those that clearly point to idolatry and idolatrous customs. The occasional appearance of an ornament that somewhat resembles a cross carries no weight in our mind. The cross was used as an ornament, and with no reference to Christianity long before Jesus was crucified, and today is more the symbol of the apostate churches of Christendom than the original Church established by God Himself. The appearance of such a symbol would appeal more readily and have greater weight with Roman Catholics than with members of the true Church. The heathen has adorned his edifices with crosses for the reason that it was a natural, easy and becoming style of ornament.

The civilization of the Jaredites very much resembled that of the Nephites and to our mind was greatly in advance of that of the builders of Copan, Palenque and their sister cities. It should here be observed that the greater portion of the cities built by the Nephites before the crucifixion of Christ were destroyed by the convulsions that attended that most momentous event, others so badly shattered that it would not pay to repair them. The Nephite remains, therefore, that we would expect to find would be those that were erected during the universal reign of peace that followed the ministry of the risen Redeemer. Is it not also consistent to believe that if any Jaredite ruins remained at the time of the Savior's death they also were destroyed by the universal convulsions? It must likewise be remembered that in the last great war the Lamanites took great delight in destroying everything Nephite.

The question now arises, Were the Jaredites the mound builders? Again we answer, We think not. The remains found in the mounds that have been opened betoken a race of builders far inferior in civilization to what Ether represents the Jaredites to have been. True, it is possible, as some have suggested, that an inferior race of later ages, may have opened these mounds and made them sepulchres for their dead, and placed therein, with the dead, the flint and quartzite arrowheads, the beads, pipes, shells, and inferior pottery and ornaments that have been there found. It is also quite supposable that the mounds scattered far and wide about this northern continent, [^39] were not all built by the same race. It is affirmed with some show of evidence that some of these mounds are known to have been built by the Shawness and Cherokees, [^40] while others are ascribed to the Chickasaws and Winnebagos. It is also suggested that the Mandans and Minnitarees were at one time mound-building people. [^41]

Major J. W. Powell, director of the U. S. Bureau of Ethnology, in the Forum, says: "No fragment of evidence remains to support the figment of theory that there was an ancient race of moundbuilders superior in culture to the North American Indians."

A lady writer (Mary Morrison) writing on this question in "Hearth and Hall," [^42] sums up the opinions of a number of intelligent investigators in the following statement:

"The mound-builders were formerly regarded as a race so remote from the present Indian tribes that there could be nothing between them, yet all recent theories deny this. Many Indian tribes have built burial mounds for their dead.

"Some of the mounds in Ohio have yielded from their deepest recesses articles of European manufacture, showing an origin not farther back than the historic period. Spanish swords and blue grass beads have been found in the mounds of Georgia and Florida....

"The annals of the Columbian epoch have been carefully studied, and it is found that some of the mounds have been constructed in historical times, while early explorers and settlers found many actually used by tribes of North American Indians; so we know that many of the Indians were builders of mounds. The contents of these mounds have been compared with the works of art of the Indian tribes before they were influenced by Europeans and both were substantially identical."

But, on the other hand, we have the fact before us, that the skeleton of the Pharaoh, found in Kinderhook, Illinois, referred to previously, was dug out of a large mound. After penetrating about eleven feet the workers came to a bed of limestone that had been subjected to the action of fire. They removed the stones, which were small and easy to handle, to the depth of two feet more, when they found the skeleton. This was evidently a burial chamber, as with the bones, which appeared to have been burned, was found plenty of charcoal and ashes. [^43] From this fact it is evident that some of the mounds are of very ancient date, as it is not supposable that this man would be the only one of his race and nation to be buried in this manner. We also suggest that this colony of Egyptians may have originated the style of architecture in this country in which so many find resemblances to the Egyptian, and which is specially characterized by the erection of vast truncated pyramids.

There is also another consideration; it is that the Jaredites built largely of wood. Undoubtedly their temples and palaces would be constructed of more lasting materials; to believe otherwise would be to believe that the habits of the Jaredites were different from those of all other civilized races; but the homes of the people appear to have been built from the product of the forest, and throwing all other considerations aside we cannot expect to now find remains of wooden dwellings built from four thousand to twenty-five hundred years ago. The proof of our assertion is that when the Nephites began to colonize the northern continent they found it admirably adapted for that purpose with the exception that it was without timber, and the reason given why it was without timber was "because of the many inhabitants who had before inhabited the land" who had consumed it. [^44] To get over this difficulty the Nephites built their houses out of cement, and also imported considerable lumber from the lands of Zarahemla and Bountiful, and further they preserved "whatever tree should spring up upon the face of the land," until it was large enough for building purposes.

ANIMAL LIFE OF THE JAREDITE PERIOD

When Jared and his colony reached the Valley of Nimrod they tarried there for a season and made it their outfitting point. They gathered their flocks, male and female, of every kind, they laid snares and caught the fowls of the air, they prepared a vessel in which they carried fish, and they also took along with them swarms of honey bees. [^45] Silk worms must have also formed a portion of their lading, for we read of their descendants manufacturing silks and fine twined linen, [^46] as likewise did the Nephites, their successors in the occupation of this continent. But during the long era of savagery and barbarism that succeeded the destruction of the latter race the silk worm appears to have become extinct in America, as no trace was found of it by the Spaniards when they overran Mexico and Peru. The fact that no silk worms or remains of silk fabrics were found by the followers of Cortez, Pizzaro and others has been used as an argument against the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. [^47] But it must be remembered that "in 1522 A.D. Cortez appointed officials to introduce sericulture into New Spain (Mexico), and mulberry trees were then planted and eggs were brought from Spain. The Mexican adventure is mentioned by Acosta, [^48] but all trace of the culture had died out before the end of the century." [^49] If then in about three-quarters of a century all trace of the culture had disappeared, where is the consistency of attacking the Book of Mormon because the Spaniards found no silk worms in Mexico, when between the destruction of the Nephites and the venture of Cortez more than twelve hundred years had passed away?

Among the creatures brought by Jared to America were, in all probability, the domestic animals afterwards mentioned in the record of Ether. These were all manner of cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, asses, elephants, cureloms, and cumoms, and many kinds of animals that were useful for the food of man. [^50] The elephants, cureloms, and cumoms are especially noted as being "useful unto man," from which it is reasonable to conclude that the elephant was domesticated by the Jaredites and used as a beast of burden. [^51]

It is not evident from Ether's narrative what the cureloms and cumoms were. Some suppose them to have been creatures akin to the elephant or mastadon; others think they were the alpaca or llama.

As we have already learned, when Jared's colony reached the great waters they, by divine command, built eight barges. Into these barges they all—men, women and children, went. We are told that they had prepared all manner of food, that thereby they might subsist upon the water, and also food for their flocks and herds, and whatsoever beast, or animal, or fowl that they should carry with them. [^52] From the wording of the above passage—"whatsoever beast, etc., they should carry with them"—we do not think that the ancestors of all the various kinds of wild beasts and reptiles that were found on this continent when it was discovered by Columbus were brought in Jared's barges. It is also very improbable that room could be found therein for so many various creatures and the food necessary for their sustenance during a voyage of 344 days. In our opinion it is altogether more probable that they migrated to this continent before the days of Peleg, [^53] when we are told the earth was divided. [^54] It may be asked, where did that division occur? Asia and America were not then joined, or there would not have been the necessity of Jared making a voyage of nearly a year across the Pacific Ocean. It is therefore reasonable to look at the other side of the continent, and the existence of two elevated plateaus, now submerged, one running between Africa and South America, the other between Europe and North America, gives us reason to think that these, before the days of Peleg, were a portion of the dry land; that across them the wild animals wandered, [^55] and when they sank beneath the level of the sea the earth was divided. [^56]

The next enquiry that naturally arises is, what caused this submergence? We answer that the most probable cause was volcanic action. We will take as our example the northern plateau; [^57] and condense the statements of scientific writers in relation thereto. We are informed that in ages long since past the North Atlantic ridge was one of the principal seats of volcanic activity upon the globe; the line of volcanoes extended all the way from Greenland down into Central France. In the Hebrides, Great Britain and France they have long since become extinct but in the far north volcanic action has died out much more slowly. In the fifteenth century there was still an active volcano near the Icelandic settlement in the south of Greenland. Iceland has yet twenty active volcanoes, and unnumbered boiling springs. Among the submerged peaks in the North Atlantic explosions occasionally occur. A small volcanic island appears to have remained midway between Iceland and Greenland until 1456, when it was entirely destroyed by an eruption. [^58] These examples show that the work of the volcanoes is not yet finished, and islands, etc., are still sinking; giving a reasonable basis for believing that, as the lands were once joined, this plateau was one of the bands that united them. It would indeed form one of most direct and shortest routes from the old world to the new; and furthermore is the road that some zoologists, (who do not believe the Bible statement regarding Peleg) claim that many of the animals, common to both Europe and North America, first reached the latter continent.

In reading the account of the conversations between the Lord and the brother of Jared with regard to the construction of the barges, we are struck with the solicitude manifested by the Savior concerning their ability to withstand the storms and other dangers to which they would be exposed. In one place He says:

"For behold, ye shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea; for the mountain waves shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will bring you up again out of the depths of the sea; for the winds have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the floods have I sent forth. And behold, I prepare you against these things; for howbeit, ye cannot cross this great deep, save I prepare you against the waves of the sea, and the winds which have gone forth, and the floods which shall come." [^59]

Later we are told: "Thus they were driven forth; and no monster of the sea could break them, neither whale that could mar them." [^60] Here apparently is an additional danger to that of the floods which threatened the barges. Here are whales spoken of that could mar them. But there were other creatures who could do more than this, they were monsters of the sea who could break them. What fish is there or animal of the great waters that now exists that could break a barge, built as these were, and of "the length of a tree"? No shark could do it, nor do we know of any other marine animal. But evidently from these monsters being mentioned before the whales, and the destructive word break being used in contradistinction to mar, they had greater strength and power than the whales had. Shall we be inconsistent in believing that some of the great amphibious or marine reptiles (Enaliosauria) of which geologists and paleontologists speak, such as the Plesiosauria [^61] and Ichthyosauria [^62] still existed in the Pacific Ocean; and that they had sufficient strength to break and destroy any vessel formed after the ordinary methods of ship building. To avoid a disaster of this kind befalling the Jaredites the Lord commanded them to build the peculiar barges, without windows or portholes, masts or sails, which have been the source of so much amusement to some unthinking folk.

References are now and again made in the Book of Mormon to the cattle, sheep and horses owned by the Jaredites and their successors, the Nephites and Lamanites. This has been used, like the silk-worm idea, as an argument against the genuineness of that holy record. Because the Spaniards found no horses in Mexico, Central America and Peru, and a certain tribe of Algonquins on the New England Coast were terrified by the bellowing of a bull belonging to a party of Norsemen. [^63] it is arrogantly claimed that the Book of Mormon must be a fraud, because it states that the ancient inhabitants of this continent possessed these animals. When we remember the extent of this continent it would be just as reasonable to say there could not possibly have been elephants anywhere on the eastern hemisphere in the days of Cyrus, because the British soldiery under Caswollon were frightened at the appearance of these huge creatures in the ranks of the invading Romans, as to affirm that there were no cattle in any part of America a thousand years before because these Indians knew nothing about the roaring of a bull. So far as the nonexistence of the horse in ancient America is concerned, the question has forever been set at rest by the discovery of the remains of this animal all over the land; and though Cortez and his followers saw none alive, yet Admiral Sir Francis Drake did see large bands of wild horses on the Oregon Coast in 1579, far too early for any to have escaped from the Spaniards, grown wild, and traveled so vast a distance. [^64]

THE JAREDITES AS METAL-WORKERS

One of the most marked characteristics of Jaredite civilization was the perfection reached by that people in working the metals. They were skillful in the manufacture of machinery and tools and in the fabrication of weapons of war. Gold, silver, iron, copper, brass were all wrought into things of usefulness and beauty by the hand of the cunning workman. It is somewhat strange that the fact of the use of iron by the Jaredites has been advanced as an argument against the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. Its opponents have declared that no remains of ancient iron implements have been found on this continent, apparently forgetting that as iron rusts and crumbles to dust far sooner than any other of the useful metals, it would be more remarkable if many finds of iron remains were made than the contrary. But notwithstanding the denunciations of objectors, sufficient ancient worked iron has been found to show that it was used by the former inhabitants of this continent and to prove that the statements in the Book of Mormon are correct. We will cite a few instances.

In digging a well at Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1820, at the depth of eighty feet, the workmen came upon the stump of a tree, three feet in diameter, rooted in its native soil, which had been cut with an ax or other sharp instrument. Iron rust was found on the top of the stump, as if the ax had been decomposed during the time the mass of earth rested upon it. Again the six bell-shaped brass plates found on the breast of the skeleton exhumed at Kinderhook, Illinois, already referred to, were fastened together, according to a writer in the Times and Seasons, by rings through each and clasped with two clasps. "The rings and clasps appeared to be of iron very much ozidated." The Quincy Whig says they were "secured and fastened together by two iron wires, but which were so decayed that they readily crumbled to dust on being handled."

Mr. Atwater, in the Report of the American Antiquarian Society for 1820, says that in the mounds, besides the various stone instruments, "there have been found very well manufactured swords and knives of iron and possibly steel." At Marietta, in 1819, in a burial mound, by the side of the skeleton, the remains of a sword were unearthed; the blade itself was not discovered but a streak of rust extended its whole length. Two or three broken pieces of a copper tube were also found filled with iron rust, and near the feet a piece of ore, which was nearly pure iron. (Report of the American Antiquarian Society, 1820, pp. 168-172.) At Circleville, lying on a mirror of isinglass, a plate of iron was found, of course oxidized. Before being broken it resembled a plate of cast iron. The Natchez, as well as the Aztecs, had a tradition that the country had been once inhabited by white people, who had the use of iron tools. (Ibid., p. 273)

It will be remembered that when Limhi, king of the Nephites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi, (B.C. 122) desired to open up communication with their friends in Zarahemla, he sent out an exploring expedition which, after a lengthy absence, returned without discovering the objects of its search. The explorers had been lost in the wilderness, where they had wandered many days; they also traveled in a strange land among abundant waters, and though they did not find their fellow-countrymen of Zarahemla, they discovered a desolate land which was covered with the bones of men and of beasts, and which was full of the ruins of buildings of every kind: a land which evidently had once been the home of a mighty people. As a testimony of the truth of their statements they brought back to Lehi-Nephi twenty-four gold plates which were covered with undecipherable engravings. They also brought samples of large copper and brass breastplates, and of swords. Now, while the breast-plates were perfectly sound, the swords were in a state of decay. The hilts had perished and the blades were cankered with rust. [^65] These were the remains of the once-favored Jaredites, who some four or five hundred years before had perished in fraticidal strife. That to which we wish to draw attention is that even at that time the steel and iron of their swords had rusted, while the brass and copper armor had entirely resisted the ravages of time. This being the case in less than five hundred years, how can we expect to find many traces of articles manufactured of iron, when twenty-five hundred years have passed away.

Of the language of the Jaredites we know next to nothing, except that it was at first the uncorrupted tongue spoken by the descendants of Noah until the confusion of languages at Babel. By divine condescension Jared and his companions were permitted to retain the old form of speech. The only word that we have that we are certain belonged to that language is Deseret, the honey bee. Curelom and Cumom may have belonged to the ancient tongue, most probably they did if the animals to whom these names were applied were known to Jared before his colony left Asia, otherwise they were probably first used when the animals were discovered on this continent. There are several proper names used by the antediluvians and Hebrews which also appear in Jaredite history. This makes it probable that they all, in their original forms, belonged to the uncorrupted universal language. Among these names are: Aaron, Ether, Gilead, Heth, Jared, Levi, Nimrod, Noah, Omer.

Footnotes

"On the 17th of June [1864?] in the charge of the Ninth Corps on the Confederate works east of Petersburg, a sergeant of the Fifty-seventh Massachusetts leaped upon the parapet, and with his cap in his left hand and his musket in his right, stood cheering and gesturing with his arms to incite his comrades to come on. Suddenly a shell took his head off as completely as a knife could have done, but the tall form continued erect for some seconds, the arms still waving frantically but with ever-lessening sweep and power, until the forces of the body collapsed, when the headless trunk toppled over to the ground."

"Lest ye corrupt yourselves and make you a graven image the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, the likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. (Deuteronomy 4:16-18)

---
Notas:
[^1] Almost universally understood to be a portion of Lower Mesopotamia.
[^2] The latest calculations place the call of Abraham as far back as about 2280 B.C., or earlier than the generally accepted date of the building of Babel
[^3] While residing in Kirtland Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day when President Joseph Smith was passing his door he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the boy the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing he laid the child on the bed, and turning to Elder Cahoon he said, the name I have given your son is the name of the brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown [or revealed] it to me. Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing near heard the Prophet make this statement to his father; and this was the first time the name of the brother of Jared was known in the Church in this dispensation.
[^4] "Noah, his father, who blessed him [Ham] with the blessings of the earth, and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the Priesthood." (Book of Abraham)
[^5] Two widely distant places in Mesopotamia are named as the Ur where Abraham dwelt. We incline to the opinion that the one in the far south of that land is the correct locality, as from the Book of Abraham we discover it was intimately associated with Egypt and its rulers.
[^6] We have never been able to find any revelation or other authoritative statements in print with regard to the course taken by the Jaredites in their journey from the valley of Nimrod to the land of Moriancumer. It is evident that they first traveled northward, but whether they turned east or west is not so apparent. The general idea is that they turned eastward and crossed Central Asia. Elder Orson Pratt calls these waters "the inland seas of Asia.
[^7] Evidently named after the brother of Jared. We have no direct information in regard to the locality of Moriancumer, but those who believe that the Jaredites traveled eastward through Central Asia, are of the opinion that it was near the mouth of one of the great rivers that flow through the Chinese empire into the Pacific Ocean.
[^8] Nothing more is said of Pagag in the Book of Mormon, but from his action in this matter we judge him to have been a wise and God-fearing man. (Ether 6:25)
[^9] No information is given in the sacred record of the locality or country in which Mount Zerin was situated.
[^10] The fact that Orihah was the youngest son of his father appears to have been taken as a precedent, for among the Jaredites there seems to have prevailed a custom entirely opposite to that of most other nations—that of having one of the younger, generally the very youngest son instead of the eldest, succeed his father on the throne. We do not read of any queens reigning over this race.
[^11] In the first chapter of Ether, Shez is called the son of Heth; in the tenth chapter he is called a descendant; but these two words are used in the Book of Ether, as in the Bible and other ancient records, interchangeably, or one for the other; and son, or daughter may mean a direct descendant of any remoteness
[^12] It is somewhat strange coincidence that both kings of the Jaredites who were named Com were sons of kings named Coriantum, though they appear to have lived nearly a thousand years apart
[^13] Also spelled Shiblon
[^14] Nothing is said in the Book of Ether that gives any clue to the locality in which Gilgal was situated
[^15] A place in North America, apparently not far from the Atlantic coast
[^16] These plains were somewhere on the northern continent, but no clue is given to their situation
[^17] A place in North America; its location is unknown
[^18] A hill near the valley of Shurr, location unknown, but apparently nearer the Atlantic than the Pacific seaboard of North America
[^19] Supposed to be Lake Ontario.
[^20] Recorded instances are numerous of men suddenly decapitated, showing signs of vitality and will power as did Shiz, for several seconds after their heads have been cut off. This is more especially the case when they are intensely wrought up in the hatreds and excitements of actual combat. One of the latest instances which we have noticed is referred to in the Popular Science Monthly (p. 116) for June 1892. The writer (Geo. L. Kilmer) says:
[^21] A colony of Israelites who were led by divine power out of Jerusalem and brought to this continent in the same year (B.C. 589) that that city was captured by the King of Babylonia. Among their number was Mulek, the infant son of Zedekiah, the last King of Judah, in whose honor the people were named.
[^22] As his wanderings lay in the direction of the flow of the great rivers, it is quite supposable that when he reached some deserted city on the banks of the Mississippi, or of one of its tributaries, he would find boats there, and appropriating one of them could hasten his journey by floating hundreds of miles down stream.
[^23] A famous statesman of Queen Elizabeth's days. He was one of her principal secretaries of state, and at different times ambassador to several foreign powers. He was also one of the commissioners for the trial of Queen Mary Stuart, of Scotland.
[^24] II Nephi 1:5-11.
[^25] The Nephites were destroyed at Cumorah 385 A.D. It was not until the tenth century, at the earliest, that the Northmen landed on this continent, or more than 600 years later.
[^26] A Roman historian who lived in the days of Julius Caesar.
[^27] The Straits of Gibraltar.
[^28] Elder George M. Ottinger, in his articles on "Old America," published some few years ago in The Juvenile Instructor, suggests, from the description given, that it was Central America that these Phoenicians sighted.
[^29] A Greek philosopher, born B.C. 429, died B.C. 348.
[^30] Lecture given before the Anthropological Institute, 1874.
[^31] M. R. G. Haliburton.
[^32] "Millennial Star," Vol. 21, pp. 40-44.
[^33] Liana—a woody, high-climbing plant, having rope-like stems.
[^34] Woodmen.
[^35] The city of Mexico was built 1325 A.D.
[^36] It is not improbable, however, that these cities were built on the foundations of older ones; and some of the masonry, sculptured stones, etc., of the more ancient city may have been incorporated in the buildings of the newer one. To do this would be very consistent with the character of the barbarous and indolent Lamanites, who would take advantage of every opportunity of this kind to lessen their labors, without any reference to the uses of sculpture, walls or foundations had been originally put to.
[^37] "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any likeness of anything that is in the heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth." (Exodus 20:4)
[^38] It is estimated that not less than 10,000 monuments of the mound-builders exist in Ohio, and they are scarcely less numerous in Indiana and Kentucky.
[^39] Fiske's "Discovery of America," Vol. I, pp. 144-145.
[^40] "There is good reason to believe that in the Natchez and Mandans, and perhaps some other tribes still existing, but in small numbers, at the advent of the whites, we have their lineal descendants." "We may infer from their bony structure that they belonged to the American family of men, and were not unlike, in structure, physical aspect, and color, the red Indian of today."—Prof. S. Newberry. Mr. John C. Southall, an able English writer, brings strong evidence to prove that the mound-builders lived not more than 1,500 years ago. Elder George M. Ottinger takes the ground that "the Toltecs and the mound-builders were the same people."
[^41] Reprinted in the "Woman's Exponent," July 15th; August 1st, and August 15th, 1892.
[^42] "Quincy Whig," and "Times and Seasons," reprinted in the "Millennial Star," Vol. 21, p. 44.
[^43] Helaman 3:3-11.
[^44] Ether 2:1-3.
[^45] Ether 9:17; 10:24.
[^46] See "The Discovery of America," by John Fiske, Vol. I, pp. 3, 179.
[^47] Jose de Acosta, a Spanish writer, born about 1539, died 1600. In 1571 he was sent as a missionary to America, of which, after his return to Spain, he published a history.
[^48] Encyclopedia Britannica.
[^49] Ether 9:18, 19.
[^50] The fact that the Mexicans retained traditions of the elephant (Humboldt's "Vue des Cordilleras," pl. 15) is evidence that these animals were known to the Nephites; and if the Indians were the "mound builders" then that creature had not become extinct when the Nephites were destroyed, for one of the mounds is in the form of a huge elephant, and several objects found within the mounds have been adorned with its likeness or fashioned in its shape. The fact that the bones of the elephant, now in the Deseret Museum, were found on the top of an adobe house near Payson, confirms us in the view that elephants existed on this continent to a much later date than is the general opinion.
[^51] Ether 6:4.
[^52] A son of Eber, of the family of Shem.
[^53] Genesis 10:25.
[^54] The northwestern part of Europe has been solid continent for more than a hundred miles to the west of the French and Irish coasts; the Thames and Humber have been tributaries to the Rhine, which emptied into the Arctic Ocean, and across the Atlantic ridge one might have walked to the New World dryshod.—Fiske.
[^55] Some have thought that this division of the earth in the days of Peleg was not a physical division of the continents by the great waters, but a patriarchal or political division, made by Noah, in which he divided Europe, Asia and Africa among his three sons, Shem, Ham and Japeth. Even admitting this to be true, and that the physical division did not take place in the days of Peleg, yet the presumption is strong, almost amounting to a certainty, that certain portions of the American continent were at one time joined to Europe and Africa, and over these connecting plateaus the wild animals could have migrated.
[^56] Sometimes called the Telegraph Plateau, because the electric cables between Europe and North America are laid upon it.
[^57] "Where volcanic action is declining geysers and boiling springs are apt to abound, as in Iceland; where it has become extinct at a period geologically recent, as in Auvergne and the Rhine Country, its latest vestiges are left in the hundreds of thermal and mineral springs whither fashionable invalids congregate to drink or to bathe."—Fiske.
[^58] Ether 2:24-25.
[^59] Ether 6:10.
[^60] Plesiosaurus—An extinct marine reptile, having a very long neck, a small head and paddles for swimming.
[^61] Ichthyosaurus—An extinct marine reptile; its name means a fish lizard. The remains of these creatures that have been found in the rocks show them to have varied from ten to thirty feet long.
[^62] It is stated that when Thorfinn Karlsefni, made an unsuccessful attempt, 1007 to 1010 A.D., to establish a colony in Vinland, the Indians were as terribly afraid of his cattle as the Aztecs were in later years of the Spanish horses. The chance bellowing of a bull sent them yelling to the woods, and they did not show themselves again for three weeks.
[^63] For details see President George Q. Cannon's "Life of Nephi," pp. 70-73.
[^64] Mosiah 8:8-11.
[^65] To this land the Jaredites gave the name of Moron. It was a portion of the region known to us as Central America. It appears to have been for a lengthy period, if not during the whole of their existence, the seat of government, and residence of the reigning monarch, and the center of Jaredite civilization. In the numerous fratricidal wars that disgraced the annals of the race, Moron was, more than any other land, the chief seat of war; for here the revolutionists attacked the king, and when successful drove them thence.
