John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 1

THE MEANING OF THEOLOGY

Earth, stars and the vastness of space; yesterday, today and tomorrow; and the endlessly increasing knowledge of the relations of forces, present an illimitable universe of numberless phenomena. Only in general outline can the universe be understood. In its infinite variety of expression, it wholly transcends the human mind.

Man in the Universe. In the midst of this complexity, man finds himself. As he progresses from childhood to manhood, and as his slumbering faculties are awakened, he becomes more fully aware of the vastness of his universe and of the futility of hoping to understand it in detail.

Nevertheless, conscious man can not endure confusion. Out of the universal mystery he must draw at least the general, controlling laws that proclaim order in the apparent chaos; and especially is he driven, by his inborn and unalterable nature, to know if possible his own place in the system of existing things. Every normal man desires and seeks an understanding of his relation to all other things, and practically every man has worked out for himself, on the basis of the knowledge he has acquired, some theory which explains, more or less satisfactorily, the mystery of star and earth and man and life. No other quest of man is so vigorous and persistent as that of establishing an intelligible and satisfactory philosophy of earth-life.

Religion. The philosophy, or system of thought, adopted to explain man's place in nature determines largely the joy and manner of a man's life. If the philosophy be poor and loose, life will be confused; if rich and firm, life will be clear cut, and if law be made supreme, life will be orderly. Those who have no life-philosophy at all become the playthings of unknown forces. Every act of a man's life is influenced by the philosophy of his life. It is the most important product of an individual life, and is the most compelling power in life.

In a broad sense, the philosophy according to which a man orders his life may be called that man's religion. It may or may not involve the idea of God or an organized body of believers. If it guides a life it is that life's religion, whether it leads to weakness or to strength. Yet the word religion as used in this writing always implies a religion which accepts the existence of God. A religion which accepts the idea of a God is a theology.

Since all men are placed in the same universe, with approximately the same powers, and under conditions nearly alike, it is possible for each person to establish for himself a religion as above defined, for the guidance of his life. All religions must be organized from the content of the one universe that we know; and the presumption would be, therefore, that the religions of all men should be the same, in so far at least as men are the same. In fact, however, during the course of human history, many more or less dissimilar religions have been established and accepted by groups of men. True, most of these religions show close kinship, but the vital differences are often very great.

The Gospel. The word gospel is frequently used among Christians to designate their religion. The Gospel is a theology which includes the doctrine of the life and mission of Jesus Christ as the Son of God. Among Christians, the words religion, theology and gospel are freely used in the same sense. It is well, however, to bear in mind the distinction in meaning of the three words. The Christian religion, the Christian theology and the Gospel are equivalent in meaning. In the following pages, the terms are often used interchangeably without qualifying words. Indeed, Gospel will be used most frequently, and wherever used, it must be understood to stand for the rational theology discussed in this book.

The Purpose of This Book. This volume is devoted to the exposition of the fundamental principles of a rational theology—a philosophy of life which, because of its complete harmony with all knowledge, should be the one to which all men might safely give adherence.
