John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 3

ETERNALISM

The conceptions necessary for logical thought belong to the Gospel as well as to science, for a satisfactory life philosophy must be based on all knowledge possessed by man.

All Knowledge, the Basis. The Gospel, as the fullest knowledge, must include all facts of experience. The conceptions of time and space are quite as necessary in theology as in natural science or in any other branch of human thought. The Gospel does not claim, however, possession of ultimate knowledge concerning space or time or other fundamental conceptions. Indeed, man is ordinarily allowed to work out for himself the truths of the universe and to organize them into systems of thought which he may follow profitably. Knowledge is given directly by a superior intelligence only when it becomes indispensable to do so. Moreover, there are innumerable phenomena in the universe which cannot be explained to the human understanding as at present developed. The distinguishing feature of the Gospel is that it possesses the key to the true philosophy of life. In outline it offers the entire plan of life in the universe; and man may engage for all time in the elaboration and development of each department of this great universal plan of human life, without requiring an expansion of the outline. The plan is complete.

Fundamental Certainty. The saddest feature of man-made religions is their lack of security. One man constructs one religion; another a different one, and men flock hither and thither, accepting the one that appears, for the moment, to be the best, without the deep feeling that the one finally accepted is absolutely the one and only correct system of thought. Yet, this is logically absurd, for a house is either red or not red; a stick is straight or not straight; a man has truth or only the semblance of truth. Two different truths cannot be parallel with respect to the same thing. The final philosophy of life must be based on irrevocable truth. That which is true must always remain true, though the applications may change greatly from generation to generation. It is the absence of such fundamental certainties, no doubt, that leads men into continual search for a satisfying religion, or that drives them away from their old religion.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a system of doctrine and practice founded on unvarying certainties. Its doctrines rest on demonstrated truths that lie at the foundation of all sound, acceptable thinking. For instance, as a cornerstone of theology, the Gospel recognizes a material universe. Without matter, the mind of man would have no material on which to act. The existence of matter in its various forms becomes, therefore, a fundamental conception of the Gospel. It is the business of man to become acquainted with the material universe in all of its manifestations, so far as may be possible, in order to provide a foundation of knowledge on which the reasoning mind of man may increasingly build.

The Gospel holds strictly to the conception of a material universe. Much inconsistency of thought has come from the notion that things may be derived from an immaterial state, that is, from nothingness. This unthinkable view has been made the basis of doctrines concerning God and man, which have led to utter confusion of thought. The Gospel accepts the view, supported by all human experience, that matter occurs in many forms, some visible to the eye, others invisible, and yet others that may not be recognized by any of the senses of man. Spiritual matter is but a refined form of gross matter. In short, there is no such thing as immaterial matter, but some forms of matter are more refined than others. Light, heat, and other similar forces are held by science to be manifestations of subtle states of matter, beyond the immediate senses of man. The material universe may appear in a variety of forms, all of the same ultimate nature; but man recognizes directly, only that form which is the ordinary matter of our daily lives.

The Essence of Matter. Matter in its essence is eternal, that is, everlasting. Whether the various known forms of matter may be converted one into the other is not definitely known, though it seems probable. Any such conversion would, however, leave the total quantity of matter or its equivalent unchanged. God, the supreme Power, cannot conceivably originate matter; he can only organize matter. Neither can he destroy matter; he can only disorganize it. God is the Master, who, because of his great knowledge, knows how to use the elements, already existing, for the building of whatever he may have in mind. The doctrine that God made the earth or man from nothing becomes, therefore, an absurdity. The doctrine of the indestructibility of the essential elements of the universe makes possible much theological reasoning that would otherwise be impossible.

The nature of the material universe is not, in and of itself, a subject of deep concern in practical religion. By the slow, laborious methods of man's search for truth, the nature of the universe will gradually be revealed. Whether its material components shall be found to be something distinct, or forms of the universal energy, will not be of consequence in the Gospel structure. That matter, whatever it is, is essentially eternal, is, however, a principle of highest theological value, for it furnishes a foundation for correct reasoning.

Eternal Energy. Matter, wherever found and in whatever form, always possesses energy. It is frequently said that matter in motion only, can impress the human mind. Matter without motion, were it conceivable, could not be recognized by man as at present constituted. Matter is always associated with energy; energy with matter. It is not conceivably possible to separate them. Whether one is a manifestation of the other, so that there is only matter or only energy, or if they are distinct things, we do not know. All sound thought recognizes, however, the existence of energy throughout the universe. Energy appears in many forms, such as heat, light, electricity, magnetism, gravitation, and according to the Gospel, as the many spiritual forces. These various forms of energy seem to be convertible one into the other, thus indicating the existence of one central force, of which all other forces are manifestations. The question of energy will probably be answered gradually, as the knowledge of man increases.

Of one thing man may be perfectly certain, namely, that the energy in the universe is indestructible. Changed it may be, from heat to light, from light to electricity, from electricity to magnetism, or from one form to any other form of energy, but destroyed it cannot be. It had no beginning and can have no end. God, possessing the supreme intelligence of the universe, can use energy in accomplishing his ends, but create it, or destroy it, he cannot. Undiminished, everacting, universal energy will continue through all time. The sum of matter and energy, whether they are different or alike, will always remain the same.

Universal Intelligence. In one particular, however, the Gospel goes beyond the teachings of modern thought. The Gospel teaches that, associated with the universal energy that vivifies universal matter, and possibly identified with it, is universal intelligence, a force which is felt wherever matter and energy are found, which is everywhere. The forces of the universe do not act blindly, but are expressions of a universal intelligence. That a degree of intelligence is possessed by every particle of energized matter cannot be said; nor is it important. The great consideration is that, since intelligence is everywhere present, all the operations of nature, from the simplest to the most complex, are the products of intelligence. We may even conceive that energy is only a form of intelligence, and that matter and intelligence, rather than matter and energy, are the two fundamentals of the universe!

Eternal Intelligence. Personal man also is eternal. He was "in the beginning with God." The doctrine that man is an eternal being leads to untold possibilities. Eternal man lived a personal life before the earth-life began, and he continues a personal existence hereafter. Every other personal intelligence in the universe, visible or invisible, is eternal, was "in the beginning with God."

The Eternal Relationship. The phenomena of the universe result from the interaction of matter, energy and intelligence. These fundamental, universal elements are forever acting upon one another to produce the infinite variety of the universe. Nevertheless, space is not filled with disorder; chaos does not prevail. On the contrary, the universe, so far as known, is essentially orderly. It is filled with intelligence, which itself operates through the law of cause and effect. Under like conditions, the same cause will forever give the same effect. Therefore, where like conditions are permanently operating, like results will always be found. This law lies at the foundation of the orderliness of nature. "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven upon which all blessings are predicated, and it is only by obedience to this law that any blessing may be obtained."

An Eternal Plan. The Gospel itself, the so-called plan of salvation, or Great Plan, in obedience to which men guide their earth-lives, is eternal. It is not a temporary or transient thing, made primarily for the handful of men and women on earth, but it is an eternal plan based upon the everlasting relationships of the elements of the universe—a plan which, in some form, is adapted everywhere and forever to the advancement of personal beings. This must be so, for as it leads always to the same definite end, in accordance with the law of cause and effect, it must have a universal meaning.

Eternalism. The Gospel is founded on tangible and eternal things and relationships. These eternal realities, no doubt, in their essence lie beyond the full understanding of man, just as time and space transcend human understanding. Nevertheless, this conception, carried far enough, leads to a gospel or life philosophy which is unshakable, because it rests upon eternal certainty. Without convincing certainty, man is, in the great affairs of life, merely the driftwood of existence, moved hither and thither by the wind of doubt.

The Gospel may be said to be The Philosophy of Eternalism. The Gospel is immersed in the ocean of eternity.
