John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 4

THE WILL OF MAN

The doctrine of the eternal nature of man is most characteristic of the Gospel, and gives great satisfaction to all who have accepted the Gospel.

The Primeval Condition. All that is really clear to the understanding is that man has existed "from the beginning," and that, from the beginning, he has possessed distinct individuality impossible of confusion with any other individuality among the hosts of intelligent beings. Through endless ages, man has risen by slow degrees to his present state. Possibly, with respect to the coming day, man understands as little as did the spiritual beings of an earlier day with respect to present-day conditions.

The Intelligence of Man. To speculate upon the condition of man when conscious life was just dawning is most interesting, but so little is known about that far-off day that such speculation is profitless. Nevertheless, of some things pertaining to the beginning we are fairly certain. The being which later became man, even in the first day possessed intelligence. That is, he was aware of the external universe; he was able to learn, and by adding knowledge to knowledge, to learn more. Then, as now, the universe was filled with matter acted upon by many forces, and an intelligent being in the midst of the interaction of forces and matter, must have become aware, measurably, of what was going on. From the beginning, the ego of man has been a conscious being, saying to itself, "This is I; that is not I. My life is apart from the life of all the rest of the universe."

The Will of Man. In addition to his power to learn and the consciousness of his own existence, the primeval personality possessed, from "the beginning," the distinguishing char'acteristic of every intelligent, conscious, thinking being—an independent and individual will. No one attribute so clearly distinguishes man as does the intelligent will or the will to act intelligently. It was by the exercise of their wills that spiritual beings in the beginning gathered information rapidly or slowly, acquired experiences freely or laboriously. Through the exercise of their wills they grew, remained passive, or retrograded, for with living things motion in any direction is possible.

Naturally, man in his primeval as in his present condition, possessing with all other attributes of intelligence, the power of will, exercised that will upon the contents of the universe. The reaction of the will upon the material universe within reach, enabled intelligent beings, little by little, to acquire power. By the use of his will upon the contents of the universe, man must have become what he now is.

Value of the Will. The above doctrine involves the idea of self-effort. It is only when the will is exercised in a certain direction that the support of other forces may be secured so that progress in that direction may be accelerated. From the beginning, the deliberate use of the will has moved personal beings onward; and in this latest day of our existence, it is the will that moves men into increasingly greater lives. Undoubtedly, the will of man will determine whether the structure built throughout the ages shall be completed into a perfected man.

The Gospel, resting upon eternal, indestructible principles, maintains the living supremacy of the will of man. The culture, training and use of the will, for good or evil, determine primarily the direction of an individual life.
