John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 5

THE GREAT LAW

The innumerable interactions within the universe, must be connected by some great law. This universal law to which all lesser laws contribute, must be of first concern to the man who seeks a true philosophy of life.

Increasing Complexity of the Universe. It has already been said that a universe controlled by intelligence under the law of cause and effect cannot be conceived to be in confusion. Man is absolutely certain that, whether it be yesterday, today or tomorrow, the same act, under the same conditions, has produced or will produce the same result. Under a set of given conditions, a ray of sunshine passed through a glass prism will always be broken into the same spectrum, or a straight stick standing in water will always appear bent. Whether in the physical, mental or moral world, the law of cause and effect reigns supreme.

Quiescence in the universe cannot be conceived, for then there would be no universe. Constant action or movement characterizes the contents of the universe. The multiplicity of actions upon one another, of the various forms of matter—energy and intelligence, composing the universe, must cause an equal multiplicity of effects. Intelligent wills, in their constant activity, must and do produce an increasing series of reactions or changes among the forces of the universe.

Each set of new effects becomes the cause of still other effects. Thus, in our universe, as we conceive it to be constituted, increasing complexity or variety would seem to be the resultant law from the operation of universal forces. This is the great law of nature, to which every living thing must conform, if it is to be in harmony with all other things. In a universe controlled by intelligence, it is only natural to find everything within the universe moving towards one increasing purpose. As new light has come to man, the certainty of this law as a controlling one has become more and more emphatic.

Man and the Great Law. The law of increasing complexity or variety is fundamental. Since man is constantly acting upon and being acted upon by universal materials, he must himself be brought under the subjection of the great law. That is, under normal conditions, he will increase in complexity. As man observes phenomena and reasons upon them and applies them he grows in knowledge. Where he formerly had one fact to use, he now has many. This is the essence of his complexity. A carpenter with one tool does less and poorer work than does one with a full kit of modern tools. Likewise, man, as he gathers experience, becomes more powerful in using the forces of nature in the accomplishment of his purposes. With this thought in mind the great law becomes one of increasing power, of progressive mastery over the universe. For that reason, the law expressing the resultant of the activities of universal forces is often called the law of progression.

The extent of man's growth or progression will depend upon the degree his will is exercised intelligently, upon the things about him. It is conceivable that by the misuse of will, man may lose some of his acquired powers, the negative of the law of progression. In any case, the operation of the human will under normal conditions, adds power to man; and by the use of the intelligent will, the increasingly complex man grows in power and strength towards perfection, in an increasingly interesting world. Those who do not conform to the law of progression are abnormal and do not exert their power, to the requisite degree, in the right direction.

Nature is inexhaustible in the possible number of inter-relations among the contents of the universe. It follows, therefore, that man may forever add knowledge unto knowledge, power unto power, and progress unto progress. The law of progression is the great law of the universe, to which all other laws contribute. By adherence to this law willing, intelligent beings have risen to their present splendid state of manhood, and by further compliance with this law they will advance to a future God-like state of perfection. The Supreme Intelligence and perfected will of the universe, God, is distinguished by an obedient recognition of the conditions of the law of progression.

The law of progression gives hope and purpose to those who accept the Gospel. The feeling of security that comes from the knowledge that the elements of the universe are eternal, is made alive by the hope established by the great law that there is purpose in all the operations of the universe. Whatever man may do, whatever his life may bring, provided all his faculties are working actively among the things and forces about him, he is acquiring knowledge, thereby power, and under the law of progression, he is being moved onward to a more advanced position than he now occupies, in which he may do a mightier work and achieve greater happiness. Men, discouraged by their failure to accomplish exactly what they desire, often speak of their lives as purposeless, but it is idle talk, for, in fact, no intelligent life which concerns itself vigorously and properly with the things about it, can be said to be purposeless. Such a life adheres, automatically, to the law of progression, and therefore moves toward a great destiny of supreme power and accompanying joys. The only purposeless life is the one that does not use its faculties. It matters little what tasks men perform in life, if only they do them well and with all their strength. In the eternal plan they are given progressive value. In an infinite universe, one cannot possibly learn all or do all, at once. A beginning must be made somewhere and corner by corner, department by department, space by space, all will be known and conquered. In the end, all must be explored, and whether one begins in the east or the west cannot matter much. The big concern is the extent to which a man offers himself, mind and body, to his worthwhile work. Upon that will growth depend.

The Law of Development. The law of progression is then a law of endless development of all the powers of man in the midst of a universe becoming increasingly complex, that is, more varied and interesting. No more hopeful principle can be incorporated into a philosophy of life.
