John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 6

GOD AND MAN

The doctrine of man's pre-existence leads to an understanding of the relationship between God and man, which must lie at the very basis of a rational theology.

Why God is God. To determine this relationship between God and man, it is necessary to know, as far as the limited human mind may know, why the Lord is the supreme intelligent Being in the universe, with the greatest knowledge and the most perfected will, and who, therefore, possesses infinite power over the forces of the universe. It must be admitted at once that the mind of man can know God only in part. One thing seems clear, however, that the Lord who is a part of the universe, in common with all other parts of the universe is subject to eternal universal laws. In some manner, mysterious to us, he has recognized and utilized the laws of the universe of which he is the chief intelligence. Therefore, if the law of progression be accepted, God must have been engaged from the beginning, and must now be engaged in progressive development, and infinite as God is, he must have been less powerful in the past than he is today. Nothing in the universe is static or quiescent. While it is folly for man to attempt to unravel in detail the mystery of the past, yet it is only logical to believe that a progressive God has not always possessed his present absolute position. That view does not change his relative position to man. The term infinite is always of relative meaning.

It is clear also that, as with every other being, the power of God has resulted from the exercise of his will. In "the beginning" which transcends our understanding, God undoubtedly exercised his will vigorously, and thus gained experience of the forces lying about him. As knowledge grew into greater knowledge, by persistent efforts of will, his recognition of universal laws became greater until he attained at last a conquest over the universe, which to our finite understanding seems absolutely complete. The will of God is directed for conquest towards himself as towards his children. We may be certain that through self-effort, the inherent and innate powers of God have been developed to a God-like degree. Thus, He has become God.

The supreme Being of the universe transcends the human understanding. His intelligence is as the sum of all other intelligences. There can be no rational discussion of the details of God's life or nature. To him we give the most complete devotion, for to us he is in all respects infinite and perfect. His Godhood, however, is the product of simple obedience to the laws of the universe.

Many Gods. In the unseen pre-existent world, many other intelligent beings have been engaged in acquiring power over the forces of the universe. There is little probability of any two of these attaining exactly the same degree or place of progress, at the same time. There is rather the probability of infinite gradation from the lowest to the highest development. Some may be approaching God in power, others may be immeasurably far from the Lord in power, nevertheless immeasurably far above us mortal men of the earth. Such intelligent beings may be as gods to us for they possess to a greater or less degree the quality of Godhood. The acceptance of the doctrines in the preceding chapters makes it a logical necessity to believe that there are many beings so highly developed that they are as gods.

Why Man is Man. It is evident from what has been said that man, subject to eternal laws, in the far-off beginning must have exercised his will towards his present state of manhood. As more knowledge and power are attained, growth becomes increasingly more rapid. God, exalted by his glorious intelligence, is moving on into new fields of power with a rapidity of which we can have no conception, whereas man, in a lower stage of development, moves relatively at a snail-like, though increasing pace. Nevertheless, man is moving onward in eternal progression. In short, man is a god in embryo. He comes of a race of gods, and as his eternal growth continues, he will approach more nearly the position which to us is Godhood, and which is everlasting in its power over the elements of the universe.

God's Help to Man. Self-effort, the conscious operation of will, has enabled man to attain his present high position. However, while all progress is due to self-effort, other beings of power may contribute largely to the ease of man's growth. God, standing alone, cannot conceivably possess the joy that may come to him if hosts of other advancing and increasing workers labor in harmony with him. Therefore, because of his love for his children and his desire to continue in the way of greatest joy, he has proceeded to aid others in their onward progress.

Knowledge may be transmitted from intelligence to intelligence. God offered to help some of the waiting intelligent beings secure the knowledge that he had already gained, in such a manner that they need not traverse the road that he had traversed, but might find other and perhaps simpler opportunities of universal existence. He devised plans of progression whereby the experiences of one person might be used by an inferior one. Each person should give of his experience to others, so that none need do unnecessary work. In that manner, through the united effort of all, the whole race of progressive beings receives an added onward impetus.

The work and glory of God is to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

Man's Help to God. The progress of intelligent beings is a mutual affair. A lone God in the universe cannot find great joy in his power. The Lord, being in harmony with eternal laws, can accomplish his purpose best as the whole universe advances. The development of intelligence increases the variety within the universe, for each active individual may bring new relationships into view, and thus increase manifold the body of acquired truth. In that sense, the man who progresses through his increase in knowledge and power becomes a co-laborer with God, and may be said, indeed, to be a help to God. It is a comforting thought, that not only do we need God but that God also needs us. True, the need God has of us is relatively small, and the help he gives us is infinitely large, yet the relation exists for the comfort and assurance of man.

God's Attributes. To analyze the Supreme Intelligence of the universe, the Lord whom we worship, is a futile attempt, to which men of shallow minds only give their time. That which is infinite transcends the human understanding. The Gospel accepts this condition calmly, knowing that in the plan of things, greater truths will come with increased power until, in the progress of time, we shall understand that which now seems incomprehensible. For that reason, eternal or everlasting or infinite things are those understood by God, the supreme and governing Power, but not yet understood by us. Thus, "eternal punishment is God's punishment; endless punishment is God's punishment." Likewise, everlasting joy or endless blessings are God's joy and God's blessings. Man acknowledges in this manner that all things are relative to God.

Man does not understand the Lord fully, yet an understanding between man and God does exist, since he comprehends our every need. He recognizes our difficulties, hopes and sorrows, faults and follies. God is supreme; his justice is perfect; his love is unmeasurable and his mercy without end; his justice and love and mercy are tempered by his own divine memory. The Lord's relation to man is, in a literal sense, that of father to son, for we are of the same race with God. We may rest secure that God's attributes are, with others, those that man possesses, made great and beautiful. He is our Father who knows and understands us.
