John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 7

MAN IS THAT HE MAY HAVE JOY

Is the increasing power of man sufficient reward for the effort and struggle that must accompany progression? This question comes to every student of the Gospel. Power in itself may not be the ideal end of existence. It becomes necessary, therefore, to determine if gifts are associated with power that make worthwhile the eternal searching out and use of knowledge in order that greater power may be won.

Consciousness and the Universe. Intelligent spiritual beings have been conscious, from the beginning, of the world in which they found themselves. They must have been susceptible from the first, to pleasure and pain, and must have had equivalents of our senses, which possibly were keener than those that we now possess. When they were placed in opposition to any law of nature, pain or its equivalent undoubtedly resulted exactly as today. When they conformed to the law, satisfaction must have been sensed, as today.

Intelligent beings can not rejoice in pain; therefore, from the beginning, to avoid pain and to secure joy, they have searched out and obeyed the law. The more advanced an intelligence, the greater number of laws that are understood to which adaptation may be made, and therefore the greater the possibility of joy. The search for increasing power carried on by all normal beings, is then really a search for a greater and more abiding joy. There is no godliness in pain, except as it is an incident in securing more knowledge. True freedom, which is full joy, is the complete recognition of law and adaptation to it. Bondage comes from ignorance of law or opposition to it.

The Primeval Condition. Man's approach to a fullness of joy is pictured in his revealed history. Through the veil of forgetfulness we see but dimly our pre-existent condition. The Gospel student does not really concern himself greatly with the details of the life before this one; so much needs to be done in this life that he is content to know the great outlines of pre-existence which may assist him to understand the eternal journey of intelligences. Of the primeval condition of man little is known. He found about him as his conscious life began many forces, operating in divers ways, and to control them and thus to sense joy, he began to study them. The story of that early day of striving has not been told to mortal man.

The First Estate. Matter exists, perhaps, in many forms, but may be classified as the ponderable matter of earth, known directly through the senses, and as the imponderable matter which cannot be sensed directly by man. This second class, often called spirit matter, is perhaps most important, for it is not unlikely that from it are derived all other forms of matter.

It was of first importance that intelligent beings, aiming to conquer the universe, should learn to understand and to use correctly the properties of universal matter in all of its forms. As nearly as can be learned, the efforts of man were at first devoted to education in the properties of spirit matter. We were begotten spirits by God, who thus became our Father, and we his sons and daughters. Our career in the spirit world is often spoken of as man's first estate.

How long man remained in the first estate is not known. Undoubtedly, however, it was long enough to enable him to become thoroughly familiar with all manifestations of spirit substance. Only when education in this division of the universe was completed were we permitted to enter the next estate.

The Second Estate. The kind of matter characteristic of this earth also forms an important part of the universe. No spirit can acquire real mastery over the universe until this form of matter is so thoroughly understood as to be used and governed. The next step in the education of these intelligent beings was, therefore, to teach them familiarity with gross matter. Consequently, the spirit beings passed out of the spirit world and were born into the world of earthly things, the world we now occupy, as men and women clothed upon with bodies consisting of gross matter, so that intimate familiarity with the nature and possibilities of substances of earth might be acquired. This is called the second estate of man.

The business of man is to become so thoroughly acquainted with earth conditions, that, through the possession of an earthly body, he may go onward, upward, forever.

The Third Estate. We pass out of this, but reappear in another world. For a brief time we are separated from our earth-worn body, but finally we shall become possessed of bodies, composed of both kinds of universal matter. In this estate, spirit-matter and the grosser matter of earth of our final bodies are represented by their essences, which permit perfect freedom and ease of movement and thought. These celestial bodies, as they are called, connect the intelligence of man with all parts of the universe, and become mighty helps in the endless search for truth. This is the third estate of man.

Such then are the three estates, and, so far as known, all the estates of man.

Whether the outline, as here presented, is in its details precise or not, matters little. The essential thing is that man has to undergo experience upon experience to attain the desired mastery of the external universe; and that we, of this earth, are passing through an estate designed wholly for our further education.

Everlasting Joy. It follows that, in each estate, with each onward step, a profounder knowledge of the laws of the universe and a fuller development of the personal will are attained. When conscious, active wills are thus at work, the new knowledge makes possible a more perfect adaptation of man to law. The more completely law is obeyed, the greater the consciousness of perfect joy. Throughout eternal life, increasing intelligence is attained, leading to greater adaptation to law, resulting in increasingly greater joy. Therefore it is that eternal life is the greatest gift of God, and that the plan of salvation is priceless.
