John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 9

THE GREAT PLAN

The plan proposed by God for the progress and government of the spirits who entered upon their earth careers is revealed only so far as necessary for the guidance of man. We may remain certain that the Great Plan is based upon eternal laws that always have been and will be operative. Matters pertaining to man's earth-life are of eternal interest; and the laws formulated for the guidance of man on earth are fundamental for the guidance of man in any place and at all times. Nothing is temporary or transient about the Plan itself, for it rests on eternal foundations.

Forgetfulness. One condition of the Plan is that the spirits transferred to the earth shall remain here in forgetfulness of an earlier existence. As in a dream, in moments of deep spiritual feeling, we occasionally seem to recall our pre-existent life. A veil has been drawn over the past; and, without the aid of memory, man fights his battle with the world of gross matter. This forgetfulness seems reasonable. The spirit of man accepted the earth-plan in detail, and if he remembered every step that led to the acceptance, and every detail of the Plan itself, there would not be much need for the exercise of will in adhering to it. Left as he is, with little memory to steady him, he must exercise all his power to compel surrounding forces to serve him in searching out the past and in prophesying of the future. By such vigorous exercise of his will he develops a more intimate acquaintanceship with the things of the earth.

Subject to Earth Conditions. Intimacy with the conditions of earth is necessary to give man final knowledge of them. Such information cannot be obtained second hand nor by casual or superficial acquaintanceship. For that reason, probably, man has been brought so completely under the subjection of gross matter that he has no power over it beyond that which he gains as he obtains knowledge of it. Hence, on this earth, stripped of all power, and left, as it were, helpless in the midst of contending universal forces, man must search out the nature of the things about him and determine their laws before he acquires power over the earth and thereby enters into a condition of joy. In the face of the impending change called death, man is determined to acquire the power that will lift his earthly body from the grave and give him an eternal association with all the elements of the universe.

Laws to be Obeyed. To enter into the fulness of progressive joy, a man must, as has been said, subject himself to the laws of the universe. In God's Plan for life on earth is a system of laws representing eternal realities, to which man must conform. Such a law, for instance, is faith, which, in its simple, universal meaning, is man's certainty that in the universe is found everything he may desire for his upbuilding and advancement, and that the eternal relations of universal forces will prevail in the end for his good. Another such fundamental law, to which man must conform, is that of repentance, which in its larger sense is merely faith made active. Passive faith can do little for man's advancement. Yet another such law is that of baptism, which is essentially obedience to existing laws. And still another such law is that of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which perhaps means that a man may place himself in touch with the whole of the universe, including the beings of superior intelligence that it contains, and draw knowledge from forces beyond the earth. These and other laws are given as means for man's development. They sharpen his free agency, develop his habits of obedience to law, and establish for him communication with God. A plan formulated by an intelligent Being must necessarily be composed of laws, for even the infinite relationships of matter and energy fall naturally into groups of invariable laws. The laws of the Plan like those above stated, are logical necessities, if the earth-plan be accepted.

An Organization. It follows of necessity that if there is a plan intended for many persons there must be an organization to carry out the provisions of the plan and to make it available to all. The plan is not for one alone, but for many. All must be served and blessed by the Great Plan. Those, therefore, who subject themselves to the earth-plan with its laws, must needs group themselves so that the laws may be operative for all. A person is able to serve in the advancement of the whole race of man, only when there is unity of purpose and effort, such as may be secured by organization. The question of organization involves those of priesthood authority and others, later to be discussed.

All to Accept the Plan. The full earth-plan has been accepted by all the spirits who appear on earth, in conformity with their vote in the Great Council. That is fundamental. However, those who enter upon their earth-careers may accept or reject the Gospel on earth; but, since the full success of the Plan is based upon the progression of all the spirits, it becomes necessary to use every possible effort to secure for the Plan the acceptance on earth by all who approved it in the spirit world, and who, therefore, have been allowed to enter upon the pilgrimage of earth. God's purpose in the Plan will be incomplete so long as one soul remains unwilling to comply with the requirements of the Plan.

Life on earth deals directly with gross matter and the forces pertaining to it. The laws formulated for the guidance of man are especially devised for earth conditions, and belong to the earth. For instance, water baptism, the symbol of obedience to God and acceptance of his love, is essentially an ordinance of and for this earth. It is not thinkable that water baptism is practiced in a future estate for water is an earth substance. If this be true, then all who enter upon the earth-career, and who desire the perfected joy derived from the Gospel, must have baptism on this earth. Should some of the spirits refuse, while on earth, to accept the Gospel, or fail to hear it, baptism, belonging to the earth, must be done for them, vicariously, on earth, so that they, having had the work done for them here, may accept or reject the ordinance in their life beyond the grave. This is the motive of the work for the dead. The earth ordinances must be done by or for every soul born upon the earth so that the earth-experience may not be in vain, should the Gospel be accepted in the remotest day of eternity. This view becomes more important when it is recalled that the ordinances of the earth, belonging primarily to the earth, stand for vast, eternal realities, indispensable to man's progress.

When the simple ordinances of the Gospel, as pertaining to the earth, have been done for the dead, and accepted by them, then the dead may be judged as of the earth, and may receive the blessings of the obedient who conform to law.

The Meaning of the Earth-Plan. The earth-plan, the plan of salvation, or the Great Plan, for the guidance of the spirits placed on earth, may perhaps be more clearly understood if it is compared to the great chart in the captain's cabin by which the vessel is steered. Life on earth is as the large and tumultuous ocean. The chances of shipwreck, or of being driven out of the set course, are many. If, however, the ocean is well charted, the mariners can better avoid the sunken reefs and other dangers, and after the storm can more readily return to the course so that the destined port may be entered with a good bill of health. The Gospel is such a chart, on which the journey of life is outlined, showing the dangers of the journey, the havens of rest and the final destination. If a man accept the chart, and use it in his life's career, he will find the voyage pleasant and his arrival secure, and his life will be as that of one cast in pleasant places.

THE BEGINNING OF THE EARTH WORK
