John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 10

THE COMING OF MAN

The decision arrived at in the Great Council was carried out by those to whom the authority to do so was committed.

Making of the Earth. The first step, in carrying out the Great Plan, was to secure a place on which the desired experience might be gained. To accomplish this, the earth was made from materials found in the universe, which, by the intelligent power of God, were collected and organized into the earth. The earth was not made from nothing, nor by the fiat of God, except as his will and words determined that the work should be undertaken. In the clumsy manner of man, adding stone to stone or material to material, the earth was not made; rather, great forces, existing in the universe, set into ceaseless operation by the directing intelligence of God, assembled and brought into place the materials constituting the earth, until, in the course of long periods of time, this sphere was made suitable for the abode of man. In the making of the earth, as in all other matters pertaining to the destiny of man, the work was done in complete and orderly harmony with the existing laws of the universe. The Mosaic six days represent successive stages in the building of the earth, each measured by ages of time. The forces of nature act steadily, though often slowly in the accomplishment of great works.

The Builders. The creation of the earth, the details of which are not known, must have been marvelously and intensely appealing in its interest to the intelligent beings who, because of their exalted knowledge, had the necessary power over the elements and forces of the universe to accomplish the forming of an earth. Three great intelligent Beings were in supreme authority in the building of the earth; namely, God, the Father, his Son Jehovah, who became the Christ, and Michael, who became the first man, Adam. These three Beings were naturally the ones concerned in the making of an earth for the sojourn of the spirits, for it was through the agency of God, the Father, that the spirit beings were started on the road of eternal progression; it was about the mission of Jehovah, the Son of God, that the differences of opinion raged in the Great Council, and finally, it was Adam, or Michael, who was appointed to be the one to come upon the earth, and there to subject himself to death, so that the procreation of spirits in earthly tabernacles might be begun. These three Beings, who are so vitally concerned in the destinies of the human race, had charge of the making of an earth which should be a suitable and pleasant habitation for the earth-clad spirits.

The Coming of Man. The earth at last was finished. Adam, the first man, and his wife, Eve, then appeared on earth. The statement that man was made from the dust of the earth is merely figurative. It may mean that he was made of universal materials, as is the earth. Likewise, the statement that God breathed into man the breath of life is figurative and refers to the existence of the spirit within the body. The exact process whereby man was placed upon earth is not known with certainty, nor is it vital to a satisfactory understanding of the plan of salvation. We may rest assured that the first man and woman were eternal beings, who subjected themselves to life on earth, so that the process of clothing eternal spirits with mortal bodies might begin.

The "Fall." Biblical lore and ancient traditions among nearly all races of man, tell of the "fall" of the first parents from the grace of God. An event called the "fall" did occur, but it was a necessary part of the Great Plan. Adam and Eve were eternal beings, not under the ban of mortal death. Subject to death they must become, however, if their posterity should inherit corruptible bodies. The fall was a deliberate use of a law, by which Adam and Eve became mortal, and could beget mortal children. The exact nature of this event or the exact manner in which the law was used is not understood. The Bible account is, undoubtedly, only figurative. There was no essential sin in the "fall," except that the violation of any law, whether deliberate or otherwise, is always followed by an effect. The "fall" of Adam and Eve was necessary, for without it there would have been no begetting on the earth of spirits with mortal bodies, and the Plan proposed and confirmed in the Great Council would have remained inoperative. "Adam fell that man might be." Adam and Eve, in view of the great sacrifices they made to make the Great Plan a reality, are the great hero and heroine of human history.

The First Blessing. The curse; so-called, pronounced by God upon Adam as he went out of the Garden of Eden, that in the sweat of his brow he should earn his bread, is possibly the greatest of all human blessings, and it is a simple extension of another great eternal law. From the beginning of the dim past, when man slumbered with only feeble thought of his possible vast future, the compelling law of his progress has been that only personal effort can achieve desirable things. The price to be paid for advancement is vigorous self-effort. The active will precedes every step of progress. To exercise the will means labor, which may well be represented by "the sweat of the brow." The so-called curse, however, carries with it the magnificent promise that man, by the exercise of his powers, may subdue the earth, and make it serve all his needs. In a universe controlled and directed by an intelligent God, every intelligent will may ultimately control for its own use not only things of the earth but all forces of the universe. The conquest of the earth depends entirely upon the degree to which man exercises his will, that is, the degree to which he accepts the obligations as well as the benefits of the first blessing.

The Garden of Eden. The first days on earth of the first man and the first woman are of intense interest to every student of the subject, and it is to be regretted that so little knowledge of those early times has survived the vicissitudes of time. Adam and Eve were placed in a place of limited extent, known to us as the Garden of Eden. Within its precincts conditions existed, not known by the outside world, into which the first parents were driven after the Fall. In the Garden, God walked with man and taught him the living truth.

A Wise Beginning. In all matters pertaining to the beginning of man's earth career, it may be observed that proper preparations had been made. There has been no blind destiny working out unknown purposes; instead, intelligent forces have provided for man from beginning to end. The whole scheme of man's life, here and hereafter, is one of order and system.
