John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 11

THE COURSE OF THE GOSPEL ON EARTH

The Great Plan provided that man should come upon earth with the memory of his past taken from him, so that, beginning his earth-life as a child, he might repeat on earth the efforts that earned for him progress in the pre-existent life. Even Adam and Eve forgot the details of their previous lives, for it was necessary that all be under the same law, and that no strength be derived from the memory of pre-existent experiences.

Adam Hears the Gospel. The only rational thing that could be done for spirits so placed on earth was to teach them the story of man's origin and destiny and the meaning and duties of earth-life. The plea of ignorance would not then be valid. Consequently, soon after the first parents had been driven out of the Garden of Eden, an angel appeared and taught Adam the story of man from the first to the last day. The plan of salvation, including the atoning sacrifice of Jesus, the organized Church, the purpose and powers of the priesthood and the rights and duties of man upon earth, whether within or without the Church, was fully unfolded. Adam, the first earth-pupil of God, was taught, as his first lesson, the eternal philosophy overshadowing the existence of man. When Adam had been taught all this, and had accepted the truth, he was baptized, even as men are baptized today, and he received all the other ordinances of the Gospel and was given full authority through the Priesthood conferred upon him to officiate in God's name in all matters pertaining, under the Great Plan, to the welfare of man.

The First Dispensation. As children and children's children came to Adam, he taught them carefully all that had been taught him, so that the knowledge of the law might remain upon the earth. The ordinances of the Gospel were practiced, the righteous were organized into the Church, even as today, and the authority of the Priesthood was transmitted by Adam to his children, and by them to their children, so that the precious gift might not be lost. In those days the Church was probably fully organized according to the patriarchal order; at least in the days of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, it seems quite clear that the Church was established with all of its essential parts. The activity in behalf of the Gospel which began with Adam and continued until Noah, at the time of the great flood, is ordinarily known as the first dispensation of the Gospel.

The First Apostasy. From the beginning of his earth-career, Adam retained his free agency. God, directly or through agents, might teach and command, but Adam, a free agent, had the right to accept or reject as seemed him best. Adam's children, likewise, though taught the way of righteousness by the patriarch of the race, could accept or reject for themselves whatever was taught them. Free agency was man's possession in that early day as it is now.

The descendants of Adam soon began to exercise their free agency, some for, and many against, the Great Plan. Cain, a son of Adam, exercised his free agency in the murder of his brother Abel. As time went on, large numbers departed from the truth concerning man's place in the universe as taught by Adam, and refused to accept the Gospel. Almost concurrently with the establishment of the Church in the first dispensation there was, therefore, a first apostasy. It is ever so, it has ever been so, and ever will be so, that in a world of intelligent beings, possessing free agency, some will accept and others will reject truth. No doubt, in the process of time, truth will triumph, and all may be brought to understand the will of God, but the conquest is certain to be attended by many temporary departures from truth. Nevertheless, Adam and those who remained true to his teachings continued, faithfully, to teach to others the eternal truth, so that they might perchance be made to return to the gospel which they had so lightly cast aside.

Later Dispensations. The first apostasy culminated in the flood, which was sent because of the violence of that apostasy and the accompanying corruption of men. As far as known, only Noah and his immediate family were preserved. In them, however, was represented all the blood of the world. To the new race Noah explained fully that the flood was due to the wicked hardness of the hearts of the people, and to their refusal to accept eternal truth or to respect the authority of God, and that it was necessary, should calamity be avoided, to live in accordance with the Great Plan. The Gospel was taught them in its purity. Yet, it was only a short time before apostasy again occurred. The free agency of man cannot be curbed. However, it is probable, that there has not been, since the flood, such utter corruption as prevailed during the first apostasy.

From the days of the flood, the Lord or his messengers have appeared on earth, at various times, to restore truth or to keep it alive in the hearts of the faithful, so that the earth might never need to be without the knowledge of the Great Plan and the authority of the Priesthood. For instance, Melchizedek, the high priest, possessed a full measure of the authority of the holy Priesthood. To Abraham, the Lord and his angels appeared, and endowed him with the authority of God. So on, down the course of time, there are numerous instances of the appearance of the Lord to men to help them to a more perfect understanding of the truths that must be comprehended and obeyed, if men are to continue in their progressive development. It is not known how many men and women at various times have received such visitations, but it is probable that many, even when the Church has not been organized, have received and used the truths of life as embodied in the Great Plan.

Dispensation of the Meridian of Time. In the course of human history and in accordance with the Great Plan, Jesus, the Son of God, appeared on earth, to atone for the act of Adam and Eve, who "fell" that men might be. This is called the dispensation of the meridian of time. Jesus did live on earth, and gave his life so that our mortal bodies may rise from the grave and pass into eternal existence, beyond the reach of corruption. During the sojourn of Jesus on earth, he devoted himself to the teaching of the Gospel, including the story of the past and the present and the hope for the future. At no time since the days of Adam, had the Gospel been so fully taught and made so simply clear to the understanding as in the days of Jesus. Under the teachings and authority of the Savior, the Church was re-established.

The Great Apostasy. After the ascension of Jesus, the Church remained, for some time, fully organized. Thousands flocked to it, and the members lived in accordance with the doctrine taught by the Savior. Soon, however, history repeated itself. In the right of their free agency, those who had joined the church often refused to obey the laws and ordinances of the Gospel, and more often changed them to suit their own convenience. Such departures from the truth became more numerous and flagrant as time wore on, until error permeated the whole Church. At last, about six hundred years after Christ, the Gospel laws and ordinances had become so completely warped that it was as if the Church had departed from the earth. The authority of the Priesthood no longer remained with the Church. This was the great apostasy. From that time, universal darkness reigned upon earth for many centuries.

In those days, however, many honest men understood that the truth and authority of the Lord were not upon the earth, and hoped that the simple principles of the Gospel might again be correctly practiced by men. Among such were Huss, Luther and many others, who used their best endeavors to show the people that error ruled. At last, hosts of men were awakened to the true spiritual condition of the world, and the days of the Reformation began. The Reformation was a period of preparation for the last restoration of the Gospel on earth, but long years were required before the darkness of centuries could be lifted from the souls of men.

The Restoration. Finally, as men broke through the darkness, as intelligence became diffused among all men, and as liberality of thought grew and became respected, the Gospel was restored with the authority of the Priesthood and the organization of the Church. On an early Spring day, in the year 1820, in a wooded grove of western New York, God the Father and God the Son appeared to a fourteen-year-old boy named Joseph Smith, who had faithfully asked for divine help. Through the instrumentality of this boy, guided constantly by the Lord, the Church was re-established, the authority of the Priesthood again conferred upon numerous men, and a fulness of knowledge pertaining to man's place in the universe offered to all who would listen. In time the Church was organized precisely as was the primitive Church, and more fully than at any other time in the history of the world. This was the great restoration, the beginning of the last dispensation.

Vital Facts. The Gospel was fully taught to the first man, who in turn taught it to others. The Church was organized from the beginning. As apostasy dimmed men's knowledge of the Gospel and undermined the Church, the full truth was repeatedly restored. At least four times has a complete statement of the Great Plan been made to the people of the earth—at the time of Adam, of Noah, of Jesus Christ and of Joseph Smith. Consequently, the Gospel has been on the earth and within the reach of men practically during the whole course of the earth's history. The fundamental truths of the Great Plan were taught to Father Adam and since that time have been spread broadcast over the earth. This wide dissemination of the truth, in all ages, explains the fact that practically every life philosophy proposed by man contains some of the truths of the Gospel. In every system of theology and in every sect there is a measure of truth, for all have drawn from the one fountain. All, no doubt, seek for truth, and believe that they have found it; but, in fact, they have only fragments, picked up here and there and worked into a system. Full truth must encompass the complete philosophy of man and the universe, including the authority to act for God in the working out of the Plan for human progress. Those who thus accept the whole Plan, constitute the Church of Christ. In the matters of the fulness of Gospel truth and of divine authority the Church and its imitators differ absolutely. There can be no duplicate set of truth and no double seat of authority.

The history of mankind makes it clear that free agency, for which the heavenly battle was waged, has been and is in full operation upon the earth. At first sight it may really seem that Lucifer's plan would have been best, for by it all men, in spite of themselves, would have been given the earth-experience and kept in the righteous path that leads to salvation. Yet, the spiritual origin of man, and the doctrine that he can advance only by self-effort, make it unthinkable that he should allow himself to be, as it were, blindfolded and directed under compulsion by some greater power. Men are directed, no doubt, by beings of higher intelligence, but in such directing, our wills must be allowed to play their part. There can be no real satisfaction, if it were possible, in advancement forced upon man. Lucifer's plan was impossible.

It must also be remembered that men are not necessarily evil because they do not accept the Gospel. Some find it impossible to understand the truth because their hearts are so set upon other things, and others have been led by their free agency in one direction, whereas the Gospel would lead them in another. Nevertheless, though men are not evil because they refuse to accept the Gospel, of necessity they retard their progress when they fail to obey the law, and thereby they invite upon themselves the punishment that comes without fail to all who are not in full harmony with controlling universal laws.

MAN AND GOD
