John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 13

MAN'S COMMUNION WITH GOD

Man is not left to himself on the face of the earth. Though his memory of a former estate has been taken away, he does not drift unwatched and unassisted through the journey on earth. At the best, man is only a student who often needs the assistance of a teacher. It is indispensable, therefore, to know how communication may be established by man with intelligent beings wherever they may be.

The Will to Ask. The first of the fundamental principles by the use of which man may confer with God is that man must show his desire to receive by asking for help. Whatever a man gains from higher surrounding wisdom is initiated either by a petition or by a receptive attitude which is equivalent to a request. Unless a man ask, he is in no condition to receive, and ordinarily nothing is given him. On extraordinary occasions, when God uses a man to accomplish his purposes, something may be given without the initiatory prayer, but such gifts are rarely of value to the man himself. To get help from without, a man must ask for it. That is the law. History confirms this doctrine. Adam prayed to God, and the angel came to explain the plan of salvation. Joseph Smith, the latter-day restorer of the Gospel, prayed in the grove, and the Father and the Son appeared. It is unnatural to believe that gifts are given without prayer. That the answer is often overwhelmingly greater than the expressed desire, is only a sign of the love of the Giver, and does not remove the necessity of asking, as the first step in obtaining what a person desires. It is probable that no request, addressed to a being of superior intelligence, is refused. However, the answer comes at a time and place not predetermined by man. Naturally, even though he asks, man has the right to reject whatever is offered him; in the midst of plenty he may refuse to eat.

By Personal Appearance. In answer to prayer, God may appear personally. There is no physical or spiritual reason why the Heavenly Father should not appear to his children in person whenever he so desires. In fact, sacred history indicates that the Lord appeared to Adam in the Garden of Eden, to Abraham in the Holy Land, to Moses on the mountain, to Joseph in the sacred grove, and to many others at various times during the earth's history. Likewise Jesus Christ, the Son of God, lived upon this earth and walked and talked with men. To limit the powers of God, by saying that he cannot or will not now appear to man, is to make him a creature of less power than is possessed by man.

By the Visitation of Angels. The will of God may be transmitted to man by visible representatives, who are beings of a lower degree of intelligence and development. Angels have frequently visited men and brought to them divine messages concerning their own affairs or the affairs of the world. After Adam was driven out of the Garden of Eden, an angel came and laid before him the philosophy of man's existence. Similarly, angels appeared to Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joseph Smith and numerous other persons, many of which appearances are not recorded in history. These vivid personages, intelligent beings vastly superior to man, knowing well the laws of nature and therefore able to control them, may visit with man, though not seen with the natural eye. Most probably we walk among a company of such invisible, intelligent spirits. The development from the earth-journey comes largely from the self-effort of man, who, apparently, must depend upon himself. If at will, he could bring to his aid visible, supernatural beings, to tide him over his difficulties, his need of self-development and self-dependence would become very small, and the man would not grow in strength.

By the Holy Spirit. God is a personal being of body—a body limited in extent. He cannot, therefore, at a given moment be personally everywhere. Time and space surround him as they surround us. Nevertheless, it is known that God, by his power, will and word, is everywhere present. The Lord must, therefore, be in possession of other agencies whereby his will may be transmitted at his pleasure to the uttermost confines of space. The chief agent employed by God to communicate his will to the universe is the holy spirit, which must not be confused with the Holy Ghost, the personage who is the third member of the Godhead. The holy spirit permeates all the things of the universe, material and spiritual. By the holy spirit the will of God is radio-transmitted, broadcasted as it were. It forms what may be called the great system of communication among the intelligent beings of the universe. The holy spirit vibrates with intelligence; it takes up the word and will of God as given by him or by his personal agents, and transmits the message to the remotest parts of space. By the intelligent operation and infinite extent of the holy spirit, the whole universe is held together and made as one unit. By its means there is no remoteness into which intelligent beings may escape the dominating will of God. By the holy spirit, the Lord is always with us, and "is nearer than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet." The intelligent earthly manifestations of the holy spirit are commonly spoken of as the natural forces. It is conceivable that the thunders and the lightnings, the movements of the heavenly bodies, the ebb and flow of the oceans, and all the phenomena known to man, are only manifestations of the will of the Lord as transmitted and spread by the measureless, inexhaustible, infinite, all-conducting holy spirit.

By the holy spirit, which fills every person, man may obtain information from the Lord. By its means come the messages which transcend the ordinary methods of acquiring knowledge. By it man may readily communicate with God, or God with him. When a person utters his prayer in faith, it is impressed upon the holy spirit, and transmitted, so that God may read the man's desire.

This doctrine of a rational theology has been duplicated in a modest way by the development of wireless telegraphy and by radio. According to scientific views, by electrical waves messages are spread throughout the universe to be taken up by any person who has the proper receiving apparatus.

The Eternal Record. So thoroughly permeated with the holy spirit is the immensity of space that every act and word and thought are recorded and transmitted everywhere, so that all who know how to read may read. Thus we make an imperishable record of our lives. To those whose lives are ordered well this is a blessed conception; but to those of wicked lives, it is most terrible. He who has the receiving apparatus, in whose hands the key is held, may read from the record of the holy spirit, an imperishable history of all that has occurred during the ages that have passed in the world's history. This solemn thought, that in the bosom of the holy spirit is recorded the whole history of the universe—our most secret thought and our faintest hope—helps man to walk steadily in the midst of the contending appeals of life. We cannot hide from the Master.
