John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 15

THE KINGDOM OF THE EVIL ONE

If there is progression, there may also be retrogression; if there is good, there may be evil. Everything has its opposite.

Descending Beings. In a universe containing eternal, intelligent personalities possessing free agency, there may be beings who are in opposition to the general laws of progress. In fact, such opposing intelligent spirits or men have always and everywhere been found. Naturally, those who devote themselves to the opposition of law are waging a hopeless battle, and lose their strength as time goes on. Nevertheless, since many of them acquired great knowledge before they turned against the truth, they may long continue active in their opposition to righteousness. The final end of such beings is not known. As they are eternal, it is doubtful if they can ever fully destroy themselves. Nevertheless, as they oppose law, they will at last shrivel up and become as if they were not. Beings who would stand in the way of progress, also use the forces of the universe, as best they can, and must be considered, in the ordering of life, whether in or out of the earth.

The Devil. The number of descending spirits in the universe is not known. In fact, little is known about the whole matter, which probably is for the good of man. The scant knowledge that we have, comes largely from the account of the Great Council. One of the great spirits there present, proposed to save men without the use of their free agency. When he and his numerous followers failed to secure the adoption of this plan, they left the Council, and set themselves thenceforth against the plan adopted by the majority. The leader in this rebellion was Lucifer, said to be a prince of the morning, who, undoubtedly, through much diligence, had acquired a high position among the spirits. Even those of high degree may fall. No man is sure of himself, unless from day to day he can keep the germ of opposition from settling within his breast.

Lucifer and his followers, who fell from the Great Council, are the devils and his angels, possessing definite wills and free agencies, who are still continuing the battle that originated in the heavens. The fundamental conception of eternalism, including eternal beings, make reasonable the existence of a personal devil, with personal agents, whose indestructible wills are used to oppose the Great Plan through adherence to which man entered upon his earth career.

Man and the Devil. If man wills not to be helped by God, he fails to receive the benefit of any divine assistance that may be tendered him. Even so, if the will of man is opposed to evil the devil has little or no power. It is only when man so wills that he may hear fully the voice of God; and it is only when man so wills that he hears the message of the devil. The doctrine that a request must initiate the gift is as true in the relationship that may be established between man and the devil as between man and God. There must be a surrender to God or to the devil, to participate in good or evil. The Lord sends his messages throughout the universe; so does the devil as far as his knowledge permits. However, the messages of the evil one need not be heard unless man so desires, and tunes his spirit to evil. In reality, therefore, a man who has command of himself does not need to fear the evil one. He is not a force that can work harm, unless man places himself under the subjection of evil; but, if the devil be allowed a hearing, he may become the master of the man, and lead him downward on the road of retrogression.

The Devil Subject to God. Though the free agency of man is supreme with respect to himself, it must not interfere with the free agencies of others. This law provided by the Lord, the perfected intelligence, holds for all ascending or descending intelligent beings. Therefore, the devil, subject to God, is allowed to operate only within well-defined limits. He may suggest ways of iniquity, but he cannot force men to obey his evil designs. A man who sincerely desires to walk in righteousness need have no fear that the devil may force him into evil. That is not permitted.

By the knowledge of opposites, man may draw conclusions of far-reaching importance in his course of progression. The observation of the operations of the devil and his powers may, therefore, serve some good in setting up contrasts for man's guidance. This does not mean that it is necessary for man to commit evil to know truth. On the contrary, every rational impulse resents the thought that a man must know sin to know righteousness better. The will for righteousness is strengthened when temptation is overcome. Unfortunately, the works of the evil one may be plentifully observed in the world, among those who have forsaken the Great Plan and the path of progression.

MAN AND THE CHURCH
