John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 16

WHY A CHURCH?

Those who believe in the Great Plan and who have met its requirements form the community known as the Church. Some persons who have given the subject only superficial study find it difficult to understand why a church should be necessary.

Man Helped by God on Earth. It was not intended in the plan of salvation that man, though in forgetfulness, should wander alone and helpless upon the earth. Rather was it intended and made necessary that men of free agency, while gaining experience by actual contact and contest with the earth and earthly forces, should be under the watchful and helpful care of beings of superior intelligence. In an intelligent world it could not well be otherwise. In fact, without the help of superior intelligence, the earth would be chaotic instead of orderly. The Great Plan is founded on intelligence, guided by a God of intelligence, and has for its purpose the gaining of greater intelligence.

Avenues of communication with God have been pointed out, but men are more or less impervious to divine messages and need earthly help to understand the will of God. The Church, the community of persons with the same intelligent faith and desire and practice, is the organized agency through which God deals with his children and presents his will. Moreover, the authority to act for God must be vested on earth in some one organization and not independently in every man. The Church holds this authority for the use of man. Besides, it is the common law of the universe, that when intelligent beings are organized, as of one body, they progress faster, individually and collectively. The Church as an organization represents God on earth and is the official means of communication between man and God.

The Plan of Salvation for All. In the Great Council the earth-career was planned for all the spirits there assembled who would accept the Plan. The earth and whatever pertains to it are for all and not for the one or the few. This means that man must not go through his earth-life independently, doing as he pleases, living apart from his fellowmen and accepting the Great Plan in his own way. By his own free agency he became a member of the hosts of the earth, and by his own promise, in the Great Council, he accepted the definite laws of the Great Plan to be enforced by God. The Church is the community of those who, having accepted the Plan, desire unitedly to work out their mutual salvation under the settled authority of God.

The purpose of the Great Plan cannot be wholly fulfilled until all have heard the Gospel and have had the opportunity of receiving its ordinances. The Church as a body undertakes to carry the Gospel to all humanity. Only when the Church is not organized on earth, may individuals who understand the Great Plan stand alone; but even in such case it is the bounden duty of those having the knowledge to give themselves to the converting of others, so that the Church may be organized for the welfare of mankind.

Orderliness. If each intelligent being placed on this earth were to lead an independent life and deal independently with his God, relative to all matters concerning him, many of which would of necessity involve others, there would soon be disorder among humanity. It has been found desirable in all earthly affairs to organize mankind so that order may prevail. By the organization known as the Church all things pertaining to the Great Plan may be done in order. Chaos is abhorrent to the intelligent mind.

Test of Attitude. There is yet another reason for the organization of a church. The plan of salvation is one founded in intelligence. Man must accept and live its laws and ordinances intelligently. By his adherence to these laws and ordinances, the Church gives a man a means of testing himself as to his attitude towards the whole Plan. Whatever is done in life somehow connects itself with the Church. A church which separates itself from the actual, daily life of man does not acknowledge the essential unity of the universe and is not founded on man's intelligent conception of the constitution of the universe. The Church, therefore, must possess a system of laws the compliance with which at all times and in every occupation will be as a test of his progress and spiritual condition, and in turn, a guide for his future work. It would be difficult for a man to apply such tests to himself if he stands alone, away from his fellowmen and making laws for himself to fit his apparent needs.

Authority. There is much to be done for man and by man during the earth-career. Every day brings its problems; laws are to be enforced; ordinances to be performed, and God must communicate with his earthly children. Much of this work involves authority, which must be settled somewhere if order is to prevail. The authority to act for God is committed to the Church, as the organized community of believers, and, indeed, authority is a distinguishing characteristic of the Church. Every man has or may receive authority to act in his own behalf in many matters, but to exercise authority in behalf of others requires the kind of authority which God has delegated to the Church. Some form of authority from God is necessary in all our work, and the earthly source of God's authority is the Church, organized by the supreme, intelligent God.

The Great Purpose of the Church. The plan of eternal progress involves every living soul who comes upon earth. To the Church is committed the huge task of keeping alive this Plan and of carrying it to all the nations. Those who have accepted the truth must be kept active; those who have not accepted it must be taught it; all must hear it; even for the dead the essential ordinances must be performed. The Church, then, is a great missionary organization. This, of itself, justifies the existence of the Church, for it is improbable that any individual would or could undertake the conversion of all the people to eternal truth, or could constantly give daily help to the multitude constituting the Church.
