John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 19

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH

To carry on the diversified work of the Church requires a comprehensive and effective organization. An organization in turn needs officers. All officers of the Church must hold the Priesthood in which resides the authority of the Church, but the Priesthood is held also by many who are not called to official positions. Therefore, while authority to act in the offices of the Church is possessed by practically every man in the Church, that authority, in the administration of the affairs of the Church, becomes effective only when the man is called to exercise the authority.

The chief officers of the Church are herewith briefly enumerated.

General Authorities. The First Presidency consists of three presiding high priests, a President and two counselors, who supervise the work of the whole Church, in all matters of policy, organization and administration. No part of the work of the Church is beyond their authority. With the death of the President, the First Presidency becomes disorganized.

Associated with the First Presidency is the quorum of Twelve Apostles. The Twelve are special witnesses for Christ, and it is their duty to carry the Gospel to all the world. In addition, they give direct assistance to the First Presidency as may be required. When the quorum of the First Presidency is disorganized, the quorum of Twelve Apostles becomes the presiding quorum of the Church until the First Presidency is reorganized. The quorum of the Twelve has one president, who is always the senior apostle.

The Patriarchs of the Church possess sealing and blessing powers expressed only in formal patriarchal blessings. They receive instructions from the Presiding Patriarch.

The quorums of Seventy, the missionary quorums of the Church, are presided over by the Seven Presidents of the first quorum. This Council labors under the direction of the Twelve. If the First Presidency and the quorum of the Twelve were disorganized, simultaneously, the first quorum of Seventy would become the presiding quorum until full reorganization were effected.

The temporal affairs of the Church are largely cared for by the Presiding Bishopric, consisting of the presiding bishop and two counselors, but under the direction of the First Presidency. The Presiding Bishopric also has general supervision of the bishops of the wards of the Church.

The General Authorities of the Church are the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, the Presiding Patriarch, the First Council of Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric—making in all twenty-six men. These general, presiding authorities, representing all the great divisions of the Priesthood, supervise and direct all the general affairs of the Church.

Stakes of Zion. For administrative purposes the Church is divided into stakes containing usually from one thousand to ten thousand members. The stakes are presided over by a Stake Presidency, three high priests, the president and two counselors, which has the same relation to the stake that the First Presidency has to the whole Church. The Stake Presidency are assisted by the high council, consisting of twelve regular and when needed as many as six alternate counselors, who are all high priests. To this body, essentially a judicial body, is assigned also much of the work for the welfare of the members of the stake. Such other officers as may be needed are secured in each stake.

Wards of the Stakes. The stakes are divided into wards containing usually from one hundred to fifteen hundred members. Each ward is presided over by a Bishop and two counselors, high priests, who are assisted in various capacities by the local ward Priesthood.

The Priesthood in Stakes and Wards. In every ward, if large enough, quorums of deacons, teachers, priests, elders and seventy are organized. If there are not enough elders and seventy in one ward to form a quorum, then a quorum is organized from two or more wards. The high priests in a stake are usually assembled into one quorum for the stake. All of the Priesthood meet regularly in the ward to which they belong, at present on Sunday mornings, for the discussion of their duties and for studying the study outlines and books provided by the general Church authorities.

Auxiliary Organizations. In addition to the organizations of the Priesthood, there are helps in government known as auxiliary organizations. These are the Relief Society, for women, the Deseret Sunday School Union, the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, the Primary Association, and others that may be organized from time to time, such as seminaries, schools and colleges. These are represented by general boards, under the direction of the First Presidency. In each stake there are stake boards of these auxiliary organizations, under the direction of the stake presidency. Moreover, in each ward of the Church, if large enough, is an organization of each of the auxiliary activities of the Church. There is also a church-wide Genealogical Society with stake and ward representatives.

All Must Work. So complete an organization, ramifying throughout the Church, shows that all members of the Church should or may be at work. There is no place for the idler. Every person, man or woman, not averse to serving the Church, will find some duty to fill his life.

Tenure of Office. The officers of the Priesthood have no definite tenure of office. Since all hold the Priesthood, there is always a supply of ready material to fill the vacancies that may occur. The general authorities in the Church have generally held life positions, but a number of them, for various reasons, chiefly insubordination or error of doctrine, have been released before death. According to doctrine, no office in the Priesthood is absolutely certain of life tenure. Failure to perform properly the work of the office constitutes full cause for removal.

An Unpaid Ministry. The rewards of life should be and are only in part material. To assist, officially, in carrying out the Great Plan, brings its own distinct reward. The Priesthood of the Church, therefore, is unpaid. A man's duty in the Priesthood seldom takes all of his time, thus leaving him largely free to earn a livelihood by the use of his profession. When a man's whole time is taken by the Church, he receives his support from the Church, but there are very few cases of this kind. There is no Priesthood class, especially trained for the work, and striving for positions carrying with them high material remuneration. All should know the Gospel and be prepared to carry on the work.

Appointments in the Priesthood. The power to nominate men to fill official positions in the Church belongs to the Priesthood of the Church. Men are chosen from any walk in life, usually without previous warning and the acceptance of the office often means the sacrifice of business, profession, or ease of life. Under this system there can be no talk of men seeking Church offices. Preparation for Church service can be the only form of self-seeking, and that may or may not lead to any particular appointment. Meanwhile, the vast organization of the Church is such as to yield opportunity for service to every man; and in fact, every worthy worker should be kept busily engaged in the accomplishment of the Great Plan.

Common Consent. Every officer of the Priesthood or auxiliary organizations, though properly nominated, holds his position in the Church only with the consent of the people. Officers may be nominated by the Presidency of the Church, but unless the people accept them as officials, they cannot exercise the authority of the offices to which they have been called. All things in the Church must be done by common consent. This makes the people, men and women, under God, the rulers of the Church. Even the President of the Church, before he can fully enter upon his duties, or continue in the office, must be sustained by the people. It is the common custom in the Church to vote on Church officers in the general, stake and ward conferences. This gives every member an opportunity to vote for or against the officers. Meanwhile, the judiciary system of the Church is such that there is ample provision whereby any officer of the Church, if found in error, may be brought to justice and if found guilty be removed from his position.

The doctrine of common consent is fundamental in the Church, and is coincident with the fact that the Church belongs to all the people. Since the authority of the Priesthood is vested in all the people, it follows that the officials of the Priesthood must be responsible to the people. The responsibility and work of the Church are not only for but by the people as a whole.

Bestowal of the Priesthood. On the earth the Priesthood was first conferred on Adam and was handed down directly from Adam through his descendants to Noah. Every link in this progression of the Priesthood has been preserved. Similarly, after Noah, it was continued for many generations. Moreover, Jesus conferred the Priesthood directly upon his disciples. At various times in the history of the world, the Priesthood has been given by God to man and continued for various periods of time. In these latter days of the restored Church, John the Baptist appeared in person and conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Later, Peter, James and John, who had received the Priesthood from Jesus Christ, and who represented the Presidency of the Priesthood in those days, appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred upon them the Holy Priesthood and the apostleship which carried with it authority in the lower divisions of the Priesthood. In the Church of Christ the authority of the Priesthood may always be traced back directly to God from whom it radiates and whom it represents.
