John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 20

THE AUTHORITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD

The authority of the Priesthood is often misunderstood. It is frequently the rock upon which spiritual shipwreck is suffered.

The Foundation of Authority. The power or right to command or act is authority. In the beginning, man, conscious and in possession of a will, reached out for truth and gained new knowledge. Gradually, as his intelligence grew, he learned to control natural forces as he met them on his way. Knowledge, properly used, became power; and intelligent knowledge is the only true foundation of authority. The more intelligence a man possesses the more authority he may exercise. Hence, "the glory of God is intelligence," and "intelligence is the pathway up to the gods." This should be clear to all who exercise authority.

Absolute Authority. Such high authority, based on increasing intelligent knowledge, may be called absolute authority. All other forms, and many forms exist, must be derived from absolute authority, which is the essence of all authority. Absolute authority which cannot be fully comprehended, does not mean that full knowledge or full power has been gained over anything in the universe. The universe will forever reveal its secrets. By absolute authority is meant the kind of authority that results directly from an intelligent understanding of the things over which authority is exercised. Authority can, therefore, be absolute only so far as knowledge goes, and becomes more absolute as more knowledge is obtained. The laws of God are never arbitrary; they are always founded on truth.

Derived Authority. Anyone possessing the absolute authority resting on high intelligence may often find it necessary or convenient to ask others to exercise that authority for him. That leads to derived authority. It does not necessarily follow that those who are so asked, understand the full meaning of the authority that they exercise. The workman in a factory carries out the operations as directed by the chief technician, and obtains the desired results, though he does not to the same extent understand the principles involved.

Every person who has risen to the earth-estate possesses a certain degree of absolute authority, for he has knowledge of nature which gives him control over many surrounding forces. Every person possesses or should possess certain derived authority, not always wholly understood, which is exercised under the direction of a superior intelligence.

The Authority of Office. In an organized body like the Church, every activity must be governed by established laws. The officers chosen to enforce these laws and to carry on the regular work of the Church, exercise their power because of their office. Authority of office is only a form of derived authority—derived from the people who have agreed to submit their wills to certain officers, who are to enforce laws accepted by the people. Even such authority, belonging to official positions, must be founded on intelligent knowledge. The organization of the Church itself must be intelligently authoritative. Therefore, authority of office is best exercised when those holding it have qualified themselves intelligently for the work. The mistakes made by officers are commonly due to the want of the intelligence needed in the discharge of their duties. Fortunately, the Church is so organized that officials may be tried for their righteousness whenever their actions appear to be wrong to the people. Mistakes are most likely made by officials who will not qualify themselves for their work.

Authority and Free Agency. While intelligent knowledge establishes the highest degree of authority, absolute authority, yet it does not justify the exercising of authority that may conflict with the wills of others. The law of free agency must not be transcended; nor is it permissible to do anything that will hinder, in the least, the progress of man. Therefore authority should be exercised only in a manner to benefit other individuals. Naturally, when a community accepts a body of laws, and officers are appointed by the people to enforce the laws, the punishment of the disobedient is not an interference with free agency, for all have accepted the laws. Only when a person withdraws from the community does the community law become inoperative with respect to him. Laws must be enforced. All the officers in the Church, who merely represent the people, must be sustained by the people. The people govern the Church through their sustained authorities. When a person opposes righteousness, the worst than can be done is to sever that individual from the organization. The Priesthood has no higher authority. Punishment will come automatically to those who do wrong. The sinner is always found out.

Authority Over Self. The Priesthood conferred on man confers an authority which every man may always exercise with respect to himself and the Lord. By the authority of the Priesthood he has a right to commune with God in prayer or in other ways, and has, as it were, the right to receive communications in return from the intelligent beings about him, so that his ways may be ways of strength and pleasantness. Man's own work should be inseparably connected with the power of the Priesthood which he has received.

The Exercise of Authority. The authority committed to man by God is in earthly hands. The flesh is weak; and men who possess authority may often make mistakes in its exercise. The proper manner of exercising the authority of the Priesthood has been made exceedingly clear. "The rights of the Priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and the powers of heaven cannot be controlled or handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or compulsion, upon the souls of the children of men in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the Priesthood, or the authority of that man. Behold! ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks; to persecute the Saints, and to fight against God. No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile, reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death; let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God, and the doctrine of the Priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy sceptre an unchanging sceptre of righteousness and truth, and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee for ever and ever."

Authority of the Priesthood otherwise exercised than as above stated is not in harmony with the law. There is therefore no need to fear authority. Those who misuse it will ultimately be removed from their offices and will be punished not only by the laws of the Church, but by the Lord, the Giver of law. Severance from the Church means loss of Priesthood. Meanwhile, the thought stands out prominently, that those who receive the Priesthood, and especially those who are to exercise authority in the offices of the Priesthood, should carefully fit themselves for the work that they have to do. This is the only safe key to authority.

The Unrighteous Exercise of Authority. Authority may be unrighteously exercised from the lack of intelligence or because of wickedness. Should a member of the Church note this, the procedure of correction is to notify the ward teachers, who will try to settle the difficulty. If the ward teachers do not succeed in this, the bishop's court takes up the matter and, if needs be, passes it to the Stake Presidency and High Council, whence it may be appealed to the First Presidency. Justice is meted out to all in the Church. If the people are dissatisfied with any officer they may refuse to sustain him at the times of the voting, which prevents him from exercising the functions of his office. In such voting the majority rule; though in the Church courts of justice there must be unanimity.

The Church Authoritative. The Church of Christ possesses real authority, derived from God, and in its work represents God. Such a Church, alone, can appeal to the human understanding. A Church without authority is limp and helpless. Authority is the final test of a true Church. Does it attempt to officiate for God? Does its Priesthood possess authority? From the beginning, the Church of God has been given direct, divine authority so that its work might not be questioned. The angel walked with Adam, the Lord spoke to Abraham, Jesus in person came on earth, the Father and the Son came to Joseph Smith,—in all ages, when the Church has been fully established, the Priesthood has been conferred by authoritative beings. The authority of the Church is real and genuine and possesses power. By its power it shall be known.
