John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 21

OBEDIENCE

The consideration of Priesthood and its authority, often leads to much useless discussion of the necessity of yielding obedience to authority. Some believe that to yield obedience is to surrender free agency.

The Restraint of Nature. Countless forces, surrounding man, are interacting in the universe. By no means can he withdraw himself from them. He has learned by experience that control of natural forces is obtained only when their laws are understood. When a certain thing is done in a certain manner, there is a definite, invariable result. No doubt it has often occurred to an intelligent being that he might wish it otherwise; but that is impossible. The only remedy is to comply with existing conditions, acknowledge the restraint of nature, gain further knowledge, array law against law, until the purpose of man has been accomplished. That is the process by which intelligent beings have acquired dominion over nature. Such acknowledgment of the existence of the law of cause and effect does not weaken man; strength lies in an intelligent subjection to rightful restraint. It has been the condition of progress from the beginning. The recognition of law and the obedience to law are sure signs that intelligent beings are progressing.

An Active Condition. Obedience is an active condition else it could not be a principle of consequence. It is closely akin to repentance. Obedience means that every truth revealed is obeyed, which by our previous definition is a phase of repentance. The man who actively carries out that which he knows to be truth is an obedient man. The more knowledge a man has concerning the law in question, the more thoroughly obedient is he. Obedience is a characteristic of intelligence.

The Restraint of Man. Obedience to the invariable laws of nature is, usually, considered to be a self-evident necessity. The question of the propriety of obedience is commonly raised when man exercises authority over man. Shall a man obey a man? The first consideration in the answer to this question is whether the system which the man in authority represents is based on truth. If so, intelligent man will be bound to render obedience to the system, even if exercised through imperfect man. The second consideration is whether the man who, unless a member of the First Presidency, has limited jurisdiction, is acting within his authority in the organization. This can always be determined, simply by laying the matter before the bodies constituted to settle such matters. The third consideration is whether the matter to which authority has been applied is at all under the discipline of the organization. No officer in the Church has authority beyond matters pertaining to the Church. Authority exercised beyond that field is accepted only at the discretion of the individual members of the Church, and should come only in the form of counsel. If "yes" is the answer to these three considerations, obedience must be rendered by a progressing man. If "no" is the answer, obedience should not be yielded, but the matter should be tried before the proper courts.

The restraint of man in the exercise of authority derived from eternal laws is as compelling as the restraint of nature, because they are parts of the same whole.

The Life of Law. Obedience is compliance with truth. Truth is of no consequence to a man unless used. Obedience to truth means progress; refusal to use truth means retrogression. The moment truth is used, obedience begins. Man and the Church to which he belongs are active organisms concerned in using truth for progress. When truth is given them, promises to use that truth should be required, else the gift is in vain. For that reason members of the Church are required to promise to obey every truth received. Usually also a statement of the punishment that follows the non-use or misuse of it is made.

Disobedience. Disobedience may be active or passive. Passive disobedience is not doing what should be done; active disobedience is doing what should not be done. Both may be equally harmful. The main effect of disobedience is to weaken, and finally wreck, the man who disobeys law. Disobedience and sin are synonymous.

The Church Worth Having. The only Church worth having is one having authority derived from intelligence and truth. Such a Church will command obedience. In such a Church, little misunderstandings are easily rectified. Within the laws of the Church, man has absolute, personal freedom. It is so with nature, outside of the Church. Within the laws of nature, man has full freedom. The greatest freedom known to man comes from obedience to law. The greatest punishment conceivable to man comes from opposition to law. This is true with respect to the Church as a community of saints, and with respect to individual man in the great universe.
