John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 22

A MISSIONARY CHURCH

There must be, in every organization, and especially in a Church possessing the philosophy of man's place in the universe, a great cementing purpose. In the Church of Christ this is the desire to bring about the highest joy for all mankind.

A Church With a Purpose. Man's earth-career is designed to enable him to acquire more power, more development, and therefore more joy. In the nature of existence, it is impossible for an intelligent being to attain the highest degree of joy unless other like beings move along with him. The Great Plan will succeed only if all, or at least a majority of those who accepted it are saved. The Church, a part of the Great Plan, must have as its main purpose the saving of all human beings. All must be saved! The work of the Church cannot be completed until all have at least heard the truth and have been given the chance to accept it. There can be no talk of a few souls before the throne of God, with the many in hell. The great mission of the Church must always be to bring all men into a knowledge and acceptance of the truth. This is the cementing purpose of the Church.

The Hope of Today. However, men are not saved merely by being taught the truth. They must live it in their daily lives. Life, indeed, is an endless succession of days, each of which must contribute a little more in the development of man than the preceding one. Each day must be well spent, must be a happy one. The Church must help, every day, in all the affairs of life, from the food eaten to the highest spiritual thought. Each day must be a step toward the eternal exaltation which man desires. This is the hope of today.

Temporal Salvation. In a Church based on the principles already outlined there can be no separation between the spiritual and the material. There is one universe, of many aspects, to which we belong. There is one Great Plan for us. In the heavens spiritual things are probably of first importance; but on earth, material things are of importance. The impossibility of separating things material from things spiritual justifies the attempt of the Church to assist in the every day affairs of its members. In fact, a large part of the missionary labors of the Church must be to better the material conditions of its members. Only when the material as well as the spiritual life is looked after, can the Church rise to its full opportunity. Only in sound bodies can the spirit experience the highest joy. Only under sound material conditions can the Church move on in full gladness.

The Foreign Mission System. In conformity with the cementing missionary purpose of the Church, every male member holds or may hold the Priesthood. It follows that every member of the Church, whether man or woman, may be called to go on a mission for the upbuilding of his fellowmen. In harmony with the law of free agency, it is voluntary with the individual whether he accept or refuse the call. The practice in the Church is that those who accept missionary calls go at their own expense, on a term mission, varying in length, but usually not more than two years. The missionaries of the Church not only assist the members already gathered into the Church, but they travel over the world, preaching the everlasting Gospel, and bringing others who accept the truth into the Church. The purpose of the Church missionary system is to preach the Gospel to all members of the human race, so that, as far as possible, none may be left with the excuse that he has not heard the Gospel.

The Home Mission Service. At home the whole Church is devoted to mission service. The organizations of the Priesthood with its auxiliaries, form a network of active service into which every member of the Church may be brought. The home missionary service concerns itself with every phase of man's nature and life. Recreation, education, attractive home life, and the daily duties of all, are made part and parcel of the organized missionary system of the Church.

For the Common Good. The Church of Christ is for the common good; hence the ceaseless missionary activity which is the cementing principle of the Church. Not for the one, not even for the many, but for all, does the Church exist.
