John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 23

TEMPLE ORDINANCES

The Church of God has always been characterized by the possession of temples in which the holiest work associated with the Gospel has been done. The activities of the Church have in fact centered upon temples and temple work.

Temple Work. Every ordinance belonging to the Church and for the benefit of the Saints may be performed in a properly dedicated temple. In every temple is a baptismal font for the introductory ordinance of the Gospel. Marriages may be performed at the altars of the temple. The holy endowment is given in the temples, and there only. All this may be done by the living for themselves or for the dead. In fact, vicarious work for the dead who did not accept the Gospel on earth forms the bulk of temple work, since a person receives only once the ordinances of the Church for himself, but may repeatedly do temple work for different dead persons.

The Temple Endowment. The endowment given to members of the Church in the temples falls into several divisions. First, there is a course of instruction relative to man's eternal journey from the dim beginning towards his possible glorious destiny. Then, conditions are set up by which that endless journey may be upward in direction. Those who receive this information covenant to obey the laws of eternal progress, and thereby give life to the knowledge received. Finally, it is made clear that a man must sometime give an account of his deeds, and prove the possession of divine knowledge and religious works. It is a very beautiful, logical and inspiring series of ceremonies.

Symbolism. To make the vast elements of the endowment clear and impressive to all who partake of it, every educational device is employed. Appeal is made to every faculty of man, to eye and ear, so that the meaning of the Gospel may be clear from beginning to end.

The essence of fundamental truth is not known to man, nor indeed can be. Things are known only so far as our senses permit. All knowledge is in reality known through symbols. Letters on a printed page are but symbols of mighty thoughts, easily transferred from mind to mind by these symbols. Clearly, the eternal truths encompassing all that man is or may be, cannot be expressed literally, nor does the temple ritual do this. On the contrary, the beautiful temple service is one of mighty symbolism. By the use of symbols of speech, action, color and form, the great truths connected with the story of man are made evident to the mind.

Educational. The doctrine of the origin, present condition and destiny of man, should be well understood, for without this knowledge, it is difficult to comply fully and intelligently with the laws and ordinances of the Gospel. The temple endowment provides therefore information concerning the story of man, the creation of earth, our first earthly parents, the various dispensations of the Gospel, the meaning of the various dispensations of the Gospel, the purpose of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the means and methods whereby joy on earth and exaltation in heaven may be obtained.

In the temples such and other information is given in an organized and correct form, so that it may not depart from among the members of the Church. That is, the temples are the conservators of the great truths of the Gospel. To the temples, men and women go to be refreshed in memory concerning the doctrine relative to man and his lofty place in nature.

Conditions of Progress. The temple endowment also gives special information relative to the required conduct of man if he is to enjoy the fruits of progression and reach his possible destiny. Men and women are taught to keep themselves free from sin. They must be chaste, virtuous, truthful, unselfish. Moreover, they are taught that they must devote themselves and all that they have or may have to the great cause of truth, to the teaching of the everlasting Gospel to their fellowmen, so that the Great Plan may be worked out according to the mind and will of God.

Covenants. Those who take their endowments, and receive this high knowledge, make covenants with God that they will observe the instructions given, and carry them out in their daily lives. Thus the knowledge becomes active and vital. Knowledge blossoms into life when man covenants to use it. Unused knowledge is valueless. Only by the use of knowledge will more knowledge be obtained.

Tests. In logical sequence, the temple endowment makes clear that man must account for the deeds done in the flesh. Symbolically, but clearly, the nature of these tests that will be divinely applied are set forth. The existence of a higher intelligence is acknowledged in the setting up of tests that at sometime in the hereafter man will be required to meet.

Blessings and Punishments. It is also explained that the failure to carry out the promises made in the temples will be punished of God. This is in accordance with the law that provides a penalty for disobedience, as already explained. It is emphasized that blessings will follow those who accept the truth, practice it and live God-like lives. The essence of the temple endowment is a blessing.

Sealing Power. Perhaps the most glorious ordinances of the temple are those that seal husband and wife and children to one another for time and eternity. According to the Gospel, the marriage relation does not necessarily cease with death. On the contrary, it may continue to the end of time. Such a union or sealing for time and eternity may be performed only by the special authority possessed alone by the President of the Church. He may delegate the authority to others for longer or shorter times, so that appointed temple workers may perform such marriages in the temples of God. Similarly, children who have been born to parents who were not married for time and eternity, may be sealed later to their parents, so that the relationship may be sustained throughout all the ages of eternity.

Possible Repetition. The vastness of meaning in temple worship makes it difficult at once for any person to remember and understand it. Only once are the endowments taken for himself by any one person. To refresh his memory, and to place him in close touch with the spirit of the work, a person may enter the temple as frequently as he desires and take endowments for the dead. In that way both he and the dead are benefited. The temples, then, are means whereby every member of the Church, of righteous conduct and sufficient age, may receive precious endowments and may be kept in refreshed memory of the Great Plan, under which he, with the rest of the human family, is living. Temple work is the safety of the living and the hope of the dead. At present, temples are in operation in Salt Lake City, St. George, Logan and Manti, all in Utah; in Cardston, Alberta, Canada; in Laie, Island of Oahu, Hawaii, and at Mesa, Arizona.

MAN AND MAN
