John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 24

THE BROTHERHOOD OF MAN

Many men and women are upon earth. No one faces, alone, the forces of nature. About him move other men, with whom he must associate. In the Great Plan it is ordained that men shall dwell together. This leads to many of the finest applications of the Gospel to the daily life of man.

Common Origin. The spirits of men were born by the power of God into the spiritual world; thus all became the children of God. In turn, all have been born from the same spiritual estate into the earth estate, descending from the one earthly ancestor, Adam. All men are therefore of identical origin.

Common Purpose. The spirits of men have been placed on earth for a common purpose. From the beginning, man has risen to his high estate through the acquisition of power over the forces surrounding him. "Men are that they might have joy" is the fundamental purpose of man's activity, whether on or out of the earth. In the Great Council all spirits which have reached or will reach the earth, were present; and all declared themselves in favor of the Plan. In conformity with this agreement, man is on earth. All need a closer acquaintance with gross matter, as a means of future power and consequent joy; and all desire that the earth-experience may be accompanied with as much joy as is possible. Consequently, all who are, or have been, or will be assembled on earth, have a common purpose. Absolute uniformity prevails among men so far as their fundamental purpose is concerned.

Common Destiny. Likewise, the destiny of all spirits sent to earth, is the same. Man has ever moved towards eternal life. Every addition of knowledge has given him a vision of greater happiness and has moved him onward, toward perfection. True, since all men have free agencies, individual wills express themselves in different ways, and no two spirits are therefore at precisely the same point on the upward road. Some are far ahead, some lag behind, each and all according to individual effort. However, throughout the vast eternities, all who are conscientiously moving upward, though it be ever so slowly, will in time reach a point which is as absolute perfection to our mortal conceptions. Then, all will seem as if precisely alike. Whether or not we reach a given point at the same time, all men have a common destiny. As far as the destiny of man is concerned, all are alike.

Inter-dependence. Of even greater importance in daily work is the fact that every intelligent being affects every other intelligent being. Every person affects every other person. Through the operation of the Holy Spirit all things are held together. Good or evil may be transmitted from personality to personality; it is impossible to hide from God, and it is equally impossible for us to hide ourselves completely from our fellowmen. All our actions, thoughts and words must be so guarded that all others are assisted in their progress. This is as true for the earth-life as it may be for the spiritual life.

Men affect one another; every man is, in a measure, his brother's keeper. There can be no thought of a man going on in life irrespective of the needs or conditions of his fellowmen. The main concern of every person must be to engage in such orderly acts of life as will enable other men to use their individual wills righteously and without interference. All must be benefited, all must be helped. That is the basis of the great system of cooperation. Mean-while, the inter-dependence of spirits, dwelling on earth, brings men more closely together, and strengthens the friendships from the former spirit estate.

Brothers. The human race is a race of brothers, of the same origin, with the same purposes and with the same destiny, so elaborately inter-dependent that none may move without affecting the others. Any rational theology must recognize this condition, and, as far as it may be able, make provision for the proper recognition of the brotherhood of man.
