John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 26

MUTUAL SUPPORT

The principles set forth indicate that each man must exert himself to the utmost. Even this is not sufficient for the full progress of individuals. Every man must also be supported by every other man. Unless this is done, the individual and the community will be retarded.

The Duty of the Strong. The man who is in possession of strength, acquired by any means whatsoever, is under special obligations to the community. He must assist those who are weak; and as the strong move onward, they must pull with them those who are weak. If a person possess knowledge, he must give knowledge to others, so that all may attain knowledge; if he have great faith, he must use faith until all may know its virtue; if he have acquired much wealth, he must use it so that many may share in its benefits. Those who have must give to those who have not. Whoever understands the deeper, inner life must not forget those who are not gifted with an understanding of the meaning of life.

The weak have similar responsibilities devolving upon them. Under earthly conditions the weak tend to be jealous of the strong. This is out of harmony with the law of progress. The weak must seek strength for themselves, and should invite the assistance of the strong. The weak may help the progress of the race by accepting, as a gift, the assistance of the strong. There is no shame in accepting gifts or in learning from those who have more than we have, provided our own powers are used to the full. If the strong will not give to the weak, in the right spirit of helpfulness, or if the weak will not accept the help proffered for their advancement, the whole onward movement of humanity will be slowed down.

Moreover, it is a common law of nature that those who are strong, and give of their strength to others, add thereby to their own strength.

Cooperation. Cooperation of all, weak or strong, is characteristic of mutual helpfulness. When many men unite to accomplish great works, mighty results follow. Each man then obtains his full reward. Even if the cooperation provides that its results are divided equally among the participants, the strong receives his full reward, for, because of his greater strength, he has done greater labor, and has consequently added greatly to his strength. The weak, by their association with the strong, having shared equally with them, have gained greater hope and more courage to carry on their individual work of progress. The principle of cooperation is in full conformity with the whole plan of salvation.

Education. Education looms large in the matter of mutual support, for it is only by the development of individual powers that man may help his fellow man and thus recognize the brotherhood of man. Great powers can be exercised only by faculties that are trained to the utmost. Schools are provided where the young mind may be guided rapidly and well into a better control of itself. A rational theology must be established upon the basis of developed intelligence, which justifies the existence of schools and other devices for the proper unfolding of the body, mind and spirit. In the Church there must ever be a vigorous propaganda for the education of the masses. The Church must be a generally educated Church, in which the "educated class" includes all.
