John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 27

THE UNITED ORDER AND TITHING

The true relationship of men, the doctrine of the brotherhood of man, is nowhere better exemplified than in the principle of the united order. This system of living represents, no doubt, the acme of brotherly love and human efficiency.

Purpose. The united order recognizes that men have different talents and therefore different aspirations which should be allowed full and free unfolding. That is, the individual should be allowed to exercise his inborn gifts, to use his personal initiative. The united order further provides that the working members of a community shall share according to their needs in the material returns of the activities of the whole community. Since the wants of a community are satisfied only by a variety of necessary labor, some yielding large, others small, material gains, the united order provides that, if a man work to the full of his ability, all the working days of his life, he should have a share sufficient to meet his wants in the material gains of the community, whatever his labor may be. Under this system there could be no poverty: all would be amply supplied with the material necessities of life. Those who, because of their greater talents or training, do the greater or more difficult work will receive whatever is needed for the maintenance of life and for the special demands of their work, and they will attain, moreover, an increased growth and satisfaction because of the greater work that they have performed. Besides, only their surplus property is required for the common treasury to help out the less fortunate. The united order implies a closely organized body of men and women working together for individual and for mutual advancement, permitting the full exercise of special individual talents or powers. It appears to be the best answer to many of the great questions that trouble mankind.

Historical. The united order is not a new conception. It has been known from the beginning of time. In the days of Enoch, the seventh patriarch, the united order was practiced successfully. When the Church was organized by Christ, the united order was practiced very fully for some time, by many of His followers both in Palestine and America. It is quite possible that the order has been established and practiced successfully at other times, but no such record has come down to this age. Finally, in this dispensation, the united order was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Church, on several occasions, in the days both of Joseph Smith and of Brigham Young, tried to practice it, and wherever practiced correctly it resulted in good; but individual selfishness and persecution from without caused the abandonment of the practice. It is a manner of living requiring the fullest understanding of the Gospel truth, and the largest conception of man's place in the universe. In its practice, men must overcome their selfishness, and accept at their true values the various rewards of life. Enoch and his people acquired such high control over themselves that they were able to practice the united order successfully, and at last were translated from the earth. It seems that the united order is beyond the reach of men and women as they now are. Nevertheless, it is the system we must approach, as we draw nearer to perfection.

Cooperation. The united order has been suspended as a required form of life in the Church, but its spirit still remains. Those who are worthy members of the Church must accept the united order as the ultimate aim of the Church. It finds present partial expression in the practice of cooperation, under which many unite in one enterprise, in such a way that no one person dominates it, but that all concerned have a voice in it, and that the profits resulting from the enterprise are divided more or less uniformly among those connected with it. Co-operative enterprises have been fostered constantly and consistently by the Church, and in the majority of instances have been extremely successful. In fact, when the Church settled in Utah, it would have been impossible to accomplish the great work before the pioneers, had they not practiced cooperation. To give every man full and proper opportunity is the spirit of the true Church.

Tithing. Every organized church must have some means of material support. Houses of worship must be constructed; temples must be built; education must be fostered; the poor must be provided for; and many other material needs form a part of the spiritual mission of the Church. For the general support of the Church and of the poor who are unable to provide for themselves, a fund is provided by the tithing of the people. The law of tithing is in preparation for the united order, and some day will be replaced by the more complete system. The tithing fund is maintained by the payment, by each member of the Church, of one-tenth of his earnings, as they are delivered to him. The moneys thus obtained are placed in the hands of the bishops, and is disbursed under the direction of the First Presidency associated with the presiding bishopric and other officials named in the revelations.

Tithing is an ancient system, frequently mentioned in the history of the past. It is fair to all the people, for it is necessarily a system whereby each man pays in proportion to his earnings. Great blessings follow obedience to the law of the united order or to the law of tithing.

Voluntary Offerings. In addition to tithing, voluntary offerings may be made to the Church for specific or general purposes, as for the support of the poor or distressed living near us, or for the building of churches. The best known of these voluntary offerings are the so-called fast donations. Once a month, the first Sunday of the month, the people fast for two or three meals and place a sum, equal to the money saved, in a fund to be used for the support of the poor.

The Common Good. All these devices for gathering material funds for the sustenance of the Church simply show the underlying and overwhelming desire of those who understand the Gospel to assist one another for mutual benefit. Not the good of one, but the common good, is uppermost in the minds of those who understand and love the Gospel.
