John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 30

THE COMMUNITY

The relations of the few to the many lead to problems of gravest import to humanity.

Community Defined. A community is a body of people, living in the same place, usually with common interests, under the same laws and regulations. From the beginning of time, individuals have grouped themselves into communities. Every church is a community of believers.

The Individual in the Community. A community is an organism, with individuality, which must express itself in adaptation or opposition to law.

The community is composed of individuals, each with independent wills and agencies. Nothing must be done by the community to prevent the full unfolding of each individual, for the more progressive the individuals, the more progressive the community. On the other hand, the individual, having accepted place and life in the community, must not do anything to restrain other individuals of the community. Whatever is good for the many must always take precedence. This does not interfere with full individual development, for the greatest individual development always comes from full adaptation to law. When every individual faithfully obeys the law, the community is safe.

The Rights of the Community. The community has rights which are as inalienable as the free agency of individuals. An individual who will not obey the community laws should move out of the community. Those who remain must yield obedience to the laws established for the public good. This was well brought out in the Great Council, when Lucifer fell because he was not in harmony with the community. In that great day, as in our day, the many had the right to demand that their good be considered as of primary importance.

Training for the Community. In view of the supremacy of the community it becomes indispensable that the powers of the individual be so unfolded as to be of service to the community. No man can selfishly stand aside and say, "I am sufficient unto myself; in the community I have no interest; though I obey its laws, I do not serve it." A man must obey the laws of and vigorously serve the community. Every act of man's life must relate itself to the good of other men. This is fundamental in the Gospel, and should be fundamental in the daily relations of men.

This justifies the modern training now given men for the necessary pursuits and common tasks of daily life. Whatever is necessary, may and should be made honorable and dignified. All necessary pursuits are made professional. All who serve the good of the many have the right to find the same joy in their work whatever it may be. All men should be trained for service to the community.

It is an interesting commentary on the present-day Church that President Brigham Young was one of the first men in America to establish schools in which the training of men for the actual affairs of life was made pre-eminent. Today, children and adults are trained for worthy citizenship, both in church and state. In such training lies the hope of the community for its future. By such training may the feeling of community responsibility be established among men.

The Supremacy of the Community. From all this and from what has been said in preceding chapters, it is clear that the Great Plan was so devised that men may and must unitedly work out their salvation. Man must not be allowed to stand alone. Brother-hood is the prime principle on which the Church is based.

MAN AND NATURE
