John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology ( 1915)

CHAPTER 32

THE SOUND BODY

Consideration has been given, in the preceding chapters, to the pre-existent life of man, the course of the Gospel on earth, and man's relationship to God, to the Church, to his fellowmen and to nature. Man must, also, give respectful consideration to himself, as an individual.

The Importance of the Body. Attention has already been called to the fact that the condition of the body limits, largely, the expression of the spirit. The spirit speaks through the body and only as the body permits. The body is essentially of the earth; and, in the earth career, the earthly envelope of the spirit would naturally determine the expression of man's spirit power. Hence, if the body is in poor condition from birth, man must strengthen it as the days increase; if it is strong from the beginning, he must make it stronger.

Food. A first consideration for the proper maintenance of physical health is the proper feeding of the body. Man should use food adapted to body needs and seasonable according to nature. In accordance with the Word of Wisdom, meat should be used sparingly, fruits and vegetables plentifully, and no food should be used to excess.

Exercise. The elimination of unassimilated food from the human body is quite as important as the taking in of food. For that purpose, physical exercise must be taken regularly. Moreover, exercise develops and strengthens all parts of the body. Manual labor, usually looked upon as inferior to mental labor, is in reality a means of improving the body, permitting hard mental labor and making possible a fuller expression of man's spirit. Man's life should not be given wholly to physical work, but it should constitute a vital part of it.

Rest. Just as necessary as food or exercise, is the change called rest. If the same muscles be exercised continuously they will surely tire and good work can, then, no longer be done with them. Regular rest should be given the body. Frequently, a change from one kind of work to another is a sufficient rest; but in many cases, cessation from effort is necessary to recuperate man's strength, properly. The natural law requiring regular sleep should be obeyed, though none should sleep too long. One day out of seven, the Sabbath, should be devoted particularly, to matters concerning God and the spiritual life, which too often are submerged during the other days, in the material affairs of life. An occasional fasting is very desirable, since, for a few hours, it gives some organs of the body a complete rest. At present, the Church practice is to fast twenty-four consecutive hours once each month, usually the first Sunday of the Month. The food thus saved, in conformity with the fundamental spirit of brotherhood, is distributed among those who have need of it, by ward officers specially appointed for that purpose.

Stimulants. In normal health, food, exercise, rest, love of God and fellowman, and daily work, furnish a natural and sufficient stimulation for all the duties of life. In fact, none other should be allowed, if the best physical health is to be retained. Therefore, alcohol in all its forms, tobacco, tea, coffee, and the variety of stimulating or nerve-soothing, habit-begetting drugs should not be used. There is double danger in the use of stimulants: first, they undermine the strength of the man; and, second, they take away his mastery of himself. Under the influence of a drug, man is urged on by the drug itself, and not by his own strength of will. This is most dangerous. A man who loses control of himself never knows just what he may do.

Moral Purity. The body is much concerned in the moral purity of the man. Men and women must keep themselves pure or there will be a loss of life and procreative power. Moreover, men and women must keep themselves equally pure. No reasoning, based on natural law, justifies two standards of morality, one for the man and the other for the woman.

The Gospel and the Sound Body. The sound body is a Gospel requirement, for only with a sound body can man work out his mission properly and have full joy. Working effectively to make others happy, can be done only in a healthy body. Every effort should be made to keep our bodies as sound as possible. It is a part of a rational theology.
