Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 1

Jesus the Emissary and Exemplar

History has seen two distinct types of religious leaders: emissaries and exemplars. Although both men and women have provided leadership and inspiration of both kinds, this discussion is drawn primarily from the Old and New Testaments, whose examples deal primarily with men. A discussion of women in these roles lies outside the scope of this particular essay, and masculine nouns and pronouns are used for that reason.

Emissaries are individuals who feel that God has personally called them to bear his word and will to the people. They demand to be listened to—not for their own sakes but because they are messengers of Deity. The prototypes of emissary prophets in Israel include Moses, Samuel, Elijah, and the great literary prophets, such as Amos, Hosea, Micah, Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel.

What kind of men were they? They were dynamic, audacious, emotionally intense, and passionately absorbed by the quality of their people's lives and the fate of their nation. They made no claim to personal perfection. Their message was not "Do as I do," but rather "Do as the Lord commands you." They frequently suffered rejection, persecution, and even martyrdom at the hands of their people. More painfully, they were wounded by the also frequent failure of their people to catch fire from the burning words they had received from the Lord.

Their messages are among the most eloquent that have come to us from the ancient world. Frequently, they were scathing in their rebuke of their followers' sloth and sin. Amos, for example, a shepherd from the hills of Judea and the southern kingdom of Judah, went to Bethel, a shrine city in the northern kingdom of Israel. In the name of God, he condemned their injustice and lack of human mercy. Amaziah, priest of Bethel, correctly heard this rebuke as an attack on the house of Israel:

"Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words. For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.

"Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there: But prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court.

"Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit:

"And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord." (Amos 7:10-16.)

These emissary prophets have been called God-intoxicated men because they spoke for him in the first person and with irresistible confidence.

In contrast are the exemplars, who include such men of the Far East as Buddha, Confucius, Lao-tze, Mahvira, and Hindu gurus. They did not speak for God; in fact, some, like Confucius and Buddha, were likely agnostic. Rather, they spoke about human problems with an inspired wisdom that sought human solutions among the best qualities of human beings—tolerance, love, compassion, and reason.

Each of these men developed a distinctive interpretation of life and recommended certain habits of living that would put individuals in harmony with the forces of life. Above all, they were ethicists who, by both precept and example, drew other human beings to lead better lives. In contrast to the aggressive combativeness with which the emissary prophets denounced and derided the political and social conditions of their day, the exemplars reflected on universal themes of human experience and pronounced universally true precepts that would help human beings understand their own experience and live more profoundly.

I have long been impressed by the remarkable fact that Jesus alone, among the founders of the world religions, was both an emissary and an exemplar. Like his fellow Israel-ites, he announced himself as an emissary. He repeatedly acknowledged that he had been sent from the Father, taught the teachings of the Father, and pointed the worship of others in the direction of the Father.

To the man who asked, "Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" Jesus replied, "Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God." (Mark 10:17-18.)

When Jesus was in the temple, the Jews marveled and asked, "How knoweth this man letters, never having learned?" And Jesus answered: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him." ( John 7:14-18.)

On other occasions Jesus taught:

"My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work." ( John 4:34.)

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." ( John 5:19.)

"I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." ( John 5:30.)

Yet Jesus was simultaneously an exemplar, inviting people to come unto him to find peace and salvation and to follow his way of life. He declared:

"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.)

"I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. . . . I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." ( John 6:35, 51.)

"I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him." ( John 14:6.)

When one of the disciples, Philip, commented, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us," Jesus responded:

"Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, shew us the Father?" ( John 14:8-9.)

We can follow Jesus because we believe that he speaks and acts for God and that in his word we are hearing the will of God for us. Or we can follow him because his teachings and character show us an ideal of humanity at its highest.

In the course of my life, I have felt both the power of his authority and the inspiration of his example. Both draw me upward, one toward a vision of redeemed humankind in which I can participate, and the other toward the serious but joyful work of better realizing my human potential. Both of these attributes are potent, both as idea and as ideal. I fully and deeply acknowledge Jesus' claim to be both emissary and exemplar, and I honor him in both roles.
