Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 2

Jesus the Humanitarian

Jesus was no closet philosopher. As we read through the record of his life in the New Testament, we discover how freely he mingled with a rich variety of people and how consistently positive those interactions were. He went about doing good; where he had passed, the blind saw, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, the crippled walked, and the mentally disturbed were free of oppression. Multitudes followed him, seeing his wondrous works and hearing his words.

Jesus spoke to innumerable large groups with inspired power, and miraculously fed multitudes, but we primarily see him dealing with individuals, sensitive to individual needs. The classic example is the woman who made her way through the crowd that surrounded him to touch the hem of his garment, thus finding healing from an affliction she had had for twelve years. She had spent her last farthing on physicians, exhausting the ability of human wisdom to help her. Sensing her, Jesus immediately asked who had touched him. "Thou seest the multitude thronging thee," protested his disciples, "and sayest thou, Who touched me?" But Jesus insisted that someone had done so, for virtue, or strength, had left him. (See Mark 5:24-34.)

In that story, we find faith that our own need, however desperate, and our own faith, however flawed, will also be perceived by the being we revere as our Savior.

In the patriarchal society of Jesus' day, women and children were valued less than men. Mothers brought little children to him, seeking a blessing for them. Again, the less sensitive disciples scolded them and shooed them away, no doubt thinking that Jesus should not be bothered by these demands. But his response was, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God." He then used the incident to teach a valuable lesson on humility: "Whosever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." (Mark 10:13-15.) Holding this example in mind can provide a counterbalance to the pressures of society when we must decide which people are "important" and which are not.

Condemned sinners and lepers were the most alienated members of Jewish society. To test Jesus and find cause for punishing him, scribes and Pharisees brought before him, as he taught in the temple, a woman who they said had been "taken in adultery, in the very act." Then they cannily asked, "Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou?"

Jesus responded, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her."

They slunk away one by one, "convicted by their own conscience," until Jesus and the woman were alone.

"Woman," he asked, "where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?" When she answered "No man, Lord," Jesus told her, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." ( John 8:3-11.)

Certainly Jesus did not condone adultery. He strengthened the law of Moses by saying, "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:28.) Yet in these circumstances, when men had already shamed this woman, Jesus put her welfare above the law, giving her hope through his kindness.

His words of forgiveness rise in my mind when occasions to judge, criticize, and accuse present themselves. As I have grown older, I have less confidence in the persuasive power of preaching and pointing out faults. It has been my experience that most people—even rebellious teenagers, negligent parents, and slothful public servants—do not really need to be reminded of the "shoulds" and "oughts" in their lives. Rather than knowing better, they need help in doing better. I cherish those occasions when their repentance can begin with an act of forgiveness rather than an act of judgment, and I hope for myself the same charity from the One whose right it is to judge.

On another occasion, sinners and publicans drew near "for to hear him," a remarkable occurrence, since we would not usually think of sinners as comfortable in the presence of a person as pure as Jesus. The "Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." (Luke 15:1-2). Jesus responded by telling three remarkable parables: the lost sheep, the lost coin, and the lost son (the prodigal son). All three taught the worth of souls.

The parable of the prodigal son is a personal favorite of mine, for its beautiful image of the father's love for the sinner. As Jesus told the tale, the father did not simply accept his son's return but ran out to meet him. (See Luke 15:11-32.) Few scriptures so poignantly teach us how to allow others to change and how to welcome that change without trying to punish them or make them pay for their past mistakes.

Frequently, Jesus healed people on the Sabbath, much to the consternation of the scribes and Pharisees who knew that these acts of mercy violated the elaborate, oral laws regarding the Sabbath. In response to their criticism, he simply cut through to the important,underlying principle: "I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?" (Luke 6:9.)

As a people who cherish the laws of God and take seriously our responsibility to obey the laws of the land, it is well for us to remember that Jesus interpreted the law in a way that blessed human beings, not as something unrelated to life or as an end to be served in itself, but as an instrument of service.

Jesus was not always kind and gentle. He said what people needed to hear, so at times he was searing in his criticism. He upset the tables of the money changers, accusing them of turning a "house of prayer" into "a den of thieves." (Luke 19:46.) An entire chapter of Matthew reports Jesus' rejection of the pharisaic view of religion, illustrated particularly well by one verse: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matthew 23:23.)

In reading the Gospels, especially Matthew and Luke, it is fascinating to concentrate on Jesus' relationship to people, including his chosen disciples. He showed respect and consideration for Peter, who was valiant and loyal in his discipleship. However, he also saw Peter's weaknesses and accurately predicted that the apostle would deny him thrice. When, out of a misplaced sense of protectiveness, Peter tried to dissuade the Lord from his mission, Jesus' rebuke, "Get thee behind me, Satan" (Matthew 16:23), must have shocked him into rethinking what he knew about this man.

Humanitarian causes have experienced various degrees of popularity in our culture for the past century. Much of the inspiration for humanitarian efforts has come from the example of Jesus, suffering and rejoicing with his fellow human beings, exerting himself on their behalf, and bringing to his task a sensitive understanding of their deep needs.

As a Latter-day Saint, I appreciate the record and current achievements of the Church in humanitarian efforts. I support these efforts and rejoice in our collective achievements. For me, four aspects of religion are significant, and these efforts represent one of those aspects: the Church, ordinances and rituals, religious and ethical principles, and a religious orientation toward other human beings. But the most important of the four is other people—what happens to individuals as the result of a religion. The Church is not an end in itself, but a means of making gospel principles like faith and humility functional in the lives of people. Yes, even gospel principles are not the things of ultimate worth. Their value lies in how they bless human lives.

Jesus has taught me to place individuals first and to keep them there. The Church and gospel principles then become wonderful ways to bless their lives—and mine.
