Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 3

Jesus' Sense of Values

The message that seems to dominate the New Testament is the value Jesus placed on individuals. I believe it would be hard to go wrong if our priorities match his. But sometimes we don't know what is best for a person in a particular circumstance. How did Jesus know when to forgive and when to chasten? How can we learn when to serve and when to let another serve? In facing such questions, it helps to think about the fundamental values that shaped Jesus' own life. What did he identify as the purpose of life and what activities for him were of prime importance?

He answered these questions this way: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." ( John 10:10.) And what, for him, was the abundant life? Part of the answer is found in the Sermon on the Mount, which is a strongly antimaterialistic statement:

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. . . .

"No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? . . .

"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew 6:19-20, 24-25, 33.)

Thus, the value he proclaimed to the multitude on the mount, a message that still speaks with living words to us today, is not to place our greatest effort on multiplying our material possessions, for "the kingdom of God is within you." (Luke 17:21.) Our well-being lies largely in our own state of mind and heart, in our own sense of worth, in our relationship with our fellow human beings, on finding meaning, and in experiencing joy. Jesus' teachings and way of life are a pathway to finding satisfaction in living.

The treasures of heaven Jesus speaks of are also the greatest treasures on earth. His true followers still possess these treasures. Alma celebrates the fruits of gospel living: "And because of your diligence and your faith and your patience with the word in nourishing it, that it may take root in you, behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst." (Alma 32:42.)

Jesus not only pointed out the path we should follow, but also designated the path we should avoid, one that would lead to meaninglessness and isolate us increasingly within our own selfish circle. To a group that included his disciples, he explained:

"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save it.

"For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

"Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:34-38.)

One of my students once shared with the class the experience of a widow in her hometown in Idaho. The woman's only child, a son, was killed in World War II, and she grieved inconsolably for both her son and herself and became ill.

Her doctor, a Latter-day Saint, found nothing medically wrong with her and treated her with placebos for a time, but she did not improve. One day he told her bluntly, "If you don't change your thinking and attitude of self-pity, you will become a burden to yourself and to this community. Do you believe in the gospel of Jesus Christ?"

Startled, she answered, "Of course I do."

"Then you had better start living it," said the exasperated doctor. "Get interested in other people. Visit elderly widows and shut-ins. Help some young mothers in need of assistance. Forget your own problems and serve others."

His call to repentance was salutary. The widow, after her shock subsided, took his advice to heart and discovered a kind of happiness she had never known before, not even when she had her family about her.

I would not be so bold as to claim that I have perfected this single-minded manner of living, but even my limited experience corroborates that the abundant life cannot be equated with an abundance of things.

The abundant life is the fulfilled life, one that is fully engaged with mind and heart, reaching out to the world around us and to the people in it, and living by faith in its divine origin and purpose.
