Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 4

Four Essential Teachings of Jesus

Not everything Jesus taught was new. Many of his ideas can be found in the Old Testament, and many others have parallels in the teachings of philosophers and the founders of other world religions.

When a lawyer asked Jesus, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus answered with a statement that should already have been very familiar to the lawyer:

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

Jesus did not invent this principle. Love of God was basic in the law of Moses: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might." (Deuteronomy 6:5.) The law of Moses also contains an injunction to love one's neighbor: "Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord." (Leviticus 19:18.)

Jesus' contribution was to bring these two commandments together, quoting them separately but showing their relationship to each other and also, as he so often did, showing how the whole of religion stems from love for God and love for our fellow human beings.

I do not insist on innovation and novelty to make his teachings profound and powerful for me, for what is unique about Jesus' teaching is his emphasis and his wonderful art. He taught principles more than rules, principles that support and enrich one another, principles so fundamental and universal in application that they have meaning in all ages and circumstances.

In science, isolated facts derive their meaning from basic principles and law. The same is true in religion. Individual rules, such as lists of activities that are permitted on the Sabbath and those that are forbidden, have little value unless they are related to the basic principle of the Sabbath—that its purpose is to help us draw nearer to God and to heal or bless other human beings. I marvel at his ability to deal so profoundly with underlying principles, applying them accurately to a wide range of diverse circumstances. Surely this is wisdom!

It has been my experience from time to time to meet individuals who are preoccupied with rules. They learn new rules eagerly and strive earnestly to keep every rule they know. I grieve for them. Despite their sincerity and earnest desires for righteousness (for which they will justly and meritoriously be rewarded), they have no concept of the creative, adventurous experience that living by principle can be. Such rigidity cannot endure long against the shocks of daily living, and sometimes the rule-bound individual breaks instead of learning flexibility. Surely that is not the direction of life toward which Jesus calls us.

Four principles that Jesus repeatedly emphasized are very dear to me. I would go so far as to argue that much of his essential thought is comprised in these principles: humility, integrity, love, and faith.

Humility

In the Beatitudes at the beginning of the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus names eight conditions of the mind and heart that bring the blessed state of happiness to an individual. The first of these, rendered in the King James Version as "Blessed are the poor in spirit" (Matthew 5:3), has traditionally been interpreted to mean those who are humble. Other translations express this beatitude as "Blessed are they who feel their spiritual need" and "How blest are those who know their need of God." Another meaning of this first beatitude, I believe, is that the meek are those who are teachable and open-minded, those who will learn from their fellow human beings as well as from God—not because it is the intellectually correct thing to do, but because they are not concerned with themselves and can truly listen and, therefore, learn. I have perhaps a rather unorthodox view of the humble as those who feel no need to continually take their personal pulse, analyze how they feel about a given topic, or develop and express an opinion on every item of conversation.

Some of us have mistakenly identified humility with stage fright. I believe that this condition, sympathetic though I am to the sufferer, is actually the opposite of humility because it is based on self-concern. The Chinese call it a fear of "losing face." It is truly a blessing to still the chatter and fretting of the ego with its constant worries, anxieties, and fidgeting. A preoccupation with almost anyone or anything—whether it be a baby, a loved one, a Bach cantata, or even a stamp collection—confers a very real kind of happiness that comes only with the ability to relate totally and unself-consciously to someone or something else. The only preoccupation for which this is not true, in my opinion, is a preoccupation with the self.

Jesus has much to say and demonstrate about humility. Repeatedly he pointed out that persons of humility have no need to seek for worldly honor, put themselves forward, or anxiously claim their due. James and John, the sons of Zebedee, once asked Jesus for a special favor (rather slyly prefacing it with the request "that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire"!), requesting the privilege of sitting "one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand" when he returned in his "glory." The other apostles were, naturally, "much displeased" with James and John, but Jesus took the occasion to teach them all a lesson about humility:

"Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister: and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (See Mark 10:35-45.)

Those who are humble feel no need to seek for worldly honors or recognition. Rather, they focus on the needs and well-being of others.

My father, Milton Bennion, was dean of the College of Education at the University of Utah for over thirty years. Three of his colleagues, appointed by him, told me on separate occasions how he had gone out of his way to promote their professional status and ensure their success when he could easily have garnered honors or taken credit for himself. I believe that he had learned from Jesus to rejoice in the achievements of others.

Jesus returned to the concept of humility in an interesting parable aimed directly at certain individuals who "trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others." He taught them:

"Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." (Luke 18:9-14.)

It is appropriate that humility should be the first beatitude because it is a prerequisite to the beatitudes that follow. Humble people recognize and regret their sins and mistakes; they are meek, gentle, peaceable, and self-controlled. Certainly they hunger and thirst after righteousness and truth. The last four beatitudes are expressions of love, and we cannot love others if we are arrogant or self-centered.

In another important passage, Jesus taught about humility when his disciples showed an interest in rank and hierarchy and asked, "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?"

In response, we are told that Jesus called a little child to him, set him in the midst of them, and declared, "Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 18:1-4.)

In what sense did Jesus call the child humble? I believe that he wanted to emphasize to the apostles the difference between the child's openness and his acceptance of what was happening at that very moment. The scriptural account does not tell us what the child was doing when Jesus called him over. Was he listening to the conversation, playing a game with other children, or even running an errand? It did not matter. He responded immediately to Jesus' call and allowed himself to be "set in the midst of them" without demur. The concreteness and actuality of the child's experience contrasts sharply with the apostles' preoccupation with—and disputes over—a future state upon which they had no information but which was blocking their ability to experience the presence of the living Christ.

Those who are humble also recognize that they do not have a full knowledge of any principle of the gospel. They understand that faith, repentance, and love are words with profound meanings and implications. They keep their minds open for new insights and ponder their experience for new understandings. With Isaiah, they recognize the difference between their understanding and that of Deity:

"Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isaiah 55:6-9.)

Jesus reinforced the importance of being teachable by admonishing believers: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matthew 7:7-8.)

To those Jews who believed on him, he declared, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." ( John 8:31-32.)

The Book of Mormon prophet Alma makes a fine distinction between humility that comes from being compelled to be humble by external circumstances like poverty, and humility that comes as the fruit of believing in the word of God:

"I say unto you, it is well that ye are cast out of your synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom; for it is necessary that ye should learn wisdom; for it is because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be humble.

"And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are ye; for a man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance; and now surely, whosoever repenteth shall find mercy; and he that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall be saved.

"And now, as I said unto you, that because ye were compelled to be humble ye were blessed, do ye not suppose that they are more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word?

"Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed—yea, much more blessed than they who are compelled to be humble because of their exceeding poverty." (Alma 32:12-15.)

Integrity

The word integrity implies oneness and wholeness. If we have integrity, we have convictions, purposes, and values, and we live in harmony with them. It means that we are as good as our word. It means that our acts are consistent with our beliefs, with no guile, pretense, deception, or hypocrisy in our behavior.

Jesus taught and emphasized integrity. I am struck in the New Testament record by the intensity of his loathing for hypocrisy. In a long passage in the Sermon on the Mount, he encouraged us to act with pure motives and singleness of purpose:

"Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.

"And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

"But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him." (Matthew 6:1-8.)

I have always considered it significant that Jesus, to make certain that our love is genuine and not self-seeking, asks us to love our enemies and those who cannot reward us:

"Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?" (Matthew 5:44-46.)

Jesus was unsparing in his condemnation of certain religious practices that some scribes and Pharisees indulged in hypocritically, without sincerity. He warned his listeners to "observe and do" what the Pharisees preached, but "do not ye after their works." He accused them:

"For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi." (Matthew 23:3-7.)

He drove money changers out of the temple because they violated the integrity of the temple as a house of prayer:

"And Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; and would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple. And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves." (Mark 11:15-17.)

The finest contribution Jesus made to the concept of integrity was the quality of his own life. He lived the truth as he perceived it, fearlessly and forthrightly. Believing that he came to accomplish the Resurrection, he endured the pain of his mission and his execution without any attempt to avoid it or to persuade God or humans to alleviate his suffering. Consistent with his own teachings of unconditional love, he asked the Father to forgive those who crucified him.

Integrity is an overarching personal virtue. It includes sincerity, honesty, truthfulness, moral courage, humility, meekness, and repentance. It provides a sense of identity that rises above the trivialities of daily life and gives peace and serenity even during life's vicissitudes.

I have often been inspired by Job, who steadfastly held fast his integrity even when God himself seemed against him. When Bildad asserted God's absolute sovereignty, comparing man to "a worm," Job protested:

"As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul; all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils; my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live." ( Job 27:2-6.)

Job felt assurance in being judged on the basis of his actions as well as his intentions:

"If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit; let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity. If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands; then let me

sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out. . . .

"If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone." ( Job 31:5-8, 21-22.)

We are justly warned against the sin of pride, but I would hope that each of us, like Job, can hold our own integrity with such firmness and lack of self-deception that we, like him, can be "righteous in [our] own eyes." ( Job 32:1.) That is a goal worthy of our striving.

Love

The central and controlling principle of human existence for Jesus was love, which occupied first and second place among the commandments. Thus, love is the foundation upon which every other religious and ethical principle depends.

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples," he said, "if ye have love one to another." ( John 13:35.)

At the close of his mission, he asked Peter three times, "Lovest thou me?" Peter replied,

"Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." And each time, Jesus responded with a call to serve others out of that love: "Feed my lambs. . . . Feed my sheep. . . . Feed my sheep." ( John 21:15-17.)

Paul caught the spirit of Jesus when he wrote a stirring eulogy on love to the Corinthians that concludes with the categoricalstatement: "And now abideth faith, hope, [love], these three; but the greatest of these is [love]." (1 Corinthians 13:13.)

To the Galatians, Paul explained, "For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."

Students of human nature generally agree that a person's most basic need, beyond those needs that insure sheer physical survival, is to be accepted, wanted, and loved. Jesus' concern that we become fully human and realize the potential of our lives springs out of a solid root in the position love has in his ethical and religious thought.

Love for Jesus was both a noun and a verb. It meant that our attitudes and orientations should reflect a concern for the eternal well-being of other human souls and that our behavior should mirror that value. I believe that social isolation is much more a fact of our modern, urban lives than it was of his listeners, and that we therefore have a special challenge in responding to this commandment. I believe that if each of us will listen to our hearts, they will whisper to us of individuals we already know whose needs for love are not beingmet. Perhaps we will also hear about special populations of the love-hungry to whom our services will be especially beneficial: the homeless, those who are in prison, the mentally or physically handicapped, the terminally ill, neglected or abused children.

My own work has brought me into close contact with the elderly, within whose ranks I now stand. In the Salt Lake Valley alone, there are literally hundreds of them, mostly women, who have neither spouse nor children and who face disability and death alone. When they were younger, keeping neat houses and gardens was to them a great source of pride and self-esteem. Now they sit and watch their homes disintegrate and weeds grow in their yards. I know two women who are legally blind, living on incomes that don't permit them to call a plumber, carpenter, painter, or gardener.

Even those who can hire some of these services are not free from loneliness. I took a box of food from the Salt Lake Food Bank to an elderly widow one winter day. After a friendly visit, I wished her well. She said, "Mr. Bennion, come again, if it's only to say hello." I hope her next visitor feels, as I felt, that the promise of the Savior had been fulfilled for us: "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20.)

Faith

Jesus acknowledged his Father as the source of his beliefs and actions. His was a strong, sensible, and undoubting faith that we live in God's world and that he has a deep concern for our well-being. Whenever I feel lonely or insecure, I like to read the Sermon on the Mount, where he expressed, in beautiful words, his simple and complete trust in the Father:

"Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?

"And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: and yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?

"Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.

"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.

"Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof." (Matthew 6:25-34.)

There is a great deal of peace for me in these words. They clarify my priorities, simplify my perspective, and ring with reassurance.

Another favorite passage of scripture that illuminates the nature of faith is the fascinating conversation that grew out of an encounter Jesus had with a concerned father who had a very disturbed son. He told the man, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth.

"And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.

"When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.

"And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose." (Mark 9:23-27.)

It is the cry of the father that resonates in my own heart. In the presence of the Master, the father believed; but upon reflection, he realized that he did not always have faith. My faith, like his, is not always free of doubt. I, too, on occasion, cry, "Lord, help thou mine unbelief."

Many people are disturbed when they find doubts intruding into their faith, particularly young people who, as a natural stage in their maturation, are questioning the simple faith of their childhood. I try to point out to them two facts: Jesus did not rebuke the father for his unbelief, and the father confessed his unbelief to the Savior in the context of asking for help. I believe that our Heavenly Father is pleased with such confessions. What could make for healthier growth than expressing doubts in a context of faith? Indifference, it seems to me, is far deadlier to faith than doubt.

It is not easy in our time to maintain a simple faith in God. Perhaps it never was easy. As I have grown older, I no longer see faith as an answer-finding instrument, if you will. I still have many questions. Some of them are questions that have perplexed me from my youth, while others are questions that have come as

I have learned to ask different questions of life. But at the heart of my faith is a strong and solid core: God sees life from a different perspective than we do. What is important for us is to believe that God lives, that he has a purpose in his dealings with us, and that the principles Jesus taught have both eternal and temporal value. With such faith, I am more willing to also develop the virtue of patience.

Humility, integrity, love, and faith. Even though our discussion of these four basic principles that Jesus taught and lived has been brief, it is remarkable to me how they interface and support one another. A person cannot have integrity without humility, because only humility can provide the self-acceptance to know one's central values and the freedom from fear to express them. On the other hand, without integrity one's humility is actually hypocrisy, lacking in honesty and sincerity.

Certainly one cannot love a neighbor without having a good measure of integrity. Love has no motive beyond itself. "Love," so-called, that stems from fear, duty, or a desire to get to the celestial kingdom is not really love at all, and the acts of such "love" are poisoned by self-interest.

A person of humility, integrity, and faith needs a supreme, unifying purpose in life. Love of God and of other beings provides such a goal. Jesus' philosophy of life hangs together beautifully. Humility and faith relate people to God and Christ; integrity and love are essential in human relations. All four principles enrich one another, illustrating the genius of Jesus, the master teacher, and the power of his perfect life.
