Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 5

Jesus' Art of Teaching

Teaching is an art, not a science. I speak as someone who has labored long to learn its secrets, only to find it as mysterious as it is magical. In this realm, as in so many others, Jesus is my master. He was an artist, not only in the substance of his teaching but also in his manner and forms.

As a teacher, Jesus is most famous for the parables he created. Parables are stories taken from life, crafted by Jesus' imagination and insights, that illustrate gospel principles. Stories are remembered even when abstract reasoning, though clearly understood, is forgotten. Parables have been described as earthly stories with heavenly meanings. They are a particularly good form for the purpose that seemed to dominate Jesus' teaching—to transmit principles rather than rules or mere information.Life is dynamic; conditions change in almost infinite variety. Rules become outmoded; principles do not.

The Gospels of Matthew and Luke record many parables. Two of my favorites are the parable of the good Samaritan and the parable of the prodigal son, both of which preach eloquently and irresistibly the value of other human beings. When a man asked Jesus, "Who is my neighbour?" Jesus responded with a story so real and true to life that it could have happened exactly as he told it. But using imagination and casting the despised Samaritan as the good neighbor, he made his point with absorbing interest, clarity, and originality.

The parable of the prodigal son illustrated the rich human interest Jesus included in many of his parables. Many families have a son or daughter who seeks independence by leaving the family home and even rejecting the family's values. To have the father celebrate his son's return was a very effective way for Jesus to teach the Pharisees the worth of souls. How natural, too, for an older brother to be envious and judgmental.

Another characteristic of Jesus' parables was the concreteness of his language. He talked about things his hearers could touch and see, using simple, vigorous verbs and clearly described behavior, as we see in this example:

"A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Luke 8:5-8)

A friend once commented, "You have been a teacher all your life. What have you learned from Jesus about how to teach religion?" I haven't been able to duplicate Jesus' wonderful art of creating parables and proverbs, but Ihave tried to emulate his teaching art in five specific ways.

For example, when such a person asked if it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, thus acknowledging the legal lordship of the country's hated rulers, Jesus called for a coin, asked his questioner whose image it bore, and thus led him into identifying the image as Caesar's: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." (Matthew 22:21.)

As a teacher, I truly enjoy the process of helping people become their own teachers, rather than passively receiving instructions. Jesus' use of judicious questions is an effective way of accomplishing this end.

She replied, "How to keep the kids quiet while I give it."

I was tempted to tell her that the best way to do that was to gag and hog-tie them. But remembering Jesus' way, I asked her if she thought it might be more effective to teach not the lessons, but the twelve-year-olds. What did she know about them? their interests? their family backgrounds? their problems? How did they teach each other? What kinds of things did they seem to want to learn?

She became quite interested in this approach, which eliminated the built-in contest between what they were doing and what she wanted them to do. I believe she saw the point I was trying to make: that the purpose of Sunday School is not to teach the gospel to people but rather to teach people the gospel. Thanks to Jesus, I always try to teach people, and to have them leave the classroom with increased faith, humility, love, or insight.

I learned from Jesus that a good lesson is one idea, organized and illustrated, and readily—even vividly—applicable to the lives of the class members. Too often in our classes, we try to cover a multitude of ideas or many aspects of a basic theme. We take a shotgun approach. A good lesson should be like a rifle shot, in which the teacher develops one very specific idea or principle with the insights of the class.

For example, instead of discussing all aspects of prayer in one lesson, why not treat a single question, such as, "When have you had reason to pray with great meaning and motivation?" This is a need we all have. Class members will think first not of rules, but of their own experiences. And in the sharing, they will stimulate and enlighten each other—and the teacher.

I suspect that Jesus, like most great teachers, truly loved not only those he taught and the concepts he conveyed but also the very process of teaching. What else is teaching besides the shared search for greater truth and understanding through the characteristics that make us most human—through reason, through discourse, through sympathy, and through making connections so that our vision expands and we see relationships that we had not hitherto guessed? In fact, that's not a bad definition of heaven, too, as far as I'm concerned.
