Lowell L. Bennion, Legacies of Jesus ( 1990)

Chapter 6

Jesus and the Atonement

Thus far we have talked about Jesus' ethical and humanitarian qualities, his superb teaching gifts, his values, and the place of humility, integrity, love, and faith in his religious principles. His unique position as both an emissary and an exemplary prophet gives him authority. For all of these reasons, he merits our discipleship.

But we have said nothing as yet about his divinity—nothing about our eternal relationship to him, his atonement, and his redemption. It may be possible to give him the reasoned obedience due to a great ethical and moral teacher, but for me, my discipleship stems from my conviction of his divinity. What does his godhood mean to my worship?

Let me suggest the meaning I read in John 3:16-17:

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved."

Christ's eternal mission on behalf of human beings was fulfilled in his atonement. Literally the word means at-one-ment, signifying that we should be in harmony with God, at one with him and his Son. If we are to be at one with Deity, we must change—not God. We must overcome the limitations in our lives, for they have no counterpart in the life of God.

What human conditions deny us unity with God? What circumstances must we overcome to be one with him? What must we be saved from to obtain salvation? I believe we must overcome three things to be at one with God: mortality, ignorance, and sin.

Overcoming mortality, quite simply and flatly, lies beyond our powers. Despite medical advances, despite care to one's diet, exercise, and health, death awaits us all. Here, in the immutable and inescapable fact of our own demise, we must either reach out to Christ for help or face it alone.

One of Christ's self-announced missions on earth was to conquer death, making it possible for each person who has ever lived to pass into an immortal, resurrected state. As the first mortal to be resurrected, Christ is in a position to promise all human beings that they will rise from the grave with a tangible, perfected, immortal body. In Alma we read: "The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23.)

How the Resurrection takes place, and exactly how Christ effects it, we do not understand. We do understand that it is universal and irresistible, "for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:22.) The Resurrection appeals to us as a miracle, a pure gift of grace from the Son of God.

When Socrates was condemned to death, his friends offered to help him escape death, but he refused. As Plato records that final night with his friends, Socrates said that no harm could come to a good man in death because death was either the best night's sleep a person ever had, undisturbed by dreams or nightmares, or the passage to another world where justice reigns and where one can converse with great individuals who have gone before.

I have always appreciated Socrates' curiosity and his calmness; and even if there were no immortality, this life would still be of great value while it lasted. But such a condition would be sad. To have life end just when we have come to know and enjoy it is a tragedy indeed. Jesus is my basis for believing in eternal life. I know that his ethical and practical religious teachings are true, and they strengthen my faith in what he said about the Resurrection.

We receive, then, the Resurrection as pure gift, as something we simply cannot do for ourselves. The other two conditions, ignorance and sin, are direct responsibilities of our own, though Christ stands ready to help us, to redeem our incapacity, and to complete our deficiencies. Ignorance is not a sin unless we willfully refuse to learn, but it is a limitation almost as serious as sin. "And ye shall know the truth," Jesus promised, "and the truth shall make you free." ( John 8:32.) In his gospel, we find the means of overcoming ignorance. As human beings, we have rational and insatiable minds. We are eternal intelligences, and the acquisition of truth is a desire that is built into our nature. Christ came to earth to teach us the truth.

One of the most important things we need to learn is what are the attributes of God. Christ came to earth to reveal to us the character of God. He is the revelation of God to human beings, teaching us by precept and example the meaning of faith, humility, integrity, and love.

We do not learn about these divine attributes by mere reason or by reading the scriptures. We must learn them experientially, by living them. This process may take eons, and mortality is a crucial part of that process.

The third thing we must overcome is sin, which binds us by using our inborn free agency to make wrong decisions. Knowingly, either by commission or by omission, when we sin we act contrary to what we know is right. Jesus describes both ignorance and sin in commenting to the Pharisees: "If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth." ( John 9:41.) A person may act in ignorance, but he or she cannot sin in ignorance. And all of us, the scriptures testify, are sinners. We fail to measure up to our knowledge of the right.

Knowing the truth is a great step toward freedom from sin, followed by applying our agency to make correct choices. But even our best efforts will fall short of achieving such freedom without the aid of Christ.

What is Christ's relationship to the sins of humankind? There is only one way to overcome sin in our lives, and that is to repent, which means to eradicate it from our thinking and action. Christ helps us repent in two ways. First, his teachings and the example of his perfect life help us recognize that we are sinners until we repent of our wrongdoing. Second, he gives us faith unto repentance, motivating us to change our desires and behavior.

For me, one of the most powerful motives is his love for me, which in turn calls out my love for him. Christ loves us so much that our evildoing causes him to suffer. I remember as a child that there were some forms of naughtiness and mischief that I simply would not participate in because I knew that it would hurt my mother. Similarly, for believing Christians, the realization that we are causing our Savior pain is, in itself, a vigorous motivation to repent. I have sometimes flinched as I have read King Benjamin's testimony to his people: "And lo, he shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people." (Mosiah 3:7.)

Another way in which Christ motivates change is through the power of his life and teaching. The inspiration of a better way leads us to emulate, even in our limited and broken ways, that perfection. This motive may be particularly true of someone who has tasted the bitterness of a life of sin through wrongdoing.

When I was a missionary, a man confessed a serious sin to me. He was in a very unhappy frame of mind, guilty and tormented by his conscience. He was a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood, so I asked him, "Will you accept an assignment to prepare the sacrament table each week?"

He was startled. "Do you think I'm worthy?"

"No," I answered, "none of us are, but I believe Jesus would be pleased if you would render him this service."

The man came to me in a few months and said, "I'm a new person. My thoughts are where they ought to be."

Thinking of Jesus and rendering a specific service for him enabled this man to change his feelings from regret and depression to hope and joy. I guessed that this might be so since I had observed in my own life that I committed very few sins while thinking about my Savior or serving him.

Jesus helps us repent by promising forgiveness to those who truly repent. He affirms the teaching of Ezekiel:

"But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?" (Ezekiel 18:21-23.)

The New Testament contains many thrilling accounts of Jesus cutting directly and powerfully through the torment, guilt, and frustration of a sinner to forgive him or her. There are no elaborate contracts or negotiations that balance so much repentance against so much sin. Jesus simply and cleanly frees the person from all of that tangle, thus prompting Paul to remind the Colossians later about the importance of "forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, . . . even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye." (Colossians 3:13.)

In short, Christ makes us aware of our sins, moves us to repent from them, and promises forgiveness when we do. These are acts of grace and love; they empower us to overcome sin and its destructive role in our lives.

The apostle Paul and the other prophets believed that Jesus did one more thing for our sins, and their testimony has become part of mine. They believed that he took upon himself the sins of those who repent, that he suffered for our sins so that his mercy could satisfy the demands of justice.

I do not understand the mechanisms of redemption, and I am not sure that legal arguments of retribution and restitution adequately capture that process; but the prophets imply that we live in a world of law. When the laws are broken, somehow they must be made good or be satisfied. Jesus paid the price of our sins, according to this view. When he visited the Nephites, he said:

"Behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (3 Nephi 11:11.)

Just as we cannot understand in mortality how the Resurrection is made possible, neither do we know why or how Christ "pays" for our sins. But there is plenty that we do understand: the nature of sin, its destructive consequences, our need to repent, and the assurance of forgiveness if we do. We can be grateful for Christ's grace, which, indeed, is "sufficient" (2 Corinthians 12:9) both for overcoming death on our behalf and, united with our best efforts, for overcoming ignorance and sin within us.

Christ deserves the title "Son of God" by the beauty and perfection of his life and teachings. However, this title is not merely a tribute to his goodness, but a literal description of his divinity, according to the scriptures. He was human by birth, but more than human. In the scriptures Mary was told by an angel, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." (Luke 1:35.)

Facing his crucifixion, Jesus testified: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again." ( John 10:17-18.)

Once again, a great mystery surrounds how Jesus received his divine nature, but we can accept the fact in that mystery, believing that he undertook his mission of redemption on behalf of humankind. His life and death are evidence of his boundless grace as our redeemer from death, ignorance, and sin.

I am not a poet. I envy those who have the ability to cast the deeply felt thoughts of their heart into eloquent and beautiful forms. The thought of the Atonement stirs feelings of gratitude and awe that I cannot begin to express, but I believe that my favorite sacrament hymn, "I Stand All Amazed," does a fair job of capturing these feelings:

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me. I tremble to know that for me he was crucified, That for me, a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died. I marvel that he would descend from his throne divine To rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine, That he should extend his great love unto such as I, Sufficient to own, to redeem, and to justify. I think of his hands pierced and bleeding to pay the debt, Such mercy, such love, and devotion can I forget? No, no, I will praise and adore at the mercy seat, Until at the glorified throne I kneel at his feet. —Hymns, 1985, no. 193
