Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

The segment of this book titled "The Day of the Gentile" has been rewritten and enlarged, and because of its importance to the day and age in which we live has been given a more prominent place in the second edition.

The other segments of the book, "The Meaning of Truth," and "The Kingdom of Evil," also important to our present day in particular, with minor corrections, remain the same. A new Index and Table of Contents have been prepared which more comprehensively cover the various subjects of the book. The reader should find these helpful in identifying the important aspects of the book.

The author, while serving as president of the European Mission, during which time (1961-2) this volume was originally published, delivered an address to the missionaries of the Norwegian Mission at Oslo, based upon the materials contained in "The Day of the Gentile." This talk, taped at the time, has in various ways and places been published and republished in mimeographed and printed form under the title of, "For What Purpose," without the editing and approval of the author, except in one instance.

This has resulted in the distribution of many thousands of copies. As might be expected, without editing, this distribution from many sources has resulted in some changes which do not reflect in a true light the knowledge and understanding of the author on certain subjects.

It is hoped that this new edition will serve to cessate the further distribution of these articles, presumably reflecting the author's views.

This second edition, as we now enter a new decade of time, if carefully read and studied, will find application to the very important time in which we live. Important, because it concerns the covenants which Noah, the second great progenitor of mankind, made with his three sons, Shem, Japheth, and Ham, of whose ethnic descendants the whole earth has been populated following the great deluge, and concerning whom the Lord through his servant Noah, as Elias, has set the habitation and boundaries of mankind leading to the culmination of his work in the mortality of man.

"The Day of the Gentile" will more particularly deal with the foreordained plan of salvation effecting the lives of those who are the ethnic descendants of Japheth and his seven sons, [^1] who by ancient covenant can, by the acceptance and adherence to the Gospel now restored, come in and be numbered among the chosen of the Lord and given patriarchal assignment in the House of Israel. [^2]

The times of the gentiles are upon us and a light has broken forth which is the fulness of the gospel, and is now being taken by the heralds of truth to those that sit in darkness.

Lucifer, the arch enemy of the Son and of established light and righteousness, is attempting even now through his established kingdom of evil, to thwart and frustrate the work of God in this important day of the Gentile. But his efforts will come to naught among the good and pure in heart, and he will in the sequence of the Lord's time be rejected and cast out by those who are the Lord's, over whom he will have no power. A segment of this edition deals with the "Kingdom of Evil," over which Lucifer presides.

The defeat and banishment of Lucifer and his kingdom of evil will be accomplished by the light of truth which is intelligence as it is absorbed by those who will elect to follow the way of the Lord. Lucifer and his evil followers cannot cope with light and truth for it forsakes them.

The "Meaning of Truth" is vital to our understanding and acceptance of God's plan. A third segment of this edition therefore considers its importance.

THE AUTHOR

May 15, 1970

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Genesis, 10th Chapter.
[^2] 2. B. of M., I Nephi, Chapter 14; III Nephi, Chapter 21.
