Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

Section Two

The Meaning of Truth

Scripture Forethought

The Glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

Light and truth forsake that evil one.

(D&C 93:36, 37)

CHAPTER NINE

What is Truth

Those who read and attempt to understand the Holy Bible will find that the meaning of "truth" is not made clear. This is unfortunate, for the truth as proclaimed by the Lord, when it is understood and adhered to, provides for mankind the way of eternal life. The interrogation of the Christ by Pontius Pilate as he stood before him, accused by the Jewish high priests, approached an answer, but according to the record did not clarify its meaning upon that occasion, nor is it clarified in any known part of the ancient Holy Scriptures.

The incident when Pilate made the interrogation of Christ, is given by the Apostle John:

Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the TRUTH. Everyone that is of the truth heareth my voice.

"Pilate saith unto him, WHAT IS TRUTH?. . . [^1]

The scriptural account thereafter simply states that after this question was asked, Pilate went out again to the Jews and proclaimed that he could find no fault in Jesus. But the question as to "truth" was not answered. Perhaps an early manuscript containing the answer was lost or perhaps the answer which Christ must have invariably given was not recorded.

At any rate, the Prophet Joseph Smith centuries later, acting under the inspiration and revelation from this same Lord, who stood before Pilate, declared by revelation, the meaning of "truth" in these words:

And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come; [^2]

Truth, therefore, is eternal and unchangeable. A truth declared today is the same as it would have been declared centuries ago, had there been an occasion to declare it. A truth made known in our own time, cannot be at any variance with the truth written in ages past; or even upon some far-off planet rolling in the depths of space. Truth is eternal; it will ever be found applicable, no matter when or where given, to that law upon which it is predicated. Furthermore, should a truth be discovered by so-called scientific pursuits, or given by divine revelation through a prophet of God, each in its own sphere of influence, the period of its announcement, whether or not it is understood by man, is not consequential, it must ever remain as a truth and will circumvent all error and simply stand as a truth.

The differences of concept between men of science and those of religion, with regard to the origin, purpose, and destiny of man and of his present abode, the earth, or of the universe, continue in our own so-called enlightened age. While apparently devoid of physical violences, which once characterized the disputes, the evident controversy of word and concept is perhaps more pronounced today than at any other time in the world's history.

Difference in the Concepts of Religion and Science

Science, briefly stated, is a pursuit of knowledge operating through the intelligence of man in the constant seeking and finding of eternal truths that pertain to man, the earth, and universe.

Religion, in the true Christian concept, depends upon revelation from God for its faith and teachings of truth. These teachings, because of God's concern for the human family, often involve certain fundamental truths of life, which may be sought after and found by strictly scientific pursuits. Religion is actually a science, for the true follower of Christ will ever seek after truth. He may not only look for it in test tubes or nuclear reactors, but from pure knowledge as revealed from God unto his servants, the prophets.

The Uniting of Discovery

When fundamental truths are established, either by scientific pursuits or by direct revelation from God, there can be no disputes, or actual variances, for the source of the knowledge is the same. Whether man receives a knowledge of truth by divine revelation or through the workings of science, in the realms of which he is capable, where gradually the application of the same truth is understood the result will ever be the same.

There has never been a time or never will be when God will reveal unto his servants any knowledge that is contrary to law, "for all things abideth the law of their own kingdom." [^3] Consequently, when science discovers a truth, it will agree with revelation from God.

Not All Religious or Scientific Statements Are True

It therefore follows that not all statements made by those professing knowledge through either scientific or religious pursuits, are necessarily true. Just the opposite has been in evidence throughout the ages of the past. When religious leaders or institutions supposedly relying upon inspirational sources for information through revelation have made statements of error, it must be conceded that such error is devoid of any divine direction. Science likewise in its many erroneous calculations must concede faulty channels of information and lack of complete knowledge in arriving at conclusions, and become, as Paul the ancient apostle, told Timothy, "Science falsely so called." [^4]

When dealing with the universe and the earth upon which man lives, or with any physical law, whether it be scientific or religious, truth is the governing factor; the simple deduction, therefore, is that when either announces a truth, and it proves to be so there will be no cause for variance.

The following quotations are from the book, Gospel Philosophy by J. H. Ward, (pp. 21-27) out of print now, but finding application in our own day:

A conflict has been going on for years between some students of science on one side and the devotees of religion on the other. Nearly all the great and good men of the medieval or modern times have been engaged on one side or the other, and a hard contest it has been. The war has been waged longer, the battles have been fiercer, the sieges more persistent, the diplomacy more far-reaching, and the revenge more deadly than ever characterized the great military campaigns of Alexander, Caesar, or Napoleon.

Conflict Between Science and Religion

Certain historical accounts record the fact that the first great conflict between science and the so-called Christian church of that time was in reference to the geography, shape, and surface of the earth. When science disclosed the fact that the earth is round, there was a great commotion in all Christendom, since the discovery was made by Mohammedan and Jewish scholars. This declaration was particularly aggravating to the Christians of that day who were led to say:

Is it possible for vile Mohammedans to understand and teach such a truth when it is not yet known to the assumed church of God?

Loss of Revelation Led Church into Error

But here arose the difficulty: the so-called Christian church by apostasy had lost the key of revelation. Her decisions depended not upon the voice of inspiration but upon musty parchmental teachings of an erroneous past. Claiming to be the church of God, she regarded her decisions as infallible and irrevocable and her teachings as beyond question. Her ideas were crystallized; her philosophy, if indeed it was worthy of that name, was stationary.

Upon the announcement concerning the earth's geography, at once the war spirit became fierce and hot. The great writer Eusebius treated the doctrine with contempt. Lactantius asks: [^5]

Is there any one so senseless, as to believe that there are men whose footsteps are higher than their heads? That the crops and trees grow downward? That the rains, snow and hail fall upward to the earth?

At this stage of controversy, Cosmas Indicopleustes, by direction of the Catholic Church, undertook to give a description of the earth. According to Cosmas, the universe is in the form of an immense box, twice as broad as it is high and twice as long as it is broad. At the bottom of this box lies the earth surrounded by four great seas or oceans. At the outer edges of these seas rise immense walls, which support the vault of heaven, even as the walls of a house support the roof; and thus walls and vault shut in the earth and all of the heavenly bodies. This vast box he divides into two compartments or stories. In the lower one men were said to live and sun and moon and stars to move. The upper one was said to be the abode of God and the angels, whose principal work was to move the sun and planets to and fro and to open the windows of heaven and thus regulate the quantity of rain. Cosmas arrived at his theory concerning the earth by specific references of various scriptures from the Holy Bible.

Scriptures Misinterpreted to Support Erroneous Theory

When we investigate the scriptures which Cosmas used to support his theory, it can well be realized how readily one who is not inspired or who does not have the key whereby the truths of biblical statements are to be correctly understood can lead to false and utterly untrue statements. These scriptural references which Cosmas used are given herewith.

As to the Four Seas Surrounding the Earth

And God said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. [^6]

As to the Pillars or Walls Supporting the Vault of Heaven

The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof. [^7]

As to the Rains or Waters That Were Held to Deposit upon the Earth

Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens. [^8]

As to the Separation of the Heaven from the Earth:

It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in. [^9]

The controversy regarding the earth does not particularly exist today, but one might well wonder, at the time when this description was given, the source of the supposedly true knowledge of the geography of the earth advanced by the Catholic Cosmas, and other Christian leaders who at that time freely supported his theory as a fundamental fact. How do we explain their lack of true inspiration?

It is seen here, that the supposed church of Christ devoid of revelation declared an untruth, while the scientist with intelligence of man enlightened by the Spirit of God, had discovered a truth.

Space will not permit us to follow this contest in all of its phases. Sufficeth it to say that so late as the fourteenth century Cecco d'Ascoli was burned alive for asserting his belief in the roundness of the earth. The students of history will also remember how Columbus at the great council of Salamanca was overwhelmed by texts of scriptures wrested from their rightful meaning, presented at that court by learned priors, attempting to prevent his intended and, later to be, history-making voyage.

Because of such errors as were sustained by the so-called Christian church, it must be conceded, therefore, in a scientific not less than a religious point of view, that many leading minds looked with favor toward that great religious movement known as the Reformation which was to break the bands of bigotry and false concepts.

Second Great Controversy

While Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli were busy denouncing the corruptions of the Romish church, the forces were preparing for the second conflict between science and so-called religion, namely that of the motion of the earth.

Copernicus-Motion of the Planets Around the Sun

Copernicus, a Polish scientist, born at Torun, Poland, but who leaned to German allegiance, lived at the same time as Luther and died two years before him. His was as brave a life as ever lived in history. For thirty-six years, at the very time the Protestant struggle was raging, he was working on his immortal book in which he so clearly demonstrates the motion of the earth, and the revolution of the planets around the sun. But he dared not print it for many years. If he published it at Rome, it would fall into the hands of the Inquisition; if he caused it to be printed in Germany, there were the Protestant leaders no less hostile; if he sent it to Switzerland, there stood Calvin and Zwingli ready to burn it. At length the work was ready for the press. By the entreaty of rebellious Romish Cardinal Schomberg, and with many apologies, Copernicus ventured to publish it. He was now old and feeble, while patiently he waited at death's door to see a printed copy. At length the long looked for copy arrived. He saw it, composed himself, and died in the year 1543.

Bruno Supports Findings of Copernicus

Seven years after the death of Copernicus, was born that strange individual, Giordano Bruno, who advocated and taught the principles found in the book from Copernicus concerning the rotation of the earth around the sun. He had to flee to Switzerland, but Calvin held power there, and Bruno was soon obliged to leave. Driven in succession from England, France, and Germany, he ventured later to return to Italy. He was arrested in Venice and after eight years of solitary confinement was burned in Rome, February 16, 1600. When the atrocious sentence was passed upon him, he nobly replied.

Perhaps it is with greater fear that you pass this sentence upon me than I receive it. [^10]

Galileo-Persecutions of the Inquisition

Meanwhile Galileo was prosecuting his studies at Florence. In May of 1609 he made his first telescope, and pointing it toward the heavens saw the satellites of Jupiter, and the phases of Venus. These were two of the weightiest arguments that had yet been presented in favor of the Copernican Theory. Galileo understood the Copernican Theory, and began to encounter vulgar indignation which accused him of impiety. In 1611 Galileo publicly exhibited the spots on the sun. This only excited the rage of his persecutors. Goaded by opposition he wrote a letter in 1613 to Abbe Castelli, showing that the scriptures were given for our salvation and not to teach astronomy in particular. This was repeating Bruno's offense. Galileo was brought before the Inquisition and after years of imprisonment only saved his life by denying the great truths he had discovered. He died in 1642 in the seventy-eighth year of his age, the prisoner of the Inquisition; but religious bigotry did not end there, it tried to follow him beyond the grave disputing his right to make a will and denying him burial in consecrated ground.

Protestant Leaders Intolerant of Scientific Findings

Unfortunately the leaders of the Protestant cause were no less bitter, for though Luther, Calvin, Zwingli, and others, had protested against the irrevocable and assumed infallible and false teachings of the Romish church, yet they themselves exhibited the same spirit against those who would dare announce a truth contrary to their concepts.

In reference to Copernicus, Luther, the great reformer, without the inspiration of revelation declared this,

People give ear to an upstart astrologer, who strives to show that the earth revolves.

This fool (Copernicus) wishes to reverse the whole system of astronomy. [^11]

Zwingli declared;

The earth can be no where, if not in the center of the universe. It is a part of a good mind to accept the truth as revealed by God, and acquiesce in it. [^12]

No Differences between True Science and True Religion

Another controversy, between religion and science, age-old in its concept, continues in our day with all its bitterness. This involves the creation of man and the forming of the earth. But, in these vital issues, as in all conditions where truth is involved, when the facts are fully known, the revelations from God to his servants the prophets will be subscribed to by the true findings of men. True religion and true science will always be in harmony. The source of knowledge is the same, and from which source could never come conflicting concepts.

Michael Servetus Challenge of the Trinity Dogma

Here we see the lack of inspiration which these two men, great as they were as reformers, had concerning these truths. Calvin further proved the darkness of his own mind when he put to death that celebrated philosopher, and physician, Michael Servetus, whose greatest crimes were that in religion he denied the absurd dogma that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are three separate and distinct beings and are yet one and the same person, and in science he had partially succeeded in discovering the circulation of the blood. The circumstances were also of the most atrocious character. Servetus was roasted for two hours in the flames of a slow fire made of green wood. And thus the superstitions and bigotry of the Protestants were not far behind that of the Catholics. In the presence of the Protestant king, James the First of England, it was declared that Agnes Sampson with two hundred other witches had sailed in sieves from Leath to North Betwick Church to hold a banquet with the devil. It was also said that witches had baptized and then drowned a black cat, which caused a terrible storm in which the ship that carried the king narrowly escaped being wrecked. King James and the high church dignitaries who formed his privy council believed the accusation and condemned the poor woman to flames.

The leaders of German Protestantism were Luther and Melanchthon, yet even they were victims of the grossest superstitions. They believed that in the Tiber, not far distant from the pope's palace, a monster had been found having the body of a man, the head of a mule, and the claws of a bird of prey. After much speculation and searching of the Bibles they concluded it was a manifestation of God's anger against Rome, and they wrote a pamphlet about it.

Persecution of Men of Science, Proved Weakness of Protestants

Protestantism therefore itself, as time went on, proved its weakness as a system of reform since it took up, in many instances, the very tools of iniquity which plagued those of the early Christian church.—Thus, it may be well not to extol the leaders of this movement as warriors of reform unduly for they, too, were men of their times.

When we read of Copernicus escaping persecution only by death, of Bruno burned alive as a monster of impiety, of Servetus being roasted, or Galileo imprisoned and humiliated as the worst of misbelievers, we are forced to look upon these things as the effects of religious institutions entirely devoid of revelation and inspiration from God.

The Light of Inspiration unto All Men

In 1832 there was revealed unto the Prophet Joseph Smith, the source of this knowledge as it pertained to man and the universe.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God. . . [^13]

Similar reference to this power is made in the teachings of the Apostle John concerning the power and administrative mission of Jesus Christ whom he refers to as the "Word."

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men.

And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. [^14]

Thus, it is ruled by the Lord, in this enlightened age, made possible by the restoration of the Gospel of Truth, that man, by the application of intelligence, may find out many great Truths. The prophet or authorized representative of God upon the earth, in addition to this source of inspiration, however, will have also the bestowals of divine truths directly given, through the intercession of instruction and revelation made by messengers sent from the presence of God or by direct manifestion from God himself.

Benefits of Science

Science, that process or pursuit to find out truths about man and the universe, must never be underrated. As a civilization we owe much to science for on every side we see its benefits. The food we eat, the clothes we wear, and the houses we dwell in depend a great deal upon it. Our travels by land, sea, or air are by the mechanisms of science. The so-called Jet Age can be nothing but a tribute to the intelligence of man, enlightened as he is by the light or inspiration of Truth, administered by the Spirit of God.

The books we read, the illumination to read by, the conveniences of our homes, and the super highways we travel on, have come by scientific advancement. The relief of human sufferings, the saving of lives through medicine-and research, the promotion of human happiness, all are affected by and owe much to science. God has so ordained by the inspiration of light and truth that man shall find out many things for himself, and these discoveries when correctly established only serve to prove the governing laws of such which God himself has established.

The Age of Enlightenment

It has been estimated that ninety percent of all the scientists that ever lived upon the earth are alive today. Scientific advancements in our modern age can be explained by the revealed fact, that the restoration of the gospel, and the "pouring out" of God's Spirit upon all flesh, in this last dispensation of God's will, known as the fulness of times, is producing an influence of enlightenment upon all flesh. Thus through God-given intelligence, man can discover many of the laws that pertain to the universe and man. This was announced by the Prophet Joseph Smith,

. . . that I may bring to pass my strange act, that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh— [^15]

The Prophet Joel spoke anciently of this very same condition in the latter days, when great intelligence would fill the earth, resulting in the discovery of many of the strange and great things of life,

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; . . . your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: [^16]

It will be of interest, to those who may be concerned, to categorize and analyze scientific achievements in virtually every field, since the time of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ through the Prophet Joseph Smith, in 1820, thereby indicating the fulfillment of the prophecies made by him and others many years before these discoveries were made.

Men of research and science who have that vision to project their thought and action into the channels of truth, will find inspiration in accordance with God's promise of inspiration. It is to be hoped that their findings will be used for the good and blessing of mankind, not their destruction.

Revelation—Divine Personal Appearance Greater

In addition to this source of inspiration in a manner more emphatic and far-reaching, the prophets and authorized servants of God will have the bestowals of divine truths directly given, through the intercession made by messengers sent from the presence of God or even the appearance of Holy Deity, to give instruction or in announcing divine Truth intended for man's salvation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Job 38:31; Amos 5:8.
[^2] Egyptian Alphabet, Church Historians Office
[^3] D&C 93:33. Difference in the area of study of a prophet and a scientist. A Scientist studies nature and the environment in which he finds himself. A Prophet studies nature's Author. A scientist investigates the things created. A Prophet communes with the Creator.
[^4] B. H. Roberts—Seven Last Discourses., PP. 12, 13.
[^5] Idem. pp. 17, 18.
[^6] Pearl of Great Price, Abr. 4:25-27.
[^7] J. H. Ward, Gospel Philosophy, pp. 187-191.
[^8] George Rawlinson, The Origin of Nations, p. 2.
[^9] (J. F. Smith) pp. 353, 354.
[^10] P. of G. P., Abraham 3:18.
[^11] George Rawlinson, The Origin of Nations, p. 7.
[^12] P. of G. P., Moses 1:33, 35.
[^13] Kahn, Design of the Universe, pp. 157-158.
[^14] P. of G. P., Moses 1:39, 40.
[^15] Joel 2:27-30.
[^16] D&C 95:4; Called by Isaiah, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Isa. 29:14.)
