Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER TEN

Scientific Concepts a Part of the Gospel in All Ages

When the true Church of Jesus Christ exists upon the earth, whether as in the Meridian of Time, or anciently, as in the days of Adam or the religion of Jehovah, referred to by the apostle Paul as the gospel, which before was preached in the days of Moses and Abraham, or as it is now proclaimed in this the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times restored in these last days through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, there are basically no conflicts arising between its fundamental teachings and the true findings of science.

Men of God Anciently Were Scientists

In ancient times, as can be observed by the writings and declarations of the prophets Moses, Job, David, Abraham, Isaiah, and others, these great men themselves were the leading scientists of their time. They understood, to an advanced degree, natural history, architecture, sculpture, music, botany, and astronomy. In the latter they made such progress in their findings, that many of the constellations still retain the names which they used, such as Orion and Pleiades. [^1] Moses and Abraham among these perhaps rose to the most eminent level in their knowledge of man and of the universe, a fact established by the translations of the Book of Abraham and revelations contained in the Book of Moses, in the Pearl of Great Price.

It was revealed to Joseph Smith that Methuselah also was a great astronomer having a knowledge of the planets. [^2]

Scientific Truths Known by the Prophets of God

In the third chapter of Abraham, in the Pearl of Great Price, many important truths, regarding the planets and stars, as they were known unto Abraham, a prophet of God in ancient times, are made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith in this dispensation of time, by virtue of a divine gift of translation which enabled him, a revelator, to understand certain Egyptian hieroglyphics contained on parchment that had fallen into his hands.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, from time to time, declared many fundamental scientific truths, so recognized by the world, not in the sense of complete technical coverage, but in statement-like form, the validity of which tends to prove that its issuance was divinely inspired. For here, without the preponderance of usual information that would normally cover such a declaration had it been made in a so-called scientific manner, a scientific fact is made known. Yet this announcement will stand as the truth, and cannot be refuted.

This would indicate, that now, as in times of old, both religious and scientific truths are given unto the prophets of God. In fact, in the strict sense of the true meaning of both, there is no difference. A prophet of God is in very deed a true scientist.

Evidences of Joseph Smith's Scientific Knowledge

With regard to a scientific statement being declared by a prophet of God, consideration is given here to several that have been proclaimed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. These having come from the fountainhead of knowledge, are indisputable. As the years come and go, and as science is able to uncover the truth, regardless of conflicting concepts, it will be found that its findings will subscribe in every way to prophetic announcements. Recent findings of science have corroborated these facts.

These declarations are submitted in outline form only, first the subject, then the statement of Joseph Smith.

(1) Matter in whatever form is eternal.

For man is spirit. The elements are eternal,. . . [^3]

Comment:

Here a great truth is declared in referring to the eternal nature of the element of which the mortal body is composed, and which needless to say, also refers to all matter or element. It is the very law which makes possible the resurrection of the mortal body, that it may be inseparably united with the spirit, which itself is an element and is also eternal.

This truth concerning the non-destructibility of matter, while declared in connection with a great spiritual principle, is finding scientific substantiation every day. Many times there have been men who have thought that matter could be destroyed, only to find that it had changed its form. The most recent of scientific statements concerning matter, is that it is an energy, electrical or otherwise. The chain reaction in the exploding of the atomic or hydrogen bombs has served to prove how impossible it is to destroy a basic element such as plutonium. Scientists may change its form, yes, but never destroy its locked-up power. The elements are eternal, and of an eternal substance is made the species of God and man, who are of the same order, for man is in the express image and same lineage as God.

The amazing developments of science in this field led the now deceased, brilliant Einstein to say that he could not hope to understand the properties of energized matter.

In the discourse of B. H. Roberts on the "Protest against a Dying Universe," some few thoughts of interest are gathered.

There was a time when learned men felt reasonably secure, for instance, in the thought that matter was indestructible. Also that energy was indestructible; that while these existences might change forms, the substance of the things was perpetuated, and the universe was secure as an enduring thing. But the new knowledge, recently developed in the years indicated, (since 1900) has changed all that, and men are saying today that matter is being destroyed; that energy is radiated away, and that the whole universe is imminently in danger, with a lapse of time, of absolute annihilation. [^4]

This theory of dying universe and the complete destruction of matter, if true, would nullify the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith and prove him a false prophet and therefore no prophet at all. But in the light of still later findings, eminent scientists express supporting evidence to the declaration of the Prophet Joseph Smith. One of such will suffice to give evidence of the fact, that when science has developed the truth about the matter, their findings will support the declarations of the Prophet of God.

Dr. Millikan, against the contentions of most of his conferees in science, holds that the cosmic ray is so powerful, though its source is unknown as yet, that it will have the power to convert the radiated matter and energy of the universe back to mass, and establish the eternity of the universe.

William L. Laurence in his report on Dr. Millikan's representations of the cosmic ray at the National Academy of Sciences at Pasadena in late September of 1930, said:

Dr. Millikan has gone far afield in the development of a new cosmology based on the results of these further experiments with the cosmic ray. This new cosmology has its central point in the hypothesis that the creation of worlds and all matter is a never ending process that goes on today and will go on forever. [^5]

(2) The Law of the Species.

And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after its kind; and the Gods saw they would obey.

And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said: Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness; and we will give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them. [^6]

While Darwin, Huxley, Hooker, Spencer, and others revealed to the world a vast amount of knowledge concerning the origin of the species and the development of plants and animals, there were those who would have gladly found an antagonism between the facts of science and the records of revelation. But now it is admitted that it would be equally wonderful, would as much require the infinite powers of Deity, to develop all the varied and marvelous forms of organic life from a single germ as to call them into existence by special acts of creation. In reality we owe these philosophers a debt of gratitude for having studied nature so carefully and given us so many deeply interesting and important facts.

It is evidently a part of the divine plan that species within its kind should develop from a lower to a higher condition. We see this in the improvements in the breeds of our domestic animals, as well as in wild animals that now live, as compared with the remains of the ancient Saurians that once roamed over the earth. The doctrine of "Natural Selection" or "Survival of the Fittest," as Huxley terms it, is also a law of nature. We see this illustrated at the present time in the history of the races of men and species of animals. The weaker races of men are gradually disappearing while those nations who possess the highest mental, physical, and moral characteristics are extending their dominion over the earth.

The lion, tiger, bison (or buffalo), elephant, rhinoceros, and in fact, all the fiercer and larger animals, are even now disappearing before the advance of civilized man.

Darwin's Law of Variations

The law of variation, as expressed by Darwin, is true with certain limitations. For example, every person must admit a vast change in the condition of the best breeds of our domestic swine, from their ancestors, the wild boars of medieval Europe. Yet nowhere can be found a single trace of transmutation of species. For example, if we should trace the pedigree of the horse backwards through a thousand generations we should find that the original animal was also a horse, though probably a very inferior animal.

No Evidence of Transmutation

Of all the living animals and fossil remains of extinct ones, though thousands of specimens have been found, yet of land animals and the higher orders of creation, not a single instance of proven transmutation can be found.

Huxley's Theory of the Embryos

True, we are told by Huxley that the embryos of different animals closely resemble each other, so that at an early state of their existence they cannot be clearly distinguished. But what of this? It only shows the unity of design in the works of the Creator which is one of the grand characteristics of the world. Further, it teaches us a lesson of man's ignorance and lack of knowledge. With all the aid of science we are unable to perceive those minute arrangements of atoms or basic cells from which growth emanates, which will on development produce a tortoise or a fowl, a dog, or a man. Who will presume to say that a castle was developed or "evolved" from a cottage because they were built of the same materials or because some of the rooms were after the same pattern? Why then should the Divine Architect's work be doubted because he gives to the germs of different beings the power of self-development according to a specified pattern, which is to the end of a vastly different organism, each in ultimate perfection?

Theory of Early Man

The "primeval savage" is a common idea, and the so-called learned never tire of presenting to us a primitive man as only a little above the brutes, devoid of knowledge, art, language, or culture, a creature in few respects, elevated above, but mostly beneath the anthropoid apes, from whom, it is contended, is his descent by way of evolution.

Rawlinson Protests Against Priority of Savagery

In the maze of supposedly learned presentations, it is contended by Rawlinson, one of the great students of ethnology, and in his own right a celebrated scientist, that there is absolutely no proof of this supposed priority of savagery to any form of civilization. [^7] This fact likewise is simply stated by a prophet of God, Joseph Smith, that all things mineral, animal, and human remain in the sphere of their creation.

The Hypothesis of Darwinian Evolution as Compared With Revelation

The hypothesis of evolution is, therefore, a viewpoint of man, which endeavors to show how man has been brought from one state of growth to another; from the ape to the savage and thence to a creature of a higher human order resulting, thus far, in the human specie which we view today. But when we listen to the voice of God's prophet with regard to the spirit and intelligence that have been placed in the physical body of man, which has been created for that purpose, then we realize how weak and shallow and vain are the imaginations of man as he attempts to explain the wonders of God's plan in the procreation of man. The Prophet Joseph Smith, by revelation, received the following enlightenment,

There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal (co-eternal) with our Father in heaven.

God never had the power to create the spirit of man at all. God himself could not create himself.

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses, is co-equal (co-eternal) with God himself. [^8]

Spirits of Men Graded

As to the gradation of men's spirits, as they are placed into a human form, the Prophet states the following,

. . . if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after for they are . . . eternal. [^9]

The glorious plan of life and salvation, involving the peopling of an earth, to provide man with the opportunities of further growth, in the true manner of evolution, as has been revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, indicates the purposes of God, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." In the light of such knowledge, the foolish theories of man, to place the glorified spirit intelligence of man, which is in the form and image of God into a base and low form of life, and then endeavoring to trace its ascendancy, provides a most irrational application of man's God-given intelligence.

The Evolution of Man in His Own Sphere

The truth of man's growth within the sphere of his existence, is an acknowledged fact, for man is constantly improving himself. This is the very plan of life and salvation which God intended for his spirit children as they sojourn in this life. And it will not end here. The transitions of man's development upon the earth can easily be followed, and these are attributed to many known reasons. The Greeks for example, are known to have passed from a semi-savage state, as described by Homer, to that of a high civilization.

The Romans gradually exchanged their low form of life known to them in the 8th Century B. C., for the splendor of the Augustine age. The growth of these and other respective civilizations can be found to stem actually from a retrogression, from that of a state of prior existence. For example, in the days of Adam, Enoch, or Abraham when knowledge and intelligence were poured out upon man, the pursuits of life were gentle and progressive. Yet contemporary with these periods, were people who were hardly civilized, the history of whom, it is clear, reveals that they had turned away from God and the light of truth.

Retrogression Cause of Known Low Stages of Civilization

It is not difficult to trace some of these retrogressions. Take, for instance, the Arab hordes issuing from the desert, unkempt, dirty, and almost naked, with no literature but the Koran, no art but that of the forging of iron. These we can trace back to the glories of the Baghdad caliphate and the magnificence of Granada.

A certain degeneration of the Jews can be traced from the post-Babylonian period to the time when the Davidic power held sway. Likewise we see the degenerating effects of time on the descendants of the once mighty Romans, of the Dacians, or of the Trojans.

In our own land of the Americas, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, we see the degeneration of a once proud and gifted and delightsome people, to that of a degenerated race, killing and being killed, even down to the last man, and who, as savages, submitted themselves to a satanic blood worship in the sacrifice of maidens on the altars of their false gods.

Another striking example of the degeneration of a race of people, who are now in retrogression, are the "Weddas" of India, now practically extinct. This tribe of people is so debased as to be considered virtual savages. Their language is limited to some few hundred vocables. They cannot count beyond 2 or 3. They, of course, have no idea of letters, they have domesticated no animal but the dog, their arts consist of making bows and arrows, they have no idea of God, and scarcely any memory. In height, they rarely exceed five feet and are considered degenerate both mentally and physically.

Yet, the best comparative philologists pronounce their language to be that descended from the most elaborate, and earliest known form of Aryan speech, the Sanskrit. The Weddas are believed to be descendants of the Aryans, who overcame the Dravidians and occupied India. The Aryans of that time can be considered as having possessed a reasonable state of civilization. [^10]

Oscillations of Civilizations

Thus, on the whole, there would seem to be grounds for believing broadly that savagery and civilization, the two opposite poles of our human civilization, are states between which men oscillate, as internal and external circumstances bear pressure. The observance of a savage race at its low ebb, may to some be sufficient grounds to contend our earth life antiquity, from degenerate to generate. It must be admitted by all, however, that the records and actual authentic information we have disprove this, and that all early pictures of life upon the earth portray a high state of civilization.

No Savages in the Garden of Eden

There were no savages in the Garden of Eden. The high state of intelligence of our first parents enabled them to learn quickly how to prepare themselves clothing, and to learn and practice early the two modes of life, namely, pastoral and agricultural. The slow and laborious steps in the development of man, as contended by others, are not in evidence here. They were in likeness, in their earth-life body to that of their Creator, and were blessed with great perception: cities were built and the riches and blessings of earth life soon came under their domination. The earliest-known civilizations all seemed to follow this pattern.

All Creations Remain in Own Sphere

Thus the declaration by the Prophet Joseph Smith, concerning the order of creations remaining in their own spheres, while not given in a so-called scientific manner, declares with solid firmness the truth that never, worlds without end, could there be a transmutation of species, for each order of growth, each kingdom of creation must remain in its own sphere of life. The eternal laws governing this principle are immutable. Science, as it learns more of these laws, will subscribe to the declarations of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

(3) The Planets and the Stars

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten . . .

. . . For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power (earth life to glorification—celestialized). And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them. [^11]

Scientific findings confirm, almost daily, the truth of these statements uttered by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In writing of our own galaxy, (or Milky Way, of which our earth is a part) a modern science writer states the following:

According to mathematical reasoning, the total mass of the Milky Way should be 250 billion stars. Yet statistical calculations, based upon photographs of different parts of the Galaxy point to the fact that not more than 200 billion radiant stars are gathered in our Galactic System. About one-fifth of our total mass must, therefore, exist in invisible form as dark clouds or dark stars, of planets of these stars, as moons of these planets, or as planetoids, meteors, cosmic dust, or thinly distributed gases.

With regard to the immensity of space, and a finite concept even of the eternal nature of God's creations, we read further:

Not only are stars not crowded, they are terrifyingly isolated in space. The Milky Way could encompass a million times as many stars without being "filled up." The chances of one star colliding with another, even in the densest section of our Milky Way, are only one in 500 trillion years. [^12]

Conclusion of Scientific Declarations by the Prophet

Other scientific inferences made by the Prophet Joseph Smith with attendant proof could be given, but these three will suffice to illustrate the fact, that, when a prophet of God speaks and his utterances encompass certain allusions to conditions incident to the true purpose of man and the universe, such utterances will always be found in harmony with the facts which men of science may uncover.

True Religion of Christ (The Gospel)

Statements have been made in this article, that true religion and true science could never be at variance. To qualify this statement we must identify "true religion" as to mean the Church of Jesus Christ which has been divinely restored and founded upon apostles and prophets, wherein the channels of revelation from God are open for divine direction. Such a religion must provide man with the means, (a Plan of Salvation) whereby through obedience to the laws and ordinances given, he can return to the presence of God having thus obeyed all and having fulfilled the measure of his birth into this life.

In this sense therefore, the religion which is referred to, that cannot be just "any religion" is primarily interested in the salvation of the human race; in those who have gone before, who are here now, or who will yet come. Revelation given to God's prophets, having to do with basic truths, other than covenants and principles of redemption, will of necessity be confined to this planet upon which man resides. This, it would seem, is objective to the purposes of God in the saving of men's souls in this life and in this sphere of action. This understanding was made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak. [^13]

Should it be the desire, however, of God to speak directly of the planets and worlds which surround us, of which man has but a meager understanding, it would be a simple matter, for they are known to him. The laws which govern them are under his control from the great planet Kolob, which planet, in the orbit of its function, is set close unto the throne of God.

Better to Know Principles of Salvation

In the light of this knowledge, which refers to space, time and occupied planets with the laws by which they function, and with the further knowledge that God, our Heavenly Father, is the ruling power over all of them and the source of all light and knowledge, (D&C 88) how then, could there be any logical dispute between science and true religion, if and when the truth of both are known and compared.

Because of the fact that a knowledge in completeness of the planets at this particular time is not necessary to the salvation of mankind, only fragmentary statements have been given rather than a complete understanding of the laws governing them. These statements have appeared as incident to other purposes of the various revelations.

It is a fact, therefore, as far as revelation to a prophet of God is concerned, that complete information has been withheld until a later time, when in the wisdom of God, such should be made known to man by divine intercession.

Man may, of course, continue to sweep the heavens with his telescope, delve deeper into space by planned landings on the moon and other bodies in space develop newer and greater uses of nuclear power, find out more about the functioning of the human mind and body, and develop new ways of combating diseases which shorten man's sojourn here upon the earth and in many other ways continue his endless search for knowledge, which without question will result in benefits to mankind. All of these things God will permit and has ordained, in accordance with the eternal law of agency of thought and action, which is the motivating force of life. But, all that man shall find out in the application of the sciences is already known unto God in infinitely greater proportions. With such greater understanding, if wise, he could bestow this knowledge upon the intelligence of man in less time than it would take to build one telescope, cyclatron reactor, or atom furnace.

But God has not willed it so, at least not yet. Thus man will continue his search, cumbersome and slow though it may be, and as he unveils each golden truth, it will ever harmonize with the laws and declarations of God. Yet God does not oppose, nor should the true Church of God oppose, the scientific search for the physical laws of life and the universe.

The Importance of the Saving of Men's Souls

In matters, however, pertaining to the souls of men and the plan of redemption, God has ruled it otherwise. In this noble pursuit it is not his will that the things of God should be left to the sciences—where man, in and of himself, could find these things out simply by a systematic study to uncover the truths of redemption. Such a method of search could only lead to despair and confusion. For the things of God cannot be understood by the physical logic and reasoning of man only. Efforts to do this very thing have led to devious Christian societies, which, for lack of revelation from God, teach for commandments the doctrines of men.

Of necessity, to save his own children God turns to divine intercession by means of revelation to his servants the prophets, that mankind may know by doctrine, commandment and ordinance, the truths necessary for his redemption.

Pure Knowledge the Possession of the Noble Ones

Needless to say, however, it is interesting to contemplate the great strides that could be made in the sciences were it possible to have access to the fountain of knowledge in the same manner that the principles of life and salvation are revealed to his prophets. For that which man strives to learn by earthly scientific methods pertains to laws already established and well known by our Father in heaven and other noble personages of pre-earth existence.

The laws of space travel, advanced nuclear chemistry, principles of power in magnetic force, and many other laws are known and used to an ultimate degree by the exalted ones in the presence of God. Were these great principles of knowledge conveyed unto the men of science today, it would move their acquisition of knowledge ahead a thousand years, perhaps a million. Who knows the extent of heavenly knowledge? But, supposing these things were revealed to man, what would be the advantage? How would it benefit him in the search for the truths that he should learn from this earth-life existence necessary to equip him for the life to follow this one? Is it not infinitely more important that the divine laws of salvation and exaltation be given him here by the power of the spirit that he may successfully keep this estate, and thus be enabled to go forward to the next, or sub-mortal estate, having accomplished the real purpose and intent of this life. It is so, and thus God in his great wisdom has spoken directly to his prophets for the best ultimate good of man, to provide for him that which he could never learn for himself without divine intercession.

It is so simple to declare, as we view science and religion in this manner, that there can be no logical quarrel between these two for they shall ever meet on common ground when the truth is known.

The Pursuits of Science Not Displeasing to God

In connection with the pursuits of science, it is interesting to call attention to the fact that God intends that man shall continue his independent search for truth. This is made known on a facsimile in the Book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price which portrays in ancient custom, by symbolical sign writing, events of importance pertaining to the life of man and of the Creator.

This particular facsimile indicates the place of Kolob, the governing planet, and of Oliblish which stands next to Kolob, in the government of the planets which belong to the same order as the earth.

God sitting upon his throne is also typified, with the cross of eternal light upon his head, representing the keys of the Holy Priesthood.

The earth is also represented, as also many other things of great interest. Some of the figures and symbols on the facsimile have not at this time been revealed. Yet, the world (represented by science) may find them out if they can!

The information provided on the facsimile, is from an inspired translation by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It indicates the fact that God is not adverse, nor is the Church, to men obtaining as much knowledge as they can by scientific research.

"For let them find out these things, if they can"

A Facsimile From the Book of Abraham No. 2.

EXPLANATION OF THE FOREGOING CUT

Fig. 1. Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the measurement of time. The measurement according to celestial time, which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit. One day in Kolob is equal to a thousand years according to the measurement of this earth, which is called by the Egyptians Jah-oh-eh.

Fig. 2. Stands next to Kolo, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, is the next grand governing creation near to the celestial or the place where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other planets; as revealed from God to Abraham, as he offered sacrifice upon an altar, which he had built unto the Lord.

Fig. 3. Is made to represent God, sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his head; representing also the grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the priesthood was revealed.

Fig. 4. Answers to the Hebrew word Raukeeyang signifying expanse, or the firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure, in Egyptian signifying one thousand; answering to the measuring of the time of Oliblish, which is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its measuring of time.

Fig. 5. Is called in Egyptian Enish-go-on-dosh; this is one of the governing planets also, and is said by the Egyptians to be the Sun, and to borrow its light from Kolob through the medium of Kae-e-vanrash, which is the grand Key, or, in other words, the governing power, which governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars, as also Floeese or the Moon, the Earth, and the Sun in their annual revolutions. This planet receives its power through the medium of Kli-flos-is-es, or Hah-ko-kau-beam, the stars represented by numbers 22 and 23, receiving light from the revolutions of Kolob.

Fig. 6. Represents this earth in its four quarters.

Fig. 7. Represents God sitting upon his throne, revealing through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood; as, also, the sign of the Holy Ghost unto Abraham, in the form of a dove.

Fig. 8. Contains writing that cannot be revealed unto the world; but is to be had in the Holy Temple of God.

Fig. 9. Ought not to be revealed at the present time.

Fig. 10. Also.

Fig. 11. Also. If the world can find out these numbers, so let it be. Amen.

Figures 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20, will be given in the own due time of the Lord.

The above translation is given as far as we have any right to give at the present time.

The Restoration—The Spirit of God upon All flesh

There can be no doubt, that many more things pertaining to life and the universe will be found out by men, inspired only indirectly as they are, by the restoration of the Gospel of Light. But here let it be repeated once again, when found, they will harmonize with God-given truths bestowed upon the prophets by direct revelation.

There can be no doubt as to the day and age in which we are living being an age of enlightenment. Great and marvelous things shall come forth as a result of the intelligence of man. The reasons for this contemporary greatness, with manifestations being made to the prophets, and of their divine bestowals, can be seen in the declarations that have been made by both ancient and modern prophecy. The Prophet Joel spoke of this, referring to our particular time:

And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed.

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; . . . and I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth. [^14]

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith we read the following, which undoubtedly refers to this same condition in the last days when all flesh shall benefit in an over-all way, from the restoration of the Gospel of Light:

For the preparation wherewith I design to prepare mine apostles to prune my vineyard for the last time, that I may bring to pass my strange act, that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh— [^15]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eleventh Article of Faith.
[^2] Isaiah 14:12.
[^3] Rev. 12:7-9.
[^4] P. of G. P., Moses 4:3.
[^5] D&C 58:27-28.
[^6] 2 Nephi 2:11.
[^7] Essay on the New Development of Christian Doctrine—Great Britain, V 1878, chapter 8, p. 269.
[^8] Design of the Universe, p. 7.
[^9] 2 Peter 2:1.
[^10] Gal. 1:6-7.
[^11] For a more complete study of the need of a restoration of the Gospel reference is made to Chapters 3-9, The Lord Speaketh, by the Author. Deseret News Press, 1964.
[^12] John 8:32.
[^13] George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith, p. 324.
[^14] The Improvement Era, Vol. 42, p. 94.
[^15] Karl Menninger
