Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER ELEVEN

The Relationship Between True Religion and the Free Agency of Man

The religion established by Jesus Christ will never interfere in the exercise of the God-given gift of free agency. Thus man must have to fulfil his destiny upon this earth as a spirit child of God. The force of unrighteous dominion will never be invoked by the true Christian church. The violation of this sacred principle is clearly seen in many of the pursuits of the post-apostolic Christian church. This fact alone, if for no other reason, should cause the sincere investigator of truth to weigh carefully any and all doctrines, systems of religious procedure, and professed authority stemming from such an institution.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, emphasizing this principle gave the following:

We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may. [^1]

The Risk of Conflict To Preserve Agency

Through the portals of "unjust dominion" could never come the truth to save and redeem mankind. To preserve and invoke this sacred right upon man in this mortal life as a necessary element of salvation, a conflict took place in our pre-existent sphere, wherein certain forces of that estate led by Lucifer, a prominent spirit, sought to destroy the free agency of man. This situation, which occurred prior to our mortal life, is clearly spoken of and apparently well understood by the prophets and teachers of both the Old and New Testaments. In these references, it can be seen that Lucifer, a son of the morning, sought to invoke a plan covering the second estate of man, (earth life) that would deprive him of his free agency, and thus make of him a thing to be acted upon, rather than to have the power to exercise his own volition, in all things pertaining to his life.

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! [^2]

The Apostle John, the beloved of the Christ who was permitted to tarry in the flesh of his mortal body until the second coming of his Master, saw in panoramic view the events pertaining to this life in glorious vision while confined a prisoner under the ruler Domitian on the Isle of Patmos. He gives a description of the fall of Lucifer, and of his expulsion from the presence of God by reason of his aggrandizement and attempt to change the eternal law of free agency:

And there was war in heaven: Michael (Adam) and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. [^3]

From the revelations given unto the Prophet Joseph Smith, the full meaning of this event is made known,

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him . . . I caused that he should be cast down. [^4]

The Power of Evil Continues

From the beginning of man's mortal probation here upon the earth, men have sought, under the influence of this same spirit of rebellion fostered by Satan or Lucifer, by the use of the dominion of force to suppress men's rights and free agency, to gain personal and political ascendancy. Unfortunately, this same power of unrighteous dominion has been exercised by the church in the post-apostolic period evidencing, therefore, the lack of its divine inspiration.

Wherever force is imposed by institutions, governments, or churches, it can have but one course of motivation, regardless of how it is colored to appear otherwise—that of evil. Such motives have never been, nor ever will be, in harmony with the commandments of God.

This glorious principle descends upon us with all the majesty of its intent in a revelation from God to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. [^5]

But Satan, not entirely defeated in his pre-existent encounter, and permitted, by the will of God (Rev. 12th Chapter) continues to provide opposition for mankind here upon earth,

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. [^6]

Satan continues his warfare against the forces of truth and righteousness here upon the earth. His methods are the invoked principles of deception, unjust dominion and force, which he practices upon all who become prey to his enticings. Therefore, the stifling of men's rights, the subjugation of the right of agency, in whatever degree, or by whomever it is invoked, becomes a part of Lucifer's plan to deceive the world and frustrate the plan of God.

A Fallacy of Truth

One of the indications that the so-called post-apostolic Christian church was and is an apostate church can be seen in the fact that it has and does now apply the unjust principle of force in its attempt to stifle agency and freedom of thought of man.

This fallacy of principle, as it was invoked in the realm of its influence, led not only the early Christian Church into the depths of a still greater apostasy, internally, but through the dissemination of such principles of error imposed upon the world a period of abject darkness for over one thousand years from which the world did not awaken until the beginning of the thirteenth century. From here came the awakening, the revival of learning. Men began to throw off the shackles of force and deception. This period is referred to in our history as the Renaissance.

The post-apostolic Christian church opened its doors to false philosophies of men and pagan customs and teachings as a means of spreading its influence. This is abundantly attested to by authentic historical records. These measures were effective, and Christianity began to rise as a new epoch. In justification of the infiltration of error into the early Christian Church as a means of converting the heathen, we note the following from the writings of Cardinal John Henry Newman, who admits the compromise with existing philosophies, and violations of pure Christian principles to thus satisfy the pagan masses:

Confiding then in the power of Christianity to resist the infection of evil, and to transmute the very instruments and appendages of demon-worship to an evangelical use, and feeling also that these usages had originally come from primitive revelations and from the instinct of nature, though they had been corrupted; and that they must invent what they needed, if they did not use what they found; and that they were moreover possessed of the very archetypes of which paganism attempted the shadows; the rulers of the Church from early times were prepared, should the occasion arise, to adopt, or imitate, or sanction the existing rites and customs of the populace, as well as the philosophy of the educated class. [^7]

Cause Leading to Dark Ages

The compromises of thought however did not extend to science, and as the power of the church increased a glacial-like freezing was clamped upon science. Referring to the causes of the "Dark Ages," the following is quoted:

Intellectualism (science) in its most modern form was despised. The only ones who read and wrote, also modestly were the priests and monks who became the guardians of the spiritual heritage of antiquity. The cultural relics were by no means studied or venerated, but were regarded with suspicion and pity, as the works of a still unenlightened humanity.

Science, independent of the Bible slept for a thousand years. —Then came the slow, slow awakening called the Renaissance, the age of re-birth. [^8]

During this period, one single book, the Bible, was venerated as the source of all truths. It was the authentic encyclopedia for all natural sciences.

False Interpretations of Bible Led to Chaos

The interpretations given to the writings of the Holy Bible by the early Christian leaders in the period which has been referred to, (Cosmos—geography of the earth) was devoid of divine inspiration. It is no wonder that men of science could not, and do not even in our own day understand such interpretations.

The Holy Bible, contains a compilation of scriptural writings, and even though only part of that which was written has been preserved in antiquity, yet it is truly a great and important record in which, if understood, can be found the teachings of eternal life but, in the possession of those who misinterpret its true meaning, it can induce confusion and misunderstandings. The true principles of life's purpose must come from non-mutated sacred writings.

Post Apostolic Church Devoid of Revelation

The first fallacy of the early apostate church can be summarized in the fact that the so-called Christianity that emerged from the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time (i. e., the period of Christ and the apostles) imposed in false manner many detriments upon the civilization through which it functioned.

Intellectualism, while not that of true science, rather of science falsely so called, as declared by the Apostle Paul to Timothy, was responsible, to a large degree, for the inroads made into the early Christian Church which produced an entirely different Christianity from that which the Christ and the apostles intended. The evidence of this are clearly discernible from the writings of the apostles, who struggled against this man-made force while they were yet living, which force of evil set out both within the church as well as without to nullify the pure teachings of the Master. They sought to paganize and culturize by association with the philosophies of men.

Many Early Day Christians Not Truly Converted

Anxiety and zealousness on the part of the apostles to extend the saving principles of the Gospel unto all, attracted unto the Church many who did not come in by the spirit of conviction; perhaps too many were intellectually converted as they were swayed by the masterful teaching of Paul and others. This new sect, they thought, would provide the means of expression of their own philosophies.

The Apostles Recognized Trends of An Apostate Church

The simple truth of the matter is that the apostles were fully aware of what was taking place, but seemed helpless to stem the tide. Their Master, the Christ, had predicted it. The revelation which they received concerning this condition led to their profuse prophecies concerning "the falling away" and final apostasy of the entire Christian body.

A few of such apostolic predictions are submitted to establish this fact:

But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that brought them. . . . [^9]

I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel:

Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. [^10]

(See also 2 Thess. 2nd chapter, re: Falling Away)

This false suppression brought the "dark ages," and imposed upon an apostate people a grim judgment. "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth will make you free," a declaration of the Master, found no application in this period of darkness.

This, it is contended, was the fallacy of the post-apostolic Christian church. Just as it was wrong in this pursuit, so was it wrong in other practices and teachings.

Reformation Leading to Restoration

The institution of religious reforms undertaken by Martin Luther and others in the fourteenth century was but the beginning of the awakening of man to the need of freedom and truth concerning life and salvation. [^11] In this, those who protested against Catholicism, recognizing its falseness, came face to face with the reality of providing the truth. The surge of men's thoughts moved forward in this direction. But, not finding the answer adequately, or of being able to assure themselves of the complete truth, there arose fragments of truth based upon the best efforts that man could put forth to understand the divine will of God as it may be invoked in the establishing, once again, of the true Christian church.

Complexity of Christian Sects

There arose many Christian sects each claiming to be the true Church, but each different in its concept, with not any uniting with the other to form one great church of the reformation or of the new truth. The very nature of these protests, that moved in different directions, casts a shadow over their authenticity. They knew the Catholic church was wrong, but they had not the revelation or divine intercession to establish the truth as Christ would have it.

Benefits of the Reformation

Nevertheless, this great period of reform produced in men's thinking the desire to know the truth and to seek for freedom associated with it. This they did with the courage and daring to reach out in search of it. Such a spirit spreading over mankind prepared the way for the coming of the restoration with its divine bestowals. But the noble men of the reformation played their parts well. They were foreordained to protest, not to restore.

The Reality of a Prophet of God Receiving Revelation Today Is Baffling to the Human Mind

Unfortunately, men of science and others find it difficult to accept the reality of God's revealing his mind and will in announcing great truths through a prophet today. Some refer to such an occurrence today, the very day that they live in, as too fantastic and unscientific to believe. Unfortunately, a scientist becomes very unscientific in the face of revelation through a prophet of God, from the source of all knowledge—GOD. Others, particularly those of professed belief in Christ, have been heard to say. "God is through with speaking to prophets. He may have revealed his mind and will to them anciently, and through his Son Jesus Christ, but things like this simply cannot happen now."

Thus, the false reasoning of the human mind, both in and out of religious circles, precludes the credibility of the declarations of the Prophet Joseph Smith. But aside from the fact as to whether or not Joseph Smith saw God and his Son Jesus Christ, the results of which led to subsequent appearances of divine messengers sent from the presence of God enabling him to declare unto the world great religious truths that have a direct bearing upon the salvation and exaltation of man, and there are ways that all this can be tested as to its truth, why should it be considered a thing incredible that God would manifest himself? Why is the idea scoffed at by so many, when it is realized that God is the Father of all spirit children that enter into earth-life bodies, and surely can select his own time and place and through whom he will speak unto his children? God is the Author, through his Son Jesus Christ, of the plan of life and salvation Who would, therefore, attempt to confine his mind and will in revealing to his children the truths necessary for their own redemption?

Repelled by the New Idea and Truth

Perhaps the failure of mankind to accept the concept that God has spoken to a prophet in this period of time, to correct erroneous concepts of life and salvation, can be found in their inability to adjust to the "new idea" concept of things. Yet it has always been a fact in every phase of life, that when the truth is known and accepted, tremendous benefits have resulted for the good of man.

The Christ once proclaimed,

And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. [^12]

The basis of this declaration is the eternal answer to those who would reject "new ideas," forbid investigation, and even in many cases deny to any man the right to investigate for himself. Yet, against powerful and formidable evidences of truth, or "the new idea," as they put it, men have arrayed themselves and have been unwilling to yield to the inspiration of God's will as it is made manifest through a chosen prophet. Often, because men are deceived where they otherwise might accept the truth, they are turned against it.

Evidence of Men's Unwillingness to Adjust

Even in material things the world opposes new truth. When England began using spinning machinery that saved thousands from grinding toil, giving employment at better wages with easier work to hundreds of thousands, it was necessary to protect the new machines inside of stone walls. Workmen hated the new idea and would wreck the machinery.

When steamships made of iron were first suggested, all those who supposedly knew anything about shipbuilding denounced the idea as foolish. The public joined in, "What idiocy to talk about a ship of iron. It is hard enough to keep a wooden ship afloat. Nothing will keep an iron ship from sinking." Yet, today nearly all are made of iron (steel).

The railroad was also denounced; even the intellectually brilliant Ruskin opposed what has now become one of man's greatest material benefits. It was thought then the constant speed of twenty miles an hour, hour after hour, would ruin the beautiful countryside, and the concussion of such speed would kill those along the road. Many continued to invest their money in stagecoaches.

The sewing machine was attacked outrageously. The first inventor was persuaded by his wife to break the model, because it would take employment away from anyone who earned her living with a needle. Actually it has saved millions of women from slavery.

Hatred of the "new idea" was never so vigorously displayed as when attacks were made upon scientific discoveries that have proved beneficial to man. When the vaccination for smallpox—a disease now almost extinct—was first suggested, some clergymen said, "It was flying in the face of providence." Reverend Edward Massey preached against it. "Job's distemper," he declared, "was probably smallpox and doubtless the devil inoculated him."

Most amazing of all was the statement that, "Diseases are sent by Providence for the punishment of sin, and attempting to prevent them is a diabolical operation."

When Dr. Boylston vaccinated his own son in Boston about 200 years ago, a clergyman urged the authorities to try him for murder, declaring that "Smallpox is a judgment of God on the sins of the people, to avert it is to provoke him more."

Men of old, and men of our day, have hated "new ideas" for many reasons. First, the "new idea" compels the brain to think and adjust; this sometimes is difficult. Secondly, the "new idea" threatens established ways. The steam engine replaced stage coaches; the telephone did away with a majority of the messenger boys. The automobile and the airplane are interfering now with rail traffic. Whoever is disturbed, opposes the disturber. And the new idea, like a bright light in a dark place, always disturbs somebody.

Difficult for Man to Accept Spiritual Truths

The idea of the acceptance of great spiritual truths, long hidden from the world, as proclaimed by Joseph Smith the Prophet, acts as a disturber upon many, because it requires a change from that which they have previously believed and accepted. The teachings of antiquity, in so many instances false, are so erroneously rooted that men are deceived and blinded to the truth, and when it is presented to them, they simply oppose the idea of the change of concept, regardless of its truth and eternal benefits. Thus, men hate new ideas to their own retarding of progress.

In our own day, we have learned by hard lessons the value of progress. The discoveries of new things are more common and readily acknowledged. But, unfortunately, this applies only to physical things, such as may be seen and participated in by the physical sense. The lesson of spiritual perception still comes hard as men continue to resist the effort of a loving Father in heaven to bestow upon them through an authorized servant or prophet, the principles of truth needed for their spiritual and consequent eternal advancement.

The World at a Spiritual Standstill in Our Own Day and Time

We are living in a day of great progress, of change, of rapid advance. The very structure of our civilization, social, political, commercial, moral, and religious, is greatly affected by great physical changes which persist before our very eyes.

There can be no question that a new era has dawned upon our planet. Means of travel, trade, association, and inter-communication between countries, even comparatively unknown, are before us, affecting our daily lives.

While in almost every field of science every art is being developed—while the mind is awakened to new thought religious knowledge in the world is at a standstill. The creeds of the fathers cast in the mould of other ages show no progress to match the onward strides of man. Yet, as we declare it, and as fully predicted by the prophets, God has poured out his Spirit upon all mankind. As proof of this I call upon any who are interested, to investigate the great strides made in every field of research since 1820.

It is the Will of God That Man Should Be Completely Enlightened

How tremendously in keeping with this will that such enlightenment upon man should come as a result of a restoration of truth from the very presence of God. That which man participates in today in scientific advancements is minute, only a fragmentary part of the light that has shone into the darkness, that brings to man, by divine intercession, the truths of eternity which, if appropriated, can lead to eternal life in the presence of God.

Joseph Smith the Prophet of the New Era

Concerning the Prophet Joseph Smith and the effect that the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ is having upon our civilization, as recorded by those even not of the Church, the following is submitted:

A writer for the New York Herald, who had visited with the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1842, wrote the following account of his experience which was originally published in his paper:

"Joseph Smith is undoubtedly one of the greatest characters of the age . . . In the present infidel, irreligious, geological, animal magnetic age of the world, some such singular prophet as Joseph Smith is required to preserve the principle of faith, and to plant some new germs of civilization that may come to maturity in a thousand years. While modern philosophy, which believes in nothing but what you can touch, is overspreading the Atlantic States, Joseph Smith is creating a spiritual system, combined also with morals and industry, that may change the destiny of the race . . . (There is a need for) some such prophet to take hold of the public mind—and stop the torrent of materialism that is hurrying the world into infidelity, immorality, licentiousness and crime." [^13]

Count Tolstoi and the Church Founded in America

Thomas J. Yates related an experience he had while a student at Cornell University in 1900. He had the privilege of meeting Dr. Andrew D. White, former president of Cornell, and at the time, U. S. ambassador to Germany. Upon learning that Mr. Yates was a Mormon, Dr. White made an appointment for Mr. Yates to spend an evening with him at which time he related to him an experience he had with Count Tolstoi, the great Russian author, statesman, and philosopher, while serving as U. S. Foreign Minister to Russia in 1892. Dr. White visited often with Count Tolstoi, and upon one occasion they discussed religion. We quote from Elder Yates' account of this discussion as related to him by Dr. White:

"Dr. White," said Count Tolstoi, "I wish you would tell me about your American religion."

"We have no state church in America," replied Dr. White.

"I know that, but what about your American religion?"

Patiently then Dr. White explained to the count that in America there are many religions, and that each person is free to belong to the particular church in which he is interested.

To this Tolstoi impatiently replied: "I know all of this, but I want to know about the American religion. Catholicism originated in Rome; the Episcopal Church originated in England; the Lutheran Church in Germany, but the Church to which I refer originated in America, and is commonly known as the Mormon Church. What can you tell me of the teaching of the Mormons?"

"Well," said Dr. White, "I know very little concerning them. They have an unsavory reputation, they practice polygamy, and are very superstitious."

Then Count Leo Tolstoi, in his honest and stern, but lovable manner, rebuked the ambassador. "Dr. White, I am greatly surprised and disappointed that a man of your great learning and position should be so ignorant on this important subject. The Mormon people teach the American religion; their principles teach the people not only of heaven and its attendant glories, but how to live so that their social and economic relations with each other are placed on a sound basis. If the people follow the teachings of this Church, nothing can stop their progress—it will be limitless. There have been great movements started in the past, but they have died or been modified before they reached maturity. If Mormonism is able to endure, unmodified, until it reaches the third and fourth generations, it is destined to become the greatest power the world has ever known." [^14]

Faith and a Knowledge of God the World's Greatest Need

Obedient to the predictions concerning this day and age spoken of by all the holy prophets, it is not religious opinion which will cover the earth, nor knowledge from scientific advancement reaching into the heart of every good man and woman, but it is faith, leading to the testimony and spiritual conviction of God. God is truth. To know him is to know the truth.

Never, I suppose, have there been so many brilliantly intellectual people upon the earth, judged by the known facts of science and human knowledge. Eric Johnston stated recently that some ninety percent of all the scientists who ever lived are living today, and the total accumulation of scientific knowledge is doubling every ten years. Yet, there is a tremendous lack of direction. Recently one of our inquiring thinkers, a noted American mental health leader, stated it this way:

Most people today live without purpose and without significance. They have no articulate philosophy, they do not live within any frame or reference. [^15]

The Need of a Prophet of God Today

It is obvious that the lack of direction lies principally in the failure of people to have a true understanding of God and his purposes. To get this, it must come from the expressed will of God through a prophet, yes, a prophet today here upon the earth, as the oracle of God—and not from the corrupted concepts of a musty and deceptive antiquity— nor from a so-called "Age of Reason," imposed upon us because of scientific exploration.

God has spoken to us. Let us listen to his oracles, and have unveiled to us the realms of Eternal Life. Here is reality. Honest and good men must come to know this, adjust to it, welcome it, meet it as a friend and know it is God's will.

Opposing this great force for good, as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith is the godless system of world communism, and other systems of unrighteous dominion that hold many nations in their grasp, denouncing the need of religious motivation, and particularly they are opposed to the morals and virtues as taught by the Christ.

The Same Spirit of Opposition to Truth

Perhaps it is this same spirit of unwillingness to accept the "new idea" concept that stands in the way of many accepting Joseph Smith as a prophet of God. This being the fact, mankind stands as the loser, because the message given to them by divine and holy personages is intended for the benefit of the world, for so has announced the Lord!

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments, . . .

That faith also might increase in the earth;

That mine everlasting covenant might be established; . . . [^16]

Every new idea or truth is opposed today as it was yesterday, and it will be so tomorrow unless man changes his course. For whenever the truth has been made known, there have always been those who have bitterly opposed it. The calling and message of the Prophet Joseph Smith has been no exception to this pattern of human acceptance. He saw and talked with God. He thereafter received many revelations, attended also with bestowals of power, and authority from God, to minister in the ordinances of the gospel: all of this for the salvation and exaltation of mankind; if men will but accept and be governed by the doctrines and articles of redemption which he gave us, seeking not only intellectual advancement, but more necessarily, spiritual advancement.

The opposition to the Prophet Joseph Smith, led him to say,

. . . Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. [^17]

There Has Been a Restoration of Truth

In announcing a truth by divine intervention, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims that an apostasy ensued following the ministry of Christ and the apostles upon the earth, resulting in a complete loss of the truths and doctrines of the Church as well as the loss of the authority, or priesthood to administer in the affairs of the church as founded by Christ. It contends further that when the true Church of Jesus Christ is upon the earth that it will be governed and controlled under the power and influence of direct revelation from God. Indeed the Church of Jesus Christ moves and breathes by revelations in which are contained the divine oracles of God, for any church professing to be that of Jesus Christ can be justified only as it will move and go forward under the impetus and power of direct revelation from the presence of God.

The simple truth exists: The Prophet Joseph Smith did see God and received the divine commission that he was to be the instrument in God's hands, after the receiving of proper instruction and the conferment of the Holy Priesthood to organize and establish the Restored Church of Jesus Christ in these latter days, and in so doing provide the channels of spiritual truths to lead man back into the presence of God, our Father, in preparation for the next great state of man.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John 17:3.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 345.
[^3] Roberts, Outline of Ecclesiastical History.
[^4] D&C 88.
[^5] Absurdities of Immaterialism, p. 11.
[^6] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:19.
[^7] Barker, Protestors of Christendom, p. 72.
[^8] Barker, Protesters of Christendom, pp. 71, 72.
[^9] D&C 130:22-23.
[^10] Jude 4.
[^11] For a more complete study of the need of a restoration of the Gospel reference is made to Chapters 3-9, The Lord Speaketh, by the Author. Deseret News Press, 1964.
[^12] John 8:32.
[^13] George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith, p. 324.
[^14] The Improvement Era, Vol. 42, p. 94.
[^15] Karl Menninger
[^16] D&C 1:17, 21-22.
[^17] P. of G. P., Joseph Smith 2:25.
