Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER TWELVE

The Quandary About God

Perhaps no greater fallacy has survived the centuries, than the present-day Christian concept of God and his Son Jesus Christ. Men have always wondered about God, as to his person or whether or not he is a person at all. Is there but one God, or are there more than one? What is our relationship to Deity? Did we ever dwell in his presence or will we ever? Has anyone acutally seen God? — These are but a few of the questions that surge through the inquiring mind of man.

There are some, perhaps, who do not seek to inquire about God. It is contended by them that it does not matter one way or other, that in the end we will know, so, why bother about it now. Isn't it true that the complexity of a search to know the truth about God leads them to assume a passive attitude rather than to risk a state of frustration in failing to find out? Another among them has said—"If we knew or understood God he would cease to be God" —for, "How can man that is finite understand that which is infinite?"

Does not the declaration of Jesus impose upon us, however, if we would seek life eternal, to know the truth about God.

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. [^1]

Joseph Smith, the great modern-day prophet, subscribes to this teaching as he tells us:

It is the first principle of the gospel to know for a certainty the character of God; and to know that we (as Moses) may converse with him as one man converses with another. [^2]

These thoughts stimulate a pursuit of knowledge of God and suggest that in doing so man will come to know more of himself and of life eternal.

Statements Concerning God From Various Christian Creeds

Let us consider the concept of God, as taught by the Christian churches of today. This can be essentially given in two statements which will, in the main, cover the generally accepted understanding in the larger divisions of Christianity.

The following is the Roman Catholic belief,

There is but one God, the creator of heaven and earth, the supreme, incorporeal, uncreated being, who exists of himself, and is infinite in all his attributes, etc.

The Church of England teaches in her articles of faith,

There is one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness.

These two statements, which provide the source of the creeds for other Christian churches, plainly indicate an immateriality of God. This is found to be the orthodox notion in respect to Deity, notwithstanding it finds so many express contradictions in the scriptures.

Other definitions of a more modern concept are also presented here.

Catholic

Catholics believe in one God in whom there are three divine persons co-equal in all things. The doctrine of the Holy Trinity is a central mystery of the Catholic faith.

Episcopalian

God is as he reveals himself. He is creative reality (God the Father). He is expressive act, (God the Son). He is responsive power, (God the Holy Spirit). He is one God experienced in a trinitarian fashion.

Lutheran

Lutherans believe in the Trinity as one God in three personalities.

Presbyterians

Presbyterians think of God not as three individuals, but of three manifestations of one.

Methodist

The meaning of the Trinity is not fully understood, (mystery) the doctrine is the expression of the three aspects in our experience of God. The Creator, the Father; the historical personality of Christ, the Son; a pervading and continuing presence and power in our lives, the Holy Spirit. The Trinity is also the formula for understanding the personality of God. God is love which is objective in the Son through activity, with the object of his love, the Holy Spirit.

Baptist

The trinitarian formula, "in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost," is used at every baptism. The sublime mystery of the Trinity, of the eternal essence of God manifested in three persons, the Baptist leaves to the theologians to interpret. He simply accepts it.

These quotations taken from the book, The Religions of America, published a few years ago by the University of Illinois Press from articles provided by selected exponents of the various faiths, indicate the almost unanimous declaration, that to them, God is a mystery!

A Challenge to the Immateriality of God

One of the writers of the new dispensation approaches the inconsistency of the immateriality of God as defined by the various Christian churches from this viewpoint:

In the work of the creation, God proposed to make man in his own image and likeness, and the proposition was executed. Moreover, Jesus is said to be the brightness of God's glory, and, "the express image of his person." Again it is said, that Jesus, "being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God,"—all his teachings declare that God has a form similar to that of man's; that he has organs, dimensions, proportions; that he occupies space and has relation to other objects in space; that, as a person, he moved from place to place; and that so far as his actual person is concerned, he cannot be in two places at one and the same instant. [^3]

Omnipresence of God Explained

Undoubtedly, the idea that prevails in the Christian concept of God that he is everywhere present, leads to a misconception as to his person. It is contended that since God fills the universe, how could it be possible to describe him as corporeal, or having a definite form or shape?

In the light of revelation, which has been received from God, the truth concerning the omnipresence of God is made known. From the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith we learn the following:

Man should know the everywhereness of God through the projection of "the light of truth," from the presence of God, which is "the same light" that quickeneth the minds of men; "which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law (i.e. power) by which all things are governed, even the power of God who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." [^4]

This revealed statement gives clarity to the manner in which God, a corporeal personage, fills the universe and exercises a governing power over it by the projection of his presence from a focal place of administration.

To assert the immateriality of God as a substance is not only to deny his personality, but his very existence; for an immaterial substance cannot exist. It can have no relation to time and space, no form, no extension, no parts. An immaterial substance is simply no substance at all; it is the description of an infinite vacuum.

Similarity in the Athiest Concept and That of an Immaterial God

The atheist may say, "There is no God," while the creed of God as described above simply says, "God is nothing."

Orson Pratt, a writer of the new dispensation, offers an interesting contrast between the atheist and those who would adhere to the belief of an immaterial God. In presenting this there is no attempt to belittle the sincerity of those who place at the altar this concept of God, their love and devotion. It is intended only to emphasize how far the concept of God has drifted from the truth.

There are two classes of atheists in the world. One class denies the existence of God in the most positive language; the other denies his existence in duration or space. One says, "there is no God." The other says "God is not here or there, any more that he exists now and then."—the infidel says, "A Spirit, though he lives and acts, occupies no room, fills no space—not even so much as does the grain of sand." The atheist does not seek to hide his infidelity; but the immaterialist, whose declared belief amounts to the same thing as the atheist's, endeavors to hide his infidelity under the shallow covering of a few words. [^5]

The Borrowed Vestige of Untruth

That which the Protestant faiths adhere to with regard to God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, is but the borrowed vestige of that perverted creed established in error by the post-apostolic church. The teachings of a mysterious and unexplainable Trinity, continue as their conception of God. It is no wonder, therefore, that Jesus spoke of these false teachings that exist in the churches that bear his name, who bear it no doubt with respect, but without proper foundation of truth.

From the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith, which he gave to the world concerning the instruction given to him by Jesus Christ in the Sacred Grove, we read the following concerning the various Christian sects who were in that day seeking converts to their fold:

. . . all their creeds are an abomination in his sight; . . . they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof: [^6]

What appears to be a mere statement of argumentation is in reality a far-reaching and meaningful declaration regarding the state of the world of Christian religions which are devoid of the Holy Priesthood with the sealing power of Elijah, in binding the hearts of the children to the fathers and the fathers to the children, as well as the fact, that, without divine revelation, these churches were teaching the commandments of men.

Source of the False Creeds of God

As to the source of the false creeds concerning God—let us look in on the great controversy that developed at the beginning of the fourth century among the various Christian churches who were torn by conflicting theories of the God whom they were supposedly worshiping.

From these theories or views of the Godhead can be summarized the following categories:

The Orthodox View: The view held to be orthodox was that in God there are three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: each really distinct, yet so united as to constitute one personal God—of the same substance, and equal as to their eternity, power, glory, and all other perfections.

Sabellius, A Bishop of a Church in Africa, advanced what is referred to as the Sabellian Theory which held to the idea, that there was but one divine person in the Godhead. And that the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit were but different aspects of the same God, and that the trinity was one of the names merely, not of distinct persons. The Logos in this theory, is an attribute of Deity, rather than a person; and its incarnation is reduced to an energy or an inspiration of the divine wisdom which fills the soul and directed all the actions of the man Jesus.

Arius, a Bishop of a Christian Church of Alexandria, opposed the orthodox theory and maintained a real distinction in the persons of the Divine Trinity. He taught that the Son was created out of nothing by the will of the Father; and though the longest astronomical periods would not measure the time of his duration yet, there had been a time when he was not. Upon the Son thus created, the Father bestowed great glory, yet he shone only by reflected light, and governed the universe only in obedience to the will of the Father; in other words, the Son was subordinate to the Father, and was unequal in power, glory, and eternity.

The Nicene Council and Creed

It was to still the commotion which arose in the church through the violent discussions of these several theories, that the Emperor Constantine assembled the Council of Nicea, A.D. 325. In that council the theories of Arius were condemned, and the orthodox creed stated thus,—"We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, the maker of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord, Jesus Christ the Son of God, begotten of the Father, only begotten, (that is) of the substance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God; begotten not made; of the same substance of the Father, by whom all things were made, that are in the heaven, and that are in the Earth; who for us men, and for our salvation, descended and was incarnate, and became man; suffered and rose again the third day, ascended into the Heavens and will come to judge the living and the dead; and in the Holy Spirit. But those who say there was a time when He (the Son) was not, and that he was not before he was begotten, and that he was made out of nothing or affirm that he was of any other substance or essence, or that the Son of God was created, and mutable or changeable, the Catholic Church doth pronounce accursed."

Athanasius, the secretary and spokesman for Alexander, a Bishop of Alexandria, a most active opponent of Arius, was called upon to give explanation to the Nicene Creed. This he did and his explanation is commonly called the Athanasian Creed. An interesting sidelight on Athanasius: At this particular time he was a young man of about twenty years. Historians regard him as either a Copt or an Egyptian. He was bright of countenance and was drawn to Alexander by a peculiar circumstance. From a window of a lofty house where he was entertaining other clergy, his attention was drawn to some children who were playing a strange game on the seashore. On being brought before Alexander they reluctantly confessed that they had been acting a baptism, and that one of them who had been chosen to play the part of a bishop had dipped them in the sea. Finding the boy-bishop had administered the rite with all the proper forms, Alexander declared it to be a valid sacrament, and himself added the oil of confirmation. Struck with the knowledge and gravity of the young Athanasius, he took under his charge the boy who was to be his successor. [^7]

The Creed of Athanasius:

We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons: nor dividing the substance, for there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost is all one: The glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate, the Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet, these are not three eternals, but one eternal. As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated; but one uncreated and one incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty; and yet there are not three almighties but one Almighty. So the Father is God, the Son is God and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God.

Thus, from this inception of error, and through its continuation of acceptance in the Catholic church, as well as in the churches of the Reformation, either in direct or indirect form, can be found the reason why the so-called Christian world, as this new dispensation began to unfold and even unto this day, knew not the truth about God. Their concept of God, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost more or less subscribes to the creed established by the Nicean Council, held in the year of 325 A.D., in the month of June.

Notes on the Nicean Council

According to Eusebius, Constantine declared that he convoked the Council at Nicea, on his own initiative, under the inspiration of God.

He provided liberally for the expenses, to and from the council, from the state treasury, for those who answered his summons to attend. Each Bishop was to bring with him two presbyters or deacons, with three servants.

To this council, impelled by various motives, came 318 Bishops. This represented about one-sixth of the total number throughout the Empire, there being about 1000 in Greek provinces and 800 in Latin. The Latin Churches sent only 7 Bishops; this fact deserves special notice, that the First Representative Assembly of all the Churches decided upon the Catholic Faith, with regard to the Creed of the Godhead, in particular, without the presence and voice of the Bishop of Rome, though the aged Sylvester was represented by two presbyters, Victor (or Vitus) and Vecentius.

The Bishops arrived in Nicea sometime in May, but the Council did not get under way until June, 325 A.D. because of the late arrival of Constantine. The opening session was held in the principal church of Nicea, but was thereafter moved to a large hall in the imperial palace. [^8]

The opening address was made by the Bishop at the right hand of Constantine, regarded by many as Eusebius, although others have thought it was Eustathius of Antioch. Constantine addressed the Council in Latin, and referred to the division in the Christian church at large with regard to the Creed of the Godhead:

I thank God . . . Who has accorded me the grace . . . of convoking you all here . . . The intestine divisions of the Church seem to me more serious and more dangerous than wars and other conflicts . . . It is necessary then that your hearts be united and that peace be seen to reign among you.

It is necessary to pause here to evaluate the premise upon which the council had been called. For here within the provinces of the empire, as represented by the 1800 or more churches, were gathered together in representation perhaps the first general council of the church. Two patriarch bishops of the church took a great part, Alexander of Alexandria and Eustathius of Antioch. Alexander was recognized as bearing the title of Pope (Pappa or Ababba, i.e. father of fathers, or Bishop of the Bishops). They were here in council to decide on a Creed that would describe the Godhead. In boldness, it is asked, how can man decide such a truth? Why should the assumed church of God find it necessary to resort to council to determine such a truth when it had already been revealed to them.

Had it not been for the workings of an apostate people, in the whole of early Christendom, the truth would still there reside, having been made known by divine revelation, which could not now or at any time be found out by the reasoning of men.

The Truth About God

The Prophet Joseph Smith, whose great privilege it was to behold God and his Son Jesus Christ in person, has restored to mankind the truth about God. No longer need mankind grope in darkness concerning the Holy Godhead, no longer need we wonder about our relationship with Deity.

The Prophet has declared unto the world, as an appointed witness of these truths, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that he is divine; that man should know further that the Father and the Son are separate corporeal beings; that they are not shapeless spirits or—incorporeal phantoms. They live as separate persons in the glorious relationship of Father and Son, in whose likeness and image, we, the spirit children of the Father, have received an earthly tabernacle, resembling the body of our spirit in stature and form, for the purpose of growth and further development in this earth-life existence which is our second estate.

The Prophet Joseph Smith gives this description of the Holy Godhead, also, the greatness of the power through which these beings govern the destinies of man by the immutable laws of the plan of salvation:

The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us.

A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him. [^9]

This statement identifies the three members of the Godhead as distince Beings of separate proportions. And even though the Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit, he, too, is a separate Personage and, as such, can only occupy one certain space at any given time.

In the light of that which has been revealed to man in this age of enlightenment because of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the perverted understanding of the Christian God need no longer be adhered to.

The Revealed Truth About God Dispels Error

The perpetuation of an antiquated doctrine of error which has compounded its effect with each passing generation, can no longer be regarded as true.

To those who founded this false concept must be given the responsibility for the acceptance and promulgation of a false creed about God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, for the creeds found in Christian denominations today concerning the Godhead have persisted down through the centuries, and are resultant from that which was founded by an apostate church.

Conclusion

For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. [^10]

The Persistence of False Concepts

No concept of things false, has persisted throughout the centuries more emphatically, than the supposed Christian concept of Deity. Stemming from an erroneous past, an assumed Christian body devoid of revelation and divine direction founded within its body a false trinitarian doctrine which unfortunately has survived the ages with successive deception.

The fact that this concept has survived is no criterion of its validity. Other false concepts have had similar survivals. Two of these have already been referred to rather extensively in this article, which deal with two great controversies that existed between science and religion. The first of these concerned the geography and shape of the earth, while the second had to do with the revolving of the planets around the sun. Strange as it may seem in these instances, it has been the Christian bodies, who above all others should have been inspired, which have turned against truth and fought to maintain traditional concepts of error.

How could this be unless, devoid of divine direction, their protestations were false and of no consequence? The advocations concerning the Holy Trinity are also false, requiring a restoration of Truth to correct the errors thus made.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John 17:3.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 345.
[^3] Roberts, Outline of Ecclesiastical History.
[^4] D&C 88.
[^5] Absurdities of Immaterialism, p. 11.
[^6] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:19.
[^7] Barker, Protestors of Christendom, p. 72.
[^8] Barker, Protesters of Christendom, pp. 71, 72.
[^9] D&C 130:22-23.
[^10] Jude 4.
