Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

Section Three

The Kingdom of Evil

Foreword to Kingdom of Evil

For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves (self-appointment) into the apostles of Christ.

And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.

Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works. (2 Cor. 11:13-15.)

Does not this scripture tell us that Satan has ministers even as Christ does? Does it not state further that these Satan-inspired ministers may also be transformed so as to appear as ministers of righteousness?

INTRODUCTORY COMMENT TO THE KINGDOM OF EVIL

It is apparent from the letter which the Apostle Paul wrote to the saints at Ephesus, that he was aware of the powers of darkness that constantly menaced the work of God. He likewise knew how this power, not "of flesh and blood" could be dealt with. His allusions to the "armour of God," no doubt, refer to the priesthood of God, which from the beginning, was given to hold in check this evil force that would attempt to destroy the efficacy of the plan of salvation, which the Father and the Son in righteousness have provided for all mankind.

The Apostle Paul knew that this power of darkness would invade the church, using perverted teachings of salvation, as a means of deceiving its believers. This spiritual wickedness is referred to in his letter to the wayward saints at Thessalonica, [^1] and outlined quite completely in a letter to the Ephesians:

Put on the whole armour of God, (meaning the priesthood, with its powers of leadership and administration) that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, (i.e. things of this world) but against principalities, against powers, (governments, kingdoms, founded and maintained upon the principles promoted by the arch-enemy of the Christ, Lucifer), against the rulers of the darkness of this world, (Lucifer's principles are those of darkness, that subjects the human will, invoking the doctrines of force, in keeping with his original intent to destroy the agency of man), against spiritual wickedness in high places. (This latter, without doubt refers to the spiritual deception that will be forthcoming and was already at work within the church itself, causing it to sink into a state of rank apostasy.) [^2]

Wherefore (because of the above condition) take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. [^3]

Footnotes

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

The Kingdom of Evil

It will be of interest to inquire into the functioning of the kingdom of evil. This kingdom, though normally unseen, is very real as its unembodied spirits under the direction of Lucifer, the arch-enemy of Christ and all that is righteous, wields a deceptive and wicked influence in the lives of men and women here upon the earth.

The Kingdom of Inner Darkness

In analyzing the revelations with regard to it, it is evident that Satan, "a son of the morning" in the spirit world, which probably means that he was among those to be born early as a spirit son of God the Father, at least sufficiently so that he assumed the right to be placed above the Firstborn son who became Christ the Lord in mortality, sought from the beginning to gain control of and be the king or master of the planet earth. The Prophet Job tells of Satan presenting himself in the pre-mortal councils in heaven, [^4] having then come "from going to and fro in earth and from walking up and down in it," [^5] wherein, he made his bid to become the redeemer of mankind [^6] who by foreordaination would inhabit it, knowing that the one sent to fulfill this calling would eventually, as the Christ the Only Begotten of the Father, become the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Knowing of this foreordained right of the One who would be the "Only Begotten" of the Father in the flesh, Satan, attempting to deceive Moses during an experience in mortality, claimed himself to be the Only Begotten Son and commanded Moses to worship him. [^7]

But Satan, who because of his space journeys from the pre-mortal presence of God unto the Earth, which had been organized for the habitation of man, was called "the prince of the power of the air," [^8] was ruled against in the primeval councils and he and his angels, numbering one third part of the host of heaven, because of their rebellion against agency, were "cast out into the earth." [^9]

The significant point here is that Satan and his angels, at that time were not defeated in the sense that they were sent away into a place where they no longer could menace God's plan and deceive the minds of men. But on the contrary, they were cast into the earth to exist, for the duration of the habitation of the earth by man, in what could be termed "inner darkness." This conclusion is not difficult to perceive for, from the time of their expulsion from heaven, they have dwelt in unembodied form upon the earth and have literally established an inner kingdom of evil. [^10] From there they continue their efforts to frustrate and destroy the plan of God the Father in the redemption of the souls of men and have constantly existed in darkness, for they not only shun light, but light and truth has forsaken them. [^11] But, so powerful has Satan and his hosts of evil become in their kingdom of "inner darkness" upon the earth that the Lord, himself, knowing that this evil "son of the morning" is his arch enemy and in knowing the extent of which he has captivated the hearts of men, proclaimed him to be the "prince of this world." But this is so only until his time will come for final defeat and complete banishment.

There can be no question, however, in the light of revealed communications from God, that Lucifer has established in the earth a kingdom of evil. The prophets refer to Satan's abode in the earth, as a place of "darkness," [^12] a place "in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps." [^13] The Prophet Ezekiel speaks of those who die in wickedness, and after their bodies are placed in the "nether parts of the earth," they shall go, "with them that go down into the pit." [^14] The Apostle Paul explained to the Ephesian Saints in early days how the Christ had ascended "up on high," having encompassed the entire range of existence upon the earth, wherein, "he led captivity captive," meaning some who were in hell in the prisons of the spirit world. Said he: "now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?" [^15]

Forces of Evil Organized

Here in the ambient areas of the earth, Lucifer and his fallen angels when cast out from our pre-mortal estate in the presence of God, continue a militant rebellion against God in opposing and attempting to frustrate the plan of salvation of which Jesus Christ is the author. It is important to regard it in this light to understand better the diabolical plan which these forces of evil have put into operation. With proper understanding and power, these evil influences that disseminate deceit and error can be detected and forestalled.

The Prophet Joseph Smith had many encounters with Lucifer himself, and there were unfolded to him by revelation and open vision many details of his kingdom of evil, its power, laws, and government, concerning which he said:

It is evident from the Apostles' writings, that many false spirits existed in their day, and had gone forth into the world, and that it needed intelligence which God alone could impart to detect false spirits, and to prove what spirits were of God. The world in general has been grossly ignorant in regard to this one thing, and why should they be otherwise—for no man knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God.

One great evil is, that men are ignorant of the nature of spirits; their power, laws, government, intelligence, etc., and imagine that when there is anything like power, revelation, or vision manifested, that it must be of God. [^16]

Evil Spirits Permitted to Function in Their Own Realm

From these remarks of the Prophet it is noted that evil spirits are permitted to function within their own realm and are often found to be demonstrating their powers in the performance of what would be regarded as a miracle to us mortals. Seeing the use of these powers some are led to believe that such is from God. For example, with regard to the speaking in tongues, the Prophet in the same article makes this statement:

Again it may be asked, how it was that they could speak in tongues if they were of the devil! We would answer that they could be made to speak in another tongue, as well as their own, as they were under the control of that spirit, and the devil can tempt the Hottentot, the Turk, the Jew or any other nation; and if these men were under the influence of his spirit, they, of course, could speak Hebrew, Latin, Greek, Italian, Dutch or any other language that the devil knew. [^17]

Evil Spirits Possess Former Knowledge

It is important to bear in mind, when contemplating how the power of evil may affect our lives, that their knowledge of pre-mortality has apparently not been taken from them. In possession of this former knowledge and of us, they are in position to wield an influence of evil through our weaknesses. The Prophet Joseph Smith has stated further:

A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us (with the things taken from us because of the imposition of mortality), and give us knowledge of the things of God. [^18]

Evil Spirits Can Be Controlled by the Priesthood

There are many references in both ancient and modern scripture that reveal the presence of evil spirits in the world. But these spirits, it is to be noted and fortunately for all, can be held in subjection by revelation and the power of the priesthood. For by this power and delegated authority their mischievous and mysterious operations, when militated against the interests of the Church and the spread of truth in particular, are detected and can be controlled.

To indicate how priesthood authority can deal with evil spirits, consider the case of the seven sons of Sceva, vagabond Jews, exorcists, who took upon themselves the right to cast out evil spirits of him who was possessed, having witnessed the exercise of this power by Paul the Apostle, and who then attempted to duplicate it by commanding the spirits to depart from the individual in the name of the Lord Jesus whom Paul preached.

The evil spirits in the man, recognizing their lack of priesthood authority, replied,

Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? [^19]

Evil Spirits Can Possess Bodies of Mortals

This incident, while establishing the need of priesthood authority to deal with evil spirits, also makes known clearly the fact that evil spirits are actually prevalent in the earth and can, under certain circumstances, possess the bodies of others.

Another incident of noteworthy reference, giving some evidence of the number of evil spirits that roam the earth, concerns two maniacs who were sorely tormented by evil spirits. One of these at least, according to the Gospels, had been bound with fetters and chains, but, with demoniac power had broken them away and had fled to the mountains to live among the tombs like an animal. Night and day his weird and terrifying shrieks could be heard. Seeing Jesus, the poor creature ran toward and was prostrate before him, crying out with a loud voice:

What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? [^20]

Jesus commanded the evil spirits to leave. One or more of them through the voice of the man, pleaded to be left alone, and with blasphemous presumption exclaimed:

I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not— [^21] Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? [^22]

The demons, by whom the man was possessed and controlled, recognized the Master, whom they knew they had to obey; but they pleaded to be left alone until the decreed time of their final punishment.

Legions of Spirits

Jesus asked, "What is thy name?" and the demons within the man answered, "My name is Legion: for we are many." [^23] To get the full significance of this happening one should study carefully the accounts recorded in Matthew 8:28-34; Mark 5:1-19; Luke 8:26-39 and also James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, pp. 310-311. (2000 swine) [^24]

These further incidents taken from the Holy Bible will suffice to show that evil spirits do occupy the bodies and minds of men, although there are many others that could be referred to. This incident indicates how well the evil spirits knew Jesus, and it is reasonable to assume that they also know any who hold the priesthood and endeavor to exercise its powers in righteousness in behalf of the purposes of God. This was also evident in the incident of the seven sons of Sceva referred to, for well they knew the Apostle Paul, a servant of God.

The Rebuking of Evil Spirits

Still another concerned Jesus while at Capernaum. There in the synagogue the Christ came face to face with a man who was possessed of an evil spirit. The Bible text states that he had, "a spirit of an unclean devil." Here, as upon other occasions, the man possessed of an evil spirit was terrified before our Lord and cried out with a loud voice:

Let us alone: what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God. [^25]

Jesus rebuked the unclean spirits and commanded them to be silent and leave the man and they obeyed.

Upon still another occasion, the disciples were confronted with a lunatic who was possessed of an evil spirit, but they could not cast him out. Jesus, alarmed at their lack of faith in making the attempt to do so, chided them with a denunciation:

O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me. [^26]

Then Jesus rebuked the evil spirit, and he departed out of him. This chagrined the apostles who asked, "Why could not we cast him out?"

"Howbeit this kind," the Master replied, "goeth not out but by prayer and fasting." [^27]

The Power of Evil in Our Day

Modern-day scriptures and experiences reveal many instances of a comparable nature to those of ancient times, indicating clearly that evil spirits do roam the earth today in our own time to deceive and frustrate God's work as revealed unto the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that Satan has great hold upon their hearts; he stirreth them up to iniquity against that which is good;

And their hearts are corrupt, and full of wickedness and abominations; and they love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil; therefore they will not ask of me.

Satan stirreth them up, that he may lead their souls to destruction.

And thus he has laid a cunning plan, thinking to destroy the work of God; but I will require this at their hands, and it shall turn to their shame and condemnation in the day of judgment.

Yea, he stirreth up their hearts to anger against this work.

Yea, he saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may destroy; behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy him . . .

And thus he goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the souls of men. [^28]

Man Must Choose Revelation of God or of Lucifer

Brigham Young, who occupied the position of God's prophet following the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, has spoken conclusively of the prevalence of evil spirits in the world and of their opposition to revelation from God. He further proclaims that the organization of the "Kingdom of Evil" is so established to attempt to match strides with the growth and development of the Church of the restoration in these latter days. Concerning this, and of the importance of accepting the revelations of God, he said:

It was revealed to me in the commencement of this Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the Gospel among the nations of the earth, so would the power of Satan rise. It was told you here that Brother Joseph warned the Elders of Israel against false spirits. It was revealed to me, that if the people did not receive the spirit of revelation that God had sent for the salvation of the world, they would receive false spirits and would have their revelation—It was not only revealed to Joseph but to your humble servant, that false spirits would be as prevalent and as common among the inhabitants of the earth as we now see them. [^29]

The Devil Has Power Over His Own

In the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, a book containing modern revelation, the Lord speaks unto his servant the Prophet Joseph Smith of the dominion of the devil and how he will have power over his own:

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion. [^30]

This means, as explained by Brigham Young, that as the Church expands its growth in the earth, Lucifer and his kingdom of evil will become increasingly more active in his own dominion to restrain the forward movement of the gospel plan revealed in this dispensation for the good of man.

Christ himself referred to Lucifer as the prince of this world and indicates the extent of his evil power. [^31]

Michael, the Archangel, Dispels Lucifer Again

It is to be remembered that it was Michael, the archangel, who was called upon to expel Lucifer and his disobedient and rebellious pre-mortal followers from the presence of God. The fact is that Michael, or Adam by his human name, has the God-given assignment to keep Lucifer within his bounds. Further evidence of this is seen in the attempt made by Lucifer to thwart the bestowal of the Melchizedek Priesthood by Peter, James, and John upon the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Apparently, not having yet received the Higher Priesthood, they were not able to detect the presence of Lucifer, who, according to the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, appeared on the Susquehanna River as an angel of light to deceive them and no doubt to attempt to interfere with the conferring of the Holy Priesthood upon them. We are informed by the Prophet of the appearance there of Michael, the archangel, who came to detect the deception of Lucifer and banish him from the scene:

The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times! [^32]

Demonstrated Power of Evil Against the Church

The demonstrated power of evil [^33] against the Church has been constant since its establishment in these last days. A manifestation of how this evil force could weave its way into the very Church, reached its apex at Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet Joseph Smith was denounced, by members and nonmembers alike, as a "fallen prophet." Some from within the Church had been his immediate friends and confidential advisers, and the divinity of his mission was being doubted by many who had only shortly before, received through him a testimony of the truth.

"No quorum in the Church," says he, "was entirely exempt from the influence of those false spirits who were striving against me for the mastery. Even some of the Twelve were so far lost to their high and responsible calling, as to take sides, secretly, with the enemy." [^34]

A Vivid Manifestation of Lucifer's Kingdom

No doubt one of the greatest demonstrations of the power of evil and the regimented forces of Lucifer against the Church was experienced by our early missionaries to the British Isles. An account of this is taken from the Journal of Heber C. Kimball who was present at the time. It is interesting to note first that the Prophet Joseph Smith, who had set them apart to their missions, bestowed upon them the gift to "open the door of salvation to that nation." [^35] Of the incident of the "kingdom of evil" we read:

Sunday, July 30th, 1837, about daybreak, Elder Isaac Russell who slept with Elder Richards in Wilfred Street, came up to the third story, where Elder Hyde and myself were sleeping, and called out, "Brother Kimball, I want you to get up and pray for me that I may be delivered from the evil spirits that are tormenting me to such a degree, that I feel I cannot live long, unless I obtain relief."

I had been sleeping on the back of the bed. I immediately arose, slipped off the foot of the bed, and passed around to where he was. Elder Hyde threw his feet out, and sat up in the bed, and we laid hands on him, I being mouth, and prayed that the Lord would have mercy on him, and rebuked the devil.

While thus engaged I was struck with great force by some invisible power, and fell senseless to the floor. The first thing I recollected was being supported by Elders Hyde and Richards who then assisted me to get on the bed, but my agony was so great I could not endure it, and I arose, bowed my knees and prayed. I then arose and sat up on the bed, when a vision was opened to our minds, and we could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth at us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half (by Willard's watch). We were not looking toward the window but toward the wall. Space appeared before us, and we saw the devils coming in legions, with their leaders, who came within a few feet of us. They came toward us like armies rushing to battle. They appeared to be men of full stature, possessing every form and feature of men in the flesh, who were angry and desperate; and I shall never forget the vindictive malignity depicted on their countenances as they looked me in the eye; and any attempt to paint the scene which then presented itself, or portray their malice and enmity, would be vain—I felt excessive pain, and was in the greatest distress for some time. I cannot even look back on the scene without feelings of horror; yet by it I learned the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God, and we got some understanding of the invisible world. We distinctly heard those spirits talk and express their wrath, and hellish designs against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them and blessed us exceedingly that day. [^36]

Elder Hyde also furnished a supplemental description of the fearful scene described above which corroborated all that had been so stated by Heber C. Kimball.

The Presence of Evil Where Church Progresses

Some time later, after the brethren had returned from their mission in England where great success had attended their labors in that entire villages and congregations of other churches were converted, and which was undoubtedly the cause of the demoniacal attack, Elder Kimball narrated his experience to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He asked the Prophet what it all meant and whether there was anything wrong with him that he should have such a manifestation. The answer given by the Prophet is most enlightening and should be kept in mind by all who endeavor to serve the Lord in the building up of his kingdom here upon the earth, wherein it is needful to be alert to the powers of evil.

"No, Brother Heber," said the Prophet, "at that time you were nigh unto the Lord; there was only a veil between you and him, but you could not see him. When I heard of it, (apparently the news of this encounter had come to the Prophet beforehand) it gave me great joy, for then I knew that the work of God had taken root in that land. It was this that caused the devil to make a struggle to kill you." [^37]

The Prophet's Own Experience with Lucifer at Far West, Missouri

How well the Prophet must have recalled at that time his own struggles with Lucifer, first, where as a young man he had gone to seek guidance in the Sacred Grove when an attempt was made to destroy him, to prevent the glorious vision from descending upon him which opened this new dispensation; and of the many other encounters, incident to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the divine bestowals involving the conferring of the keys for this dispensation. Yes, the Prophet Joseph Smith, above all other men upon the earth, knew of the powers of Lucifer and his legions of unembodied spirits who fight day and night to frustrate the work of righteousness in the earth. These occurrences were not vague experiences, but actual encounters, for, as he had told Heber C. Kimball, the closer we come to the Lord when the veil is thin then the effort of Lucifer to deceive and mislead will be the greatest.

The Prophet related an experience to Heber C. Kimball that took place at Far West in a home which the Prophet had obtained for his family and which had formerly belonged to others who had used it as a public house or tavern. Heber C. Kimball recorded the story in his own journal. (This is no doubt the house which the Prophet and family occupied during the days of Far West and which stood just southeast from the temple site. This house in later years was visited by Andrew Jenson and also Brigham H. Roberts, assistant Church historians, as contained in their accounts, and which stood on the ground where now stands a small Reorganized LDS Chapel—1961).

A short time after he got into it, one of his children was taken very sick; he laid his hands on the child's head; when it got better, as soon as he went out-of-doors, the child was taken sick again; he again laid his hands upon it, so that it again recovered. This occurred several times, when Joseph inquired of the Lord, what it all meant; then he had an open vision, and saw the devil in person, who contended with Joseph face to face for some time. He said it was his house, it belonged to him, and Joseph had no right to be there. Then Joseph rebuked Satan in the name of the Lord, and he departed and touched the child no more. [^38]

Lucifer Seeks After the More Righteous

After those presumed reflections the Prophet Joseph Smith continued his interview with Heber C. Kimball, concerning their adventure in Preston, England, with the forces of the domain of evil, for said he:

The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of His purposes. [^39]

The Opening of Dispensations Draws the Effort of Lucifer

There can be no question that in the ushering in of all great gospel dispensations, wherein divine messengers are sent from the presence of God, in resuscitating by bestowal the various keys and priesthood authority needed for the functioning of the gospel of Jesus Christ upon the earth, Lucifer has tried in every way at his command to prevent the chosen servants of God here upon the earth from receiving these gifts and powers. [^40] Lucifer knows well his ultimate doom and confinement. [^41] Still he continues his efforts, not having been decisively beaten, when he and his angels were expelled from the presence of God in the pre-existence, hoping still to gather sufficient strength to overcome eventually the forces of righteousness. In this, of course, he will fail, for his lot is cast, and with him all who follow after him, for theirs is an eternal doom to be confined in that place prepared for them, not a place of glory, but a place of darkness.

Concerning the Place of Michael the Archangel

Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life. [^42]

Michael, or Adam as he is known by his name here in mortality, was an associate in the creation of this earth and thus held a high and noble position in the pre-mortal realm. This is further indicated by the fact that it was he who directed the checking and expulsion of Lucifer in his premortal effort to gain ascendancy above the council of Gods with a proposed plan involving the doctrine of force and the forfeiture of agency, which he attempted to place in operation for the earth life existence of man.

The Eventual Subjugation of Lucifer

The priesthood after the order of the Son of God, as was known in the pre-mortal estate, known here upon the earth as the Melchizedek, contains the power that will contain Lucifer within the bounds of his habitation, and eventually, after the plan of this life is completed, will place him with those who are his followers, both from the pre-existent period, and also during the period of mortality, in that sphere or kingdom which has been prepared for him. They rejected the family order and priesthood of God, and they, in their fallen state, devoid of any capability to repent, seek now, as then, to change the plan of life and salvation as it is now in effect upon the earth.

This is a forlorn cause, but until Lucifer and his kingdom of evil are fully subjected, which in due time will be their fate, he continues his harassment of the work of the Lord. But the Lord cannot permit Lucifer to interfere in key situations where the establishment of the gospel and the exercise of agency can be implanted in the lives of those upon the earth. The calling of Michael, the great prince, in controlling the activities of Lucifer in his role as the leader of the opposition of evil in the earth life of man, is clearly seen by references to key scriptures.

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. [^43]

Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said the Lord rebuke thee. [^44] (Here Lucifer is permitted to continue but not to the extent of the destruction of Moses, wherein a key gospel situation was at stake.)

The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times! [^45]

And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all.

For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb. [^46]

Reference is made to other attempts by Lucifer to prevent the work of God from going forward.

All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. [^49]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Rev. 12:7-9.
[^2] Ibid., 12:4.
[^3] Moses 4:1.
[^4] Ibid., 4:2.
[^5] Ibid., 4:3-4.
[^6] See, Who Am I, Dyer, pp. 134-148.
[^7] Rev. 12:9.
[^8] P. of G. P., Moses 5:13.
[^9] Ibid., 5:18.
[^10] 2 Nephi 2:11.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith) p. 208.
[^12] Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 4: Eph. 2:2; John 12:31, 14:30 (Prince of air—Lucifer prince of this world to come after the death of Jesus.)
[^13] P. of G. P., Moses 5:29.
[^14] P. of G. P., Moses 5:30-31.
[^15] P. of G. P., Moses 5:49-52.
[^16] Notes taken from Rawlinson The Seven Great Monarchies.
[^17] Nahum 3:19.
[^18] Ibid., 3:1-5.
[^19] The devil has not body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 181.
[^20] Luke 4:33-34.
[^21] Matthew 17:17.
[^22] Ibid., 17:19, 21.
[^23] D&C 10:20-27.
[^24] Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 110-111.
[^25] 25. See quotation on page 171 of this article.
[^26] 26. Alma 34:31-34.
[^27] 27. Matthew 25:14, 15, 21-32.
[^28] 25. D&C 1:35.
[^29] 26. John 12:31 and 14:30.
[^30] 27. D&C 128:20; compare also the contest between Satan and Michael concerning the body of Moses. (Jude 9.)
[^31] 28. See notes beginning p. 155 of this book.
[^32] 29. Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 115.
[^33] 30. See History of the Church, vol. II, pp. 489-90.
[^34] 31. Kimball, op, cit., pp. 144-145: Preston—Ribble River
[^35] 32. Idem.
[^36] 33. Ibid., p. 270.
[^37] 34. Ibid., PP. 145-156.
[^38] 35. See Notes on this page.
[^39] 36. Rev. 12.
[^40] 37. D&C 78:16.
[^41] 38. Rev. 12:7-9.
[^42] 39. Jude 9; P. of G.P., Moses ch. 1.
[^43] 40. D&C 128:20.
[^44] 41. Ibid., 88:112-115; 76:31-48.
[^45] 42. A designation given to those in early times who did not subscribe to the commandments and teachings of righteousness. Those who did subscribe were referred to as the sons and daughters of God. (See Gen. 6:2; P. of G.P., Moses 7:1; 8:14, 15.)
[^46] 43. See page 146; Moses, P. of G.P., 1:12; 1:42.
