Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

The Beginning of Evil in the Earth

The question may properly be asked, how did Lucifer and his disciples of deceit come to be upon the earth to menace the plan of salvation, to harass mankind, and to oppose righteousness?

An account of the expulsion of Lucifer and his angels from the presence of God in pre-mortality is told by revelation to the Apostle John, the beloved of the Lord. He was given the promise of continuous life in the flesh until the second coming of Jesus Christ. Yet, because of the preaching of the gospel of Christ, he was banished to the Isle of Patmos by order of Domitian the emperor of Rome in the year 96 A.D. While there he was privileged to see in open vision and manifestation a panoramic view of prophesied happenings on this earth and her people from the beginning to the end. Part of the vision reached back into the pre-mortal sphere of man where events pertaining to Lucifer and his effort to gain power were clearly seen. These are the words of the Apostle John as he related the fall of Satan:

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. [^1]

In recording the events of the same vision, verse four of the same chapter, John indicates that so powerful was the influence of Lucifer at that time he drew a like kind as himself:

. . . the third part of the stars of heaven. . . . [^2]

These under the direction of Lucifer not only rejected the commandments but also opposed God and the forces of righteousness; they also extended their diabolical plan in accusations against some of the noble leaders or "brethren" day and night.

Thus the Apostle John witnessed the dispute in heaven which arrayed the forces of Lucifer against the forces of God, ending in the expulsion of Lucifer and his hosts from the presence of God. The conditions of this dispute have been made known in clearness to the Prophet Joseph Smith. From the book of Moses:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. [^3]

Statement of the Beloved Son as Compared With that of Lucifer

This statement was made to Moses because of the encounter he had just experienced with Lucifer, who attempted to deceive him into believing that he, Lucifer, was the god of the earth and had instructed him to come and worship him. God therefore is identifying Lucifer unto Moses. We continue to read from the account given above:

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever. [^4]

We are told in this that Christ sought nothing for himself in the way of glory. He proposed no plan contrary to the God-given plan, only the desire to do the will of the Father and to preserve the right of agency.

Lucifer and his followers could not subscribe to this plan, because in its salvation phase, it required that repentance be exercised to bring about a personal change, a new birth. Repentance, as an action, requires the unqualified exercise of agency. For man to know the difference between good and evil, and then by right of agency, choose the good, is the crowning achievement of man in seeking to attain personal salvation. Lucifer and his followers had lost the power to repent, hence they opposed God's plan.

Continuing, God said unto Moses:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down.

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the Father of all lies, to deceive and to bland men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. [^5]

Note: The expulsion of Lucifer and those who followed him from the pre-existent sphere, was obviously done because they no longer could be a part of the plan of earth life, or second estate of man, which was at that time in its final stage of launching. There was no reason for them to remain there, and since their ultimate abode, "the kingdom of outer darkness," is being prepared for them, and which they will ultimately occupy, they were cast down upon the earth, the only apparent place they could be sent, and which, being known beforehand by God, became another factor to deal with in the progress of the spirit children of God.

Effects of Lucifer's Plan Seen

The concept of life which Lucifer sought to impose upon the children of God, would take from them the right to choose between good and evil. [^6] Their eventual salvation, under his plan, would be a matter of compulsion, in a choice of negatives. Faith, the prime requisite of life upon the earth, would not be a part of the plan of salvation, and the whole course of life would be one of the rankest predestination, with all things completely decided beforehand, thus eliminating the need of a probation where the children of God could prove unto God and themselves, by an obtained worthiness, their fitness for the spheres of glory in the life to follow this one. Man shall find his place in that sphere best suited to his limitations and aspirations, and to that degree of obedience to righteous law that he can attain.

Under the plan of Lucifer, man would become nothing but a serf, something to be acted upon only and not to act. In time, as is wisely seen by our Heavenly Father and the other noble ones, if such a course were pursued, retrogression would set in and the nobility of man would change to that of a lower order. Of this we know little except that it would end in a place of darkness.

So far was the concept of Lucifer wrong and contrary to the purpose of righteousness, that the necessity of an open warfare in the pre-mortal realms was risked and encountered, to preserve the right of agency, so necessary to the salvation and eternal joy of man.

Extent of Lucifer's Influence Seen

The influence of Lucifer in this encounter is seen in the fact, as revealed to the Apostle John, that one-third of the hosts of heaven believed and were susceptible to deception by him, and in following him in open rebellion, became like unto him, incapable of repentance and committed to the purpose of continuing their opposition as long as they are permitted to do so.

Since the struggle of these two forces was not settled in the pre-earth existence, notwithstanding the fact that he and his angels were cast out of the presence of God, they are permitted to abide in the ambient area of the earth, and in such position continue their efforts to deceive and influence the embodied sons and daughters of God from their search of and obedience to the laws of righteousness to achieve placement in the degrees of glory which God has ordained for his children.

Just how well Lucifer has succeeded in his plan can be observed by the following references. It is to be remembered, however, that, unless those who have been embodied sin against the Holy Ghost, Satan will eventually have no power over them. His intention, therefore, is to relegate mankind to the lowest depth possible. In this respect, the Apostle John tells of his method:

. . . Satan, which deceiveth the whole world. [^7]

When men are deceived they can be subjected to systems or rules of governments which exercise powers of unrighteous dominion that does not allow the governed, the rights of agency.

The Coming of Priestcraft

The Establishment of Priestcraft with Covenants and Oaths of Secrecy—to Oppose the Rights and Functions of the Priesthood of God.

Moses relates the action of Lucifer, as he pursued his own plan, unto the early inhabitants of the earth.

And Satan came among them, (family of Adam and Eve) saying: I am also a son of God (and some believed him) . . . and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. [^8]

And Cain loved Satan more than God. And Satan commanded him, saying: Make an offering unto the Lord. [^9]

But this offering, so advocated by Lucifer, was not in accordance with the commandments of God and, therefore, was a deception. The Lord God, detecting this, told Cain that he could still be saved from Lucifer if he would hearken to his words, but if he would not, that notwithstanding he would rule over Satan, (because of a resurrected body) he nevertheless would become the father of all lies to the children of men, and he himself perdition because of the initiation of these principles unto the children of men upon the earth.

Cain continued to follow Satan and covenanted with him to establish more firmly these doctrines upon the earth. This was all done through the principles of priestcraft, involving unrighteous dominion over the lives of men, which constitutes the very plan which he had advocated in the pre-existent conflict. Here then, upon the earth, was the introduction of the very forces of evil which Lucifer would have imposed openly upon all of us in a plan of life had he not been restrained in the pre-existence. Despite all this, it remains in the providence of God that Lucifer is permitted to function within his realm here upon the earth.

The Need of Opposition

Thus, in the wisdom of God, was established, by the very application of agency itself, one form of opposition, which will ever be necessary in the plan of the gospel. In describing the need of opposition in all things, Lehi also points out the manner of living to which we all would be submitted if there was not an opposition in all things:

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility. [^10]

Satan With Full Knowledge Opposes the Plan of God

Satan himself, knowing well the plan of God in this regard, has set up an opposition to God's will in the plan of life and salvation. Wishfully thinking, for he knows of his eventual doom, that he might, through the weakness of the flesh of men, gain sufficient additional following, he pursues his lost cause, born out of a grim reality that he can do no other, for this is the type of being he is. But he deceives even himself as he hopes to defeat the purposes of God. But God, not fearful of this and knowing full well of the eventual triumph, permits Satan to remain within the ambient area of the earth operating within his own unembodied kingdom of evil to serve the over-all purposes of the plan of life.

An evidence that he is to be permitted to continue in this manner is indicated by the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

The spirits of good men cannot interfere with the wicked beyond their prescribed bounds, for Michael, the archangel, dared not bring a railing accusation against the devil, but said, "The Lord rebuke thee, Satan." [^11]

Lucifer, a Prince of the Power of the Air

From the further writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, we learn of some of the characteristics of those of the kingdom of evil and of certain traits of power which Lucifer himself possesses.

It would seem also, that wicked spirits have their bounds, limits, and laws by which they are governed or controlled, and know their future destiny; hence, those that were in the maniac said to our Savior, "Art thou come to torment us before the time,"—and when Satan presented himself before the Lord, among the sons of God, he said that he came "from going to and fro in the earth, and from wandering up and down in it"; and he is emphatically called the prince of the power of the air; and, it is very evident that they possess a power that none but those who have the Priesthood can control. [^12]

Lucifer Established a Priestcraft Among Children of Adam

Satan, therefore, to oppose the priesthood, established among the children of Adam in the beginning the principles of priestcraft. This condition is described further by Moses:

And Satan said unto Cain: Swear unto me by thy throat, and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it they shall surely die; and this that thy father may not know it, and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands. [^13]

The establishing of priestcraft with its covenants and oaths was not done for the sole purpose of perpetrating the murder of Abel, but to mislead and deceive the sons and daughters of Adam so that in the deception and following the course which Satan had put before them they would deny unto themselves the priesthood of God which Lucifer knew well was the source of power that could detect his deceptions and dispel him as was needed to further the work of our Heavenly Father. But Cain was deceived by Lucifer in believing that, with Abel out of the way, he would receive the birthright and inherit the riches of his father Adam's house even without the priesthood birthright.

Lucifer Held Great Power over Some Sons of Adam

The extent of the power of Lucifer over Cain and other children of Adam can be learned from the further writings of Moses:

And Satan sware unto Cain that he would do according to his commands. And all these things were done in secret.

And Cain said: Truly I am Mahan, the master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain. Wherefore Cain was called Master Mahan, and he gloried in his wickedness. [^14]

The Effects of Priestcraft Upon Cain

The effects of establishing these corrupt principles of priestcraft are seen in the fact that it was not long thereafter that those who had followed Cain were insatiated with the lust for power and the exercising of unjust principles of government over others, thereby attempting to deny the rights of free agency, which God had decreed should be the right of all. This unrighteous dominion over others, when forces of evil are at work as has proved so down through the periods of history, leads directly to the destruction of those who will not obey the mandates of those who hold power. Witness in these further writings of Moses concerning the tragic developments of early times, the exact initial pattern of what we have seen and been informed on, in every period of history, including our own present day, the operation of these unjust forces of evil as they impose upon all under them the principles of unrighteous dominion, which are in very essence the principles of priestcraft.

For Lamech having entered into a covenant with Satan, (Lamech was the fifth generation from Adam—Enoch—Irad—Mahugael—Methusael—Lamech); after the manner of Cain, wherein he became Master Mahan, master of that great secret which was administered unto Cain by Satan; and Irad, the son of Enoch, having known their secret, began to reveal it unto the sons of Adam; wherefore Lamech, being angry, slew him, (his great-grandfather) not like unto Cain, his brother Abel, for the sake of getting gain, but he slew him for the oath's sake.

For, from the days of Cain, there was a secret combination, and their works were in the dark, and they knew every man his brother.

Wherefore the Lord cursed Lamech, and his house, and all them that had covenanted with Satan; for they kept not the commandments of God, and it displeased God, and he ministered not unto them, and their works were abominations, and began to spread among all the sons of men. [^15]

The Founding of Unrighteous Governments

Thus, this unholy and unrighteous form of government established in the beginning of man's occupancy of the earth, has had its influence upon mankind almost consistently and without exception (Enoch and his city—the children of Nephi for a period) down through the stream of time. The coming of the flood in the days of Noah but restrained and retarded it, and while preventing it from destroying the plan of God and taking over completely it, nevertheless, has persisted since the days of the flood in much the same manner. The wisdom of God, however, keeps it under check now with the placing upon the earth of the priesthood of God.

History Records the Tool of Lucifer in Corrupt Government

Students of history can trace the functioning of this power of evil in the earth where, through governments, there is constantly the exercised power of unrighteous dominion over the masses—the subjugation of their will, the non-recognition of God-given rights, the wanton destruction of people in mass murders, simulating in greater fashion even, the once secret covenants of Mahan. Consider the mighty kingdom of Nimrod with its millions of slave labor, or the onward slaughtering forces of the great warrior Alexander, knowing no creed but the creed of power and force. People meant nothing to these one-time world governments. Other instances could be cited from ancient times to show the preservation of the pattern of unjust dominion which Lucifer gave to the sons of Adam. His effort and purpose was to frustrate the plan of God, and if possible, to defeat the plan of righteous dominion, and of the agency of man.

Other Great World Powers of Evil

The story of the seven great monarchies of antiquity, the Chaldaean, the Assyrian, the Medean, the Babylonian, the Persian, the Parthian, and the Sassanian or New Persian empires, is one of continuing lust for power and of aggression. All of them exhibited that kind of covetousness which we always find in those who seek to exercise unrighteous dominion over their fellow men.

Not being content with the possessions and the power they already claimed their own, they invaded the territories of neighboring countries with the object of subjugating them. To find that they met with success in any of their aggressive undertaking only served to create a desire for more power. These ancient powers always kept a watchful eye on their neighbors. If these showed any sign of weakness, or gave any other evidence of being an easy prey, they would fall on them, in the exercise of the doubtful right of the stronger. They would march on until they met with some power which was able to check their onslaught.

The Chaldean Monarchy of Evil

It began right with the first monarchy, the Chaldaeans. Nimrod, the founder of this kingdom, "the mighty hunter" of the scriptures, spread his kingdom inland, subduing or expelling the various tribes which occupied the territory. His rule was so oppressive that Abraham was forced to quit the country.

The Assyrians became "worthy" successors of the Chaldaeans. They made annual inroads into the territories of their neighbors. They would overturn, beat to pieces, and consume the towns with fire, sweep the country with their troops, and impress upon the inhabitants the fear of their presence. The ferocity of their wars was such that for every head of a foeman brought back to camp, the Assyrian soldiers received a reward.

Vanity played a great part, too. Tiglath-Pileser I, one of the most powerful Assyrian monarchs, who claims to have conquered forty-two countries in the course of but five campaigns, glories in his power and calls himself "the powerful king of the people of various tongues; king of the four regions; king of all kings; lord of lords; the supreme; monarch of monarchs; the illustrious chief . . . the conqueror of many plains and mountains of the upper and lower country; the victorious hero, the terror of whose name has overwhelmed all regions."

War is always an evil, but the wars of these monarchies were accompanied by inhuman atrocities. The complete disregard for the individual is seen as the inhabitants of captured places were treated with inhuman severity. Under the Assyrians, the leaders of the resistance received one of the usual modes of punishment: impalement, beating in their skull with a mace, flaying with a knife (sometimes even when still alive), or mutilation (by cutting off their ears or noses, by blinding them, or by plucking out their tongues by the roots). Many of the others were sentenced into slavery.

The Evil of the Assyrian Kings

Asshur-bani-pal, one of the later Assyrian kings, was especially evil in this regard. He not only gave orders for the most barbarous cruelties to be performed, but even had them represented in all their horrors upon his palace walls.

The Evil of the Medes

The Medes were wont to commit the worst outrages. They would not only "dash to pieces" the fighting men of the nations opposed to them, allowing no quarter, but inflict indignities and cruelties on the women and children, which the pen unwillingly records. Infants were slain before the eyes of the parent, and the women ravished in the most brutal manner. They had no interest in spoil, they lusted for blood, the shedding of it, and the destroying of human life. The Babylonians mutilated their prisoners, massacred non-combatants, and they too executed the children before the eyes of the parents.

One of the problems of these conquerors was to keep the subjugated countries under effective control and to discourage their rebellion from the heavy yoke placed upon them. Various measures were taken to accomplish this. It was the custom for these monarchies to take recourse to wholesale deportation. Sargon, who removed the Israelites from Samaria to other parts of the empire, employed these measures on an especially grand scale. The object was to weaken the stronger races by dispersion, and to destroy the patriotic spirit of the weaker nations. These people were either settled in other parts of the empire, or they were employed as forced laborers.

Sargon, the Assyrian, established fortified posts in the various countries of his empire, and placed in them a great standing army, to stand on guard and keep the inhabitants in check. The Medes claimed suzerainty only over the nations immediately upon their borders; the remoter tribes they placed under these nations, and looked to them to collect and remit the tribute of the outlying countries. Darius, the Persian, organized his empire into satrapies, with a satrap over them who was liable to be recalled or put to death on the merest whim of the monarch. But while in power, these satraps ruled as despotically as they could.

The Persians and Evil Practices

In spite of all these measures, rebellion against the heavy yoke of the master was seething almost everywhere, and the monarch never hesitated to deal with such rebellions with the utmost force and brutality he had at his command. Under the Persians, crucifixion or impalement of some sort was the ordinary punishment for rebellion. According to Herodotus, 3,000 Babylonians were crucified by order of Darius to punish their revolt against him.

These severe measures were not only taken against the people of other nations, but the same despotic power was also exercised over the monarch's own people. The Medes, for instance, did not hesitate to place some special troops in the rear of their armies to kill every soldier who had not the mind to attack the enemy.

In Persia, as in other empires, the monarch was the state. He ruled as an absolute despot. The power of the king was unlimited. He was the lord and master of the people, the absolute disposer of their lives, liberties, and property; the sole fountain of law and right, incapable himself of doing wrong, one whose favor was happiness, at whose frown men trembled, before whom all bowed themselves down with the lowest and humblest obeisance. Prostration—the attitude of worship—was required of all as they entered the presence of the king. As a result, tyranny was allowed to rule unchecked in the wildest caprices and extravagances.

Any one of the subjects, even the highest nobles, would be heavily punished if he incurred by a slight fault the displeasure of the monarch. In Babylon, cutting to pieces and casting into a heated furnace were among the recognized punishments. The houses of the offenders were pulled down and made into dunghills. In Persia, the nobles were liable to be beheaded, to be stoned to death, to be suffocated with ashes, to have their tongues torn out by the roots, to be buried alive, to be shot in mere wantonness, to be flayed and then crucified, to be buried all but the head, and to perish by the lingering agony of "the boat." Their wives and daughters might be seized and horribly mutilated, or buried alive, or cut into a number of fragments. It was the element of force—brutal force—that held their empires together.

The Parthian Murders

But as always in a totalitarian state, the powerful man himself fears for his life and station. And sometimes there is an internal struggle for power in the royal family. This we find in the Parthian kingdom. Here the jealousy and apprehensiveness went to such a head that the king had all his male relatives murdered, for fear they might claim the throne. The brother murdered his brother, and the son murdered his father.

Many of these monarchs were great builders. The problem of obtaining the necessary laborers they easily solved. They put to work captives taken in war, or rebels from other parts of the empire. These forced laborers were placed under taskmasters who urged them on with blows. Often these unfortunates were forced to work in fetters.

There was no freedom, not even religious freedom. Nebuchadnezzar, for instance, changed his religion several times, and in every case he forced all of his subjects to embrace the same religion. During several periods in the course of these monarchies, the priests were given great powers. They were made wealthy by the offerings of the faithful and, as they held influential positions in the civil government, they were feared by the people.

When Artaxerxes founded the Sassanian or New Persian empire, he felt that the altar and the throne had to be inseparable. He raised the Magian priesthood to the great council of the nation, and enforced their decisions by pains and penalties. By an edict of Artaxerxes, all places of worship were closed but those of the Zorastrians. The Magians took advantage of their position, and under various monarchs, and at various times, Christianity as well as other religions was cruelly persecuted and its adherents massacred, one of the worst persecutions having been that under Varahran I (272-275 A.D.). [^16]

The Evils of the Babylonian Dynasty

Nor should we pass hurriedly over ancient Babylonia with its capital of Babylon located on the Euphrates River about seventy miles south of the present Baghdad. This wicked civilization flourished, with its ill-conceived principles of unrighteous dominion, 2500 years before Christ, continuing, until overthrown by the Assyrian armies under King Sennacherib about 700 years B.C. A century later this mighty but still wicked kingdom was overthrown by the Chaldeans.

The fall of Ninevah, the capital of this kingdom, brought forth this declaration from the Prophet Nahum:

. . . all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually? [^17]

Ninevah was steeped in priestcraft and wickedness; before her destruction, against this wickedness and power of evil the Prophet Nahum fearlessly continued his proclamation of the wrath of God:

Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies (deception) and robbery. . . .

The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcasses; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumble upon their corpses:

Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.

Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame. [^18]

The fall of Ninevah, however, did not end the channels of evil government through which Satan could carry on his plan of the destruction of the agency of man, for in this manner he sought to make it impossible for man in any way to benefit from the obedient and voluntary plan of the gospel of Christ.

Nebuchadnezzar and the Citadel of Crime

Nebuchadnezzar, perhaps the greatest of all Chaldean emperors, gave rise to another great citadel of crime and deception, and became so mighty as to rule most of the ancient world. This is the government of unrighteous dominion that carried the Jews into captivity in 587 B.C.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To cover our sins. Persuasion. 2 Nephi 10:3, 5.
[^2] Gratify pride. Long-suffering. 2 Thess. 2:3-4.
[^3] Vain ambition. Gentleness and meekness. D&C 76:28.
[^4] Compulsion. Love unfeigned. Thess. 2:6-8.
[^5] Unrighteousness (many degrees). Kindness. Karl Marx.
[^6] Pure knowledge. Lenin.
[^7] Reproving with love. Anatole Lunarcharsky, Russian Commissar of Education.
[^8] Lenin.
[^9] Joseph Stalin. Real name: Joseph Vissarionovich Djugashvili.
[^10] Yaroslavsky, Religion in the USSR.
[^11] Lenin.
[^12] E. Yaroslavsky, op, cit.
[^13] Lenin.
[^14] Radio Leningrad, August 27, 1950.
[^15] Lenin. From Mercury (Sept. 1959.)
[^16] See, "Who Am I," by author for a full text study of these vital questions.
[^17] D&C 121:36-37.
[^18] Ibid., 121:41-43.
