Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Lucifer and His Own Destruction

But the devil has a way of destroying his own, for the principles which he inculcates cannot long survive in the government of men. Its very doctrine is one of decay and dissolution. Its survival, if but for a brief span of intermittence in mortal life, depends upon a re-bestowal of deception and error upon the duped minds of those who themselves are cursed with the inclinations of evil, and who, becuase of their own evil tendencies are lifted up in high places to administer the doctrines and teachings of Lucifer and his unseen band upon the innocent and wicked subjects alike who happen to fall under their dominion.

And so, this second Babylon was destroyed by its own lust for unjust power, felled by the rising force of the Medes and Persians in 538 B.C.

Notes

See Job 2:1, 2 and Job 1:7—Satan had apparently been on the earth before he presented his plan and was rejected.

Comment: Rev. 12:9—Witnesses—the casting out of Satan so he could not have come before God afterward. See also D&C 76:25.

Also—See D&C 29:36, 37. Lucifer was upon the earth before Adam. He had also been upon the earth before his expulsion from heaven. See Job, O.T. 1:7.

Priestcraft at the Birth of Christ

Following these times came the return of the Jews to Palestine, and perhaps the establishment of a worse priestcraft than those which had gone before, and which had so wantonly exercised the principles of Mahan in the slaughter of its subjects. Lucifer well knew that the time was approaching for the coming of the Son of Man, the Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father—the Redeemer of the world.

Under the leadership of Ezra and Nehemiah, two valiant men of God, a strong attempt was made to establish once again the house of Israel, at least that part of it upon the earth left to be established. This constituted principally the descendants of Judah. But here, as before, Lucifer pursued his evil purposes and caused to be integrated into this new movement the priestly order of the Pharisees under whom, with the guise of saintly purity, the leadership of the Jews was poisoned with a deception far more deadly, if it were possible, than that which had been manifest among the pagans.

The Priestcraft of Meridian Days

The Pharisee felt himself above others and promoted the idea of a priestly caste, encouraging self-sufficiency and spiritual pride. The Pharisees could have done much to have prepared the way for the coming of Christ into mortality, but actuated by the power of Lucifer, became instead a priestcraft, such a one as declared by the Prophet Jacob which would bring about the crucifixion of their God:

Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ . . . should come among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world; and they shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth, (deceived and led by their priestcraft leaders, the Pharisees), that would crucify their God.

But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. [^1]

Lucifer Invades the Church to Set Up Deception

Following the death of Christ and his apostles, with the exception of John the beloved, there arose in the earth a kingdom of unrighteous dominion, so powerful, so dominant, as to place a pall of darkness upon the entire earth, producing what is commonly known as the "dark ages." At no time in the world's history has there been a period of time when the suppression of human rights has been more in evidence. That this should be at a time when a supposed Christian church was upon the earth indicates the extent of Satan's power over his own dominion in governments of men or in religious dynasties that would take unto themselves the power of directing, not only the affairs of men that go to constitute his everyday living, but also his religious thought. Herein is an invasion of God's house, and it sounds a warning that the tentacles of the power of evil can find their ways into any church, institution, or kingdom that departs from the true ways of the Living God.

The Apostasy Directed by Lucifer Known in Advance by the Apostles of Christ

This particular kingdom of evil which established itself in the would-be very Church of Christ, through a vast "falling away" from the original teachings of the Christ and his apostles, is perhaps seen best in the eyes of vision given unto the Apostle Paul, who sensed, while yet living, the impending disaster that would befall the Christian church which he and the other apostles labored to crystallize following the death of their Beloved Master. The other apostles saw this condition, too, for had not Lucifer succeeded, through priestcraft, in having his enemy, the Only Begotten of the Father, crucified, only, of course, as Jesus would permit him to do so? Lucifer could not control him, though hard he tried in the temptation of Christ, so he schemed to have him killed, that he might get on with the temporary destruction of his teachings and philosophy of life comprising the plan of salvation. What better time, must he have thought, to restrain the forces of good and the projection of truth.

So Lucifer exerted great force and power and succeeded in establishing a kingdom of darkness and oppression, aptly described by Paul:

Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, (that day meaning the second coming of Christ which some had erroneously put into the minds of the saints at Hessalonica, and which impression the Apostle Paul was now correcting), except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;

Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped (here we see the pattern of the attempted kingdom of evil which Lucifer would set up in opposition to the kingdom of God); so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. [^2]

What could be clearer to indicate that the kingdom of evil would now invade the very sanctuary of the Church, and through the very medium of the Church would falsely project its deceptive program, under the guise of the institution of the Church of God? This usurpation, according to Paul, would come subsequent to the time which he then spoke of but before the second coming of Jesus Christ.

This usurpation was later revealed to Joseph Smith:

. . . for we beheld Satan, . . . who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ— [^3]

Of vital importance is the next declaration of Paul to the Saints in that city, for he reminded them:

And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time (or the reason Lucifer had not already taken over).

For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, (or will prevent, referring without question to the apostles of Jesus Christ, with the Holy Priesthood, who were still upon the earth), until he be taken out of the way (or until they, the apostles, were all expired, or out of the way). [^4] See also note at bottom of next page.

Lucifer's Plan to Frustrate God's Work Comprehensive

Thus, from the beginning of man's mortal probation here upon the earth wicked men have sought, under the influence of the spirit of rebellion and opposition, fostered by Satan or Lucifer as in the pre-existent state by the use of the dominion of force to suppress men's rights and agency, to gain personal and political ascendancy. Unfortunately, this same power of unrighteous dominion has been exercised by the so-called Christian church in the post-apostolic period, evidencing the craftiness of Satan in leading men astray to their doom through such religious channels which, while purporting to teach truth, misled its followers with practices and doctrines of error.

Wherever this unjust force is imposed by institutions, governments, or churches, it can have but one source of motivation, regardless of how it is colored to appear otherwise—that of evil, prompted and directed by the kingdom of evil that exists to wield a wicked influence upon the earth.

Priestcrafts in Our Own Day and Time

We need not confine our search for these evidences to ancient times only, although some reference could be made in passing to the priestcrafts and secret combinations which dissoluted a once white and delightsome people, in ancient America, to that of base savagery. From a people highly cultured in the arts of civilization, blessed with a knowledge of God and of the functioning of the priesthood, they developed to roaming bands of maddened warriors seeking to kill and caring not whether they were killed. The record of the Book of Mormon is a stark testimony of the abuses of the rights of man which Lucifer succeeded in establishing among the Nephites and Lamanites and other peoples of Ancient America.

The Influence of Friedrich Nietzsche—Karl Marx

But let us observe our own day and time for further evidences of the diabolical plan of Lucifer and his kingdom of evil to deceive the whole world. Unfortunately for those of us who live today, two men who were contemporary, lived to place into the hands of corrupt leaders basic philosophies of government and the control of the masses which, on careful study, bear the unmistakable marks of the doctrines which Lucifer introduced to the children of Adam. These two men, Karl Marx and Friedrich Nietzsche, (1818-1883, 1844-1900 approx.) while long since dead, the latter a suicide, their doctrines of evil still continue to exercise unjust powers over the peoples of the earth. From Nietzsche, as his teachings found place in the warped mind of one Adolph Hitler, the world met the effects of Nazism head-on, the result—50 million deaths, the slaughter to gain ascendance—still the teachings that Cain and Lamech believed in; still the functioning of the kingdom of evil as it finds means of expression through corrupt government, controlled and dictated by the few who had been taken possession of by the unembodied servants of Lucifer, or who themselves were evil agents unto the master planner, Satan.

From Karl Marx has come the communistic form of government that menaces our present-day world with the doctrines of force and elimination of the gospel of Jesus Christ with faith in a personal God, instilling a hatred for all men that do not subscribe to the doctrines of Marxism. It is a question as to how long it will be until mankind will feel the full impact of this evil-inspired ideology, which opposes all that is righteous and good. The kingdom of evil continues its efforts in this manner to frustrate the plan of God through governments which deal with principles of force to achieve its ends.

Comments by Communist Leaders on Christianity and Religion

Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the sentiment of a heartless world, as it is the spirit of spiritless conditions. It is the opium of the people. [^5]

We must combat religion—this is the ABC of all materialism, and consequently Marxism. [^6]

We hate Christians and Christianity. Even the best of them must be considered our worst enemies. They preach love of one's neighbor and mercy, which is contrary to our principles. Christian love is an obstacle to the development of the Revolution. Down with love of our neighbor! What we want is hate. . . . Only then can we conquer the universe. [^7]

We said at the beginning . . . Marxism cannot be conceived without atheism. We would add here that atheism without Marxism is incomplete and inconsistent. [^8]

It is impossible to conquer an enemy without having learned to hate him with all the might of one's soul. [^9]

There can be no doubt about the fact that the new state of the USSR is led by the Communist Party, with a program permeated by the spirit of militant atheism. [^10]

We do not believe in eternal morality, and we expose all the fables about morality. [^11]

Every Leninist, every Communist, every class-conscious worker and peasant must be able to explain why a Communist cannot support religion; why Communists fight against religion. [^12]

A young man or woman cannot be a Communist unless he or she is free of religious convictions. [^13]

The struggle against the Gospel and Christian legend must be conducted ruthlessly and with all the means at the disposal of Communism. [^14]

The fight against religion must not be limited nor reduced to abstract ideological preaching. This struggle must be linked up with the concrete, practical class movement; its aim must be to eliminate the social roots of religion. [^15]

It is significant to point out that the influence of the philosophy and teachings of two men, conceived in evil as their concepts were, should exert their influences and power among men upon the earth, contemporary with the time that the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times inspired and directed of God, should be established upon the earth, (1818-1833, 1844-1900.)

Lucifer "Deceiveth the Whole World"

Lucifer has, with deception, invaded other channels, for, as the Apostle John saw,—"he deceiveth the whole world." His plans are carefully worked out in many ways to make it difficult for man to learn truth. Capitalizing on the well-known fact of teaching error, and when not compared with truth, then, the error to those who have blindly accepted it, becomes the truth—Satan has caused erroneous concepts of the philosophy of life itself to be skillfully worked into the religious systems of the world.

A careful study of all religions will reveal the startling fact that the world lacks the fundamental truth, with regard to,

(1) A knowledge about the true and living God!

(2)A knowledge of the true purpose of earth life! and therefore cannot answer the questions, Whence am I? Whom am I? Whither am I going?

The confusion that exists among men concerning [^16] these important phases of our existence indicates that a very great part of mankind upon the earth and the disembodied spirits, in the spirit world, are misled and simply do not know the truth concerning God and the purpose and destiny of man. This is being cunningly kept from them by the false philosophies and teachings among men. It is difficult to make progress with this maze of error and deception that has descended upon man from the antiquities of a false teaching.

Here is a chart study of the

PARALLELS OF PERVERSION

As Instituted by Lucifer to Frustrate God's Plan

GOD-INSPIRED LUCIFER-INFLUENCED

TRUTH PERVERSION OF TRUTH

God the Father—God the Son Trinity of God compounded into

God the Holy Ghost. Persons of Form one Personage of same ethereal

and Substance, substance, and are incorporeal

Individual and Distinct Re:—Nicene Creed.

Re:—Statement of Joseph Smith the Statement of Christian

Prophet churches of World.

D&C Section 130

Holy Priesthood Priestcraft

Power to act in God's name Usurped right to represent God-

Prophets—Apostles False ministers

(A) A true right to represent (A) Ordinances and rituals without

God. authority not binding, mockery

(B) Ordinances administered are to God.

made efficacious. (B) No exaltation—keys and laws

(C) Glorification or Exaltation non-operative

through keys of power be- (C) Continuity of priestcraft

stowed in proper manner. through error and deception.

(D) Continuity of this power (D) Use of unrighteous dominion.

through rightful succession Re:—D&C 121:36-37

and righteousness. PofGP, Moses 5:29-52

Re:—D&C 121:41-43 D&C 1:35

PofGP, Moses 5:9

D&C 112<RD:"NORMAL LEVEL">Holy Sacrament Holy Sacrament

Emblems of Remembrance. Emblems of Transmutation.

Renewal of Covenant. Attended by Ritual.

Re:—D&C 20 Re:—See other Christian churches

Last Supper.

Salvation for the Dead Prayers for the Dead

(A) Christ the mediator. (A) The Virgin Mary.

(B) Vicarious service here. (B) Patron Saints to intercede.

(C) Gospel preached in spirit (C) Purgatory and monetary pen-

world— ance.

Voluntary acceptance.

(D) Exercise of given rights to (D) Other methods of tribute to

seal and bind—Predicated on pagan god and idols appease-

gospel law of gifts. ments to satisfy.

Re:—D&C Sections 124, 127, 128 Re:—Catholic doctrines

D&C Section 132 Pagan customs

(Advocate) D&C Sections 29, 110, 76,

107

PARALLELS OF PERVERSION

TRUTH PERVERSION OF TRUTH

Repentance Confession and Penance

(A) Confession. (A) Frequent confession of same

(B) Forsaking forever. sin.

(C) Release of emotional stress. (B) Repeated violation of God's laws.

(D) Laws of God and Church. (C) Indulgences.

(E) Repeated violation brings (D) Monetary connection with

severance. forgiveness.

Re:—D&C 58. (E) Repentance as a gesture both

pagan and Catholic.

(F) Festive periods followed by

pennance.

Atonement of Christ Other Crucified Saviors

(A) Vicarious sacrifice 1. Chrishna—India 1200 BC.

(B) Immortal Sire } Power 2. Sakia—Hindoo 600 BC.

(C) Virgin Mother 3. Thammuz—Syria 1160 BC.

(D) Gift of Eternal Life 4. Wittoba—Teungonese 552 BC.

for the resurrected body.

(Universal.) 5. Iao—Nepal 622 BC.

(E) The reconciliation of 6. Hesus—Celtic 834 BC.

the soul.

(The gospel.) 7. Thulis—Egypt 1700 BC.

(F) Obedience and conformity to 8. Indra—Tibet 725 BC.

God's will. 9. Gautama—Bhuddist 480 BC.

Re:—D&C 76:20-24 10. Crite—Chaldea 1200 BC.

D&C 76:69 11. Atys—Phrygia 1170 BC.

BofM—Alma 21 12. Mithra—Persia 600 BC.

PofGP—Moses 5:9; 4:2 Re:—Claims of miraculous

D&C 109:4 Many or virgin births—

BofM—Mosiah 4:2-6 others Gautama—Ray of

every starlight—all

nation crucified in one way

and or another for sins of

people. fellow men.

Sacrifice for Sin Human Sacrifice

(A) Voluntary death to fulfil (A) To appease false gods.

atonement. (B) Egypt—Chaldea—Abraham.

(B) To initiate the way. (C) Lamanites.

(D) Mystic rites—Sacrifice of

virgins.

Salvation and Exaltation Heaven and State of Rest

(A) Gospel plan—Resurrection. (A) The body is evil.

(B) Degrees of glory. (B) Two states only.

(C) Many mansions. (C) The Karma—Cosmic Spirit.

(D) Man to be governed by that (D) Forced into submission, part

law he can abide. of all-pervading spirit.

(E) The eternity of the soul. (E) The loss of the body.

(F) Constant endeavor and growth. (F) Re-incarnation to state of

(G) Godhood. endless sameness.

Also Resurrection Re-incarnation

Body and Spirit—Soul. Body evil, to be discarded.

COMMENT

Thus it can be seen in the establishing of the false counter-parts—the perversions, in every crucial phase of God's plan, Lucifer builds up a vast deception, which, as the years extend into centuries, antiquates with time each custom and practice—and as it burns its way into the minds of men, they are deceived. Man himself, lost in the maze of perverted truth, cannot learn the truth. It requires revelation from God—the source of truth—through an appointed prophet to make it known. Such a key of knowledge, or truth, is always given to the priesthood of God, which priesthood is also bestowed under the direction of Christ, for it is after his order. The priesthood, when functioning upon the earth, possesses the key of knowledge, thereby providing man with the channels of truth, which, if adhered to, will break down the perversions of truth with which Lucifer seeks to deceive and confuse the children of God.

Righteous Dominion as Compared with Unrighteous Dominion

The Prophet Joseph Smith, while confined in Liberty Jail received a communication from God which tells of the differences between the principles of righteous dominion and that of unrighteous dominion. These are given here.

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

Unrighteous Dominion

That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to (a) cover our sins, or to (b) gratify our pride, our (c) vain ambition, or to exercise control or (d) dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in (e) any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. [^17]

Summarized

Righteous Dominion

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by (a) persuasion, by (b) long-suffering, by (c) gentleness and meekness, and by (d) love unfeigned;

By (e) kindness, and (f) pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

(g) Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; . . . [^18]

Summarized

Unrighteous dominion in any form, whether exercised by governmental administration, through religious or other social groups, or through institutions of any kind, including labor unions or lodges, which provide a channel of dealing with people, any suppression of human right, or tendency, any application of unjust force upon the individual, without permitting him the right of choice, whereby he may exercise his agency, which is God-given, is a tool of evil, influenced and motivated by the powers of the kingdom of evil of which Lucifer is the leader, that has invaded our dominion of human life.

The Glory of the Law of Agency

The agency of man is not a power to be left dormant or itself to be moved upon solely by exterior forces for good or evil. Man in the true sense of the meaning is "agent unto himself" and, therefore, should assume the prerogative of acting as a result of his own volition for and in behalf of himself. This great principle is explained most effectively in one of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. At one time, in the early days of the Church, some of the members thought that because the Prophet was in frequent contact with the Lord in the necessary bringing forth of many principles and laws in establishing and governing the Church, that their every individual action was to be directed by revelation, both to the Church and for each member. While some of the early revelations were given to individuals, the Lord soon let it be known, that when a principle was revealed, or a condition explained, or a law invoked, that the members of the Church should subscribe to it of their own free will in the exercise of their agency.

Not only this, but they should themselves pursue a volitional course of righteousness, by interpreting what they had already received, in the way of truth, and choosing within themselves to go forward and do good. In this, as the Lord explained, is contained the real efficacy of agency. Let us examine the words of the Lord on this very principle:

For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward.

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepth it with slothfulness, the same is damned. [^19]

Man Reaches Apex of Greatness in Choosing Good over Evil

For man to know good and evil, such as the Gods do, [^20] and then by virtue of choice or agency, choose the good rather than the evil, becomes the crowning achievement of the individual in this mortal existence. As each individual learns and applies this law in this life, the mission and calling of Jesus Christ is vindicated. In this, when pursued in accordance with the plan of the gospel, man shall return to the presence of God, having fulfilled successfully, the purpose of an earth life probation. [^21]

In Choosing Evil, Man Is Leagued with Lucifer as an Evil Agent

In the exercise of agency, where man chooses to follow evil rather than good, such as it was, in varying degrees with those who followed Lucifer in the pre-existence and also as with the sons of Adam who disobeyed God and hearkened unto the teachings of Lucifer, he himself can become an agency of evil, to promote this influence within the perimeter of his existence, be he a servant, a king, or dictator. Cain, the son of Adam, developed evil tendencies, whereas as a master of lies and deceit, and because of his rejection of God, he became a son of perdition. Yet, he will have a resurrected body, and because of such will be above Lucifer. But had Cain repented, he would have escaped this punishment; for unto Cain the Lord said:

If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted. And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door, and Satan desireth to have thee; and except thou shalt hearken unto my commandments, I will deliver thee up, and it shall be unto thee according to his desire. And thou shalt rule over him;

For from this time forth thou shalt be the father of his lies; thou shalt be called Perdition; for thou wast also before the world. [^22]

In explaining further how man himself can become an agent of evil, and in speaking of the going forth of false spirits upon the earth, the Lord made known the following to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

. . . that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men, for some are of men, and others of devils. [^23]

Evil Disembodied Spirits Continue Evil in Their Own Spheres

Such evil men or women when they die and are sent to the state of disembodiment waiting the day of judgment and resurrection, continue their evil practices and tendencies in that place of their confinement in the spirit world. Concerning these, Brigham Young has said:

There are myriads of disembodied evil spirits—those who have long ago laid down their bodies—here and in regions round about, among and around us; and they are trying to make us and our children sick and are trying to destroy us and tempt us to evil. They will try every possible means they are masters of to draw us aside from the path of righteousness. [^24]

These personages who have become evil agents unto themselves in this life join the evil band of Lucifer and his kingdom of evil to oppose God and his plan of righteousness. They, of course, in the final judgment, will continue to be with him as sons and daughters of perdition. Their place of habitation, after all is done with concerning the probation of life, is given in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. After having designated the three kingdoms of glory, (a) celestial (b) terrestrial (c) telestial, as the places where each one can abide such a kingdom of glory, the Lord reveals the place where others, not of these three kingdoms, or glories, will reside:

For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory. [^25]

The Awful Fate of Those of Perdition Not Known

With further reference to the sons and daughters of perdition, who have been embodied in this probation, but who, after having received of the testimony of Jesus by direct manifestation from the Holy Ghost, deny it and openly oppose the will and work of God, these shall dwell in their own kingdom, the exact conditions concerning which we are not given to know, but the Lord has said the following:

Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth, and defy my power—

They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born; (or the purpose of the probation of mortality will not be fulfilled in them.)

For they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity; . . .

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power;

Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath.

For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father, before the worlds were made. . . . (i.e.—All the rest shall find the true benefits of the resurrection, in being placed in one or another of the three glories, as a result of the atoning sacrifice of Christ, but these, the sons of perdition, shall suffer the second death, which means they will forever be shut out of the presence of God in the celestial, Jesus Christ in the terrestial, or the priesthood in the telestial, speaking from an administrative basis).

Wherefore, he saves all except them—they shall go away into everlasting punishment which is endless punishment, which is eternal punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, . . . .

And the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows;

Neither was it revealed, neither is, neither will be revealed unto man except to them who are made partakers thereof; [^26]

A Frightening Realization

The frightening realization of this condition with the power of evil in the world brings this question; what are we to do? Is there a definite way of escape from the deceptions of the kingdom of evil? Obviously there is; there was in the beginning, in the pre-existent world, for let us remember, that while many followed after Lucifer, being deceived by him through their own inclinations of wickedness, there were still two-thirds of the hosts of heaven that did not follow him. These have and will be tabernacled in the flesh in this probation and have the privilege and opportunity given them, each one, to rise above this evil force to work out their own salvation.

Footnotes

Notes: Farrar Could Not Explain. Reference is made to this incident by Farrar in his Life and Work of St. Paul, pp. 348-351, wherein he proclaimed that he was content to say with St. Augustine, "I confess that I am entirely ignorant what the apostle meant."

---
Notas:
[^1] P. of G.P., Moses 5:6.
[^2] Ibid., 5:9.
[^3] Ibid., 5:11.
[^4] Alma 12:24.
[^5] P. of G.P., Moses 5:9; 4:2.
[^6] D&C 109:4; Mosiah 4:2-6.
[^7] John 3:7-8.
[^8] Ibid., 3:10.
[^9] Rev. 12:11.
[^10] Yaroslavsky, Religion in the USSR.
[^11] Lenin.
[^12] E. Yaroslavsky, op, cit.
[^13] Lenin.
[^14] Radio Leningrad, August 27, 1950.
[^15] Lenin. From Mercury (Sept. 1959.)
[^16] See, "Who Am I," by author for a full text study of these vital questions.
[^17] D&C 121:36-37.
[^18] Ibid., 121:41-43.
[^19] Ibid., 58:26-29.
[^20] Gen. 3:22.
[^21] P. of G.P., Abraham 3:25-26.
[^22] P. of G.P., Moses 5:23-24.
[^23] D&C 46:7.
[^24] Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 110.
[^25] D&C 88:22-24.
[^26] Ibid., 76:31-33, 37-39, 44-46.
