Alvin R. Dyer, Meaning of Truth ( 1961)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

A Plan of Redemption Prepared

Before the foundation of the earth was laid, before man was placed upon it, the plan of salvation was studied and known by all. It was in rebellion to this plan that Lucifer sought to aggrandize himself and was cast out of the presence of God; while in obedience to it, the Only Begotten sought to do the will of the Father. The will of the Father provided that man could go through the experience of the "fall" or a spiritual separation from God the Father, known as death, and could yet return back to the presence of God and future realms of growth and expansion.

Unto Adam and Eve, in the early days of their experience upon the earth, subsequent to the events that led to their mortality, there began to be born sons and daughters, and these sons and daughters divided two by two and themselves had other children. The births and expansion of this first family were contemporary with the enticings of Lucifer and his establishment of priestcraft. An angel of the Lord asked Adam and Eve why they offered sacrifices unto the Lord. Their answer was simple, since the Lord had instructed them to do so at the time of the expulsion from the Garden of Eden:

And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. [^1]

The angel then advised them that this was done as a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, and that whatever they would do should be done in the name of the Son. Upon this occasion the principle of repentance was introduced. (Actually this was the beginning of the priesthood, which God bestowed upon Adam anew, which power is a restraining force against evil.)

In that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, and bore record of the Father and the Son saying:

. . . I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. [^2]

With this knowledge conveyed unto him, Adam blessed the name of God and prophesied concerning all the families of the earth. Both he and Eve rejoiced, for said they:

. . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. [^3]

The Saving Principle of Repentance

In speaking of this life and the space granted for man to repent that they might return unto God, Alma, a Book of Mormon prophet, has this to say, which also is in confirmation of the teachings of Amulek:

And we see that death comes upon mankind, yea, the death which has been spoken of by Amulek, which is the temporal death; nevertheless there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection. . . . [^4]

God's Plan to Have His Children Back with Him

The protective plan of salvation is twofold. It involves first, universal salvation, which comes to all mankind regardless of race, color, or creed. The mere fact that men have been born into this life qualifies them for the application of this universal gift which is made possible by the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

The atonement of Christ made possible, by initiation and power, that man could experience the fall and yet live again as a resurrected personage. Thus, the imposition of death cast upon all mankind by the fall of our first parents is atoned for and this unconditionally. It is a gift of God through his Only Begotten Son. This is what is termed universal salvation.

Individual salvation concerns the personal worthiness of the individual as he learns through sacrifice and obedience by his own volition to choose righteousness rather than sin and error. It is in this personal struggle that Lucifer attempts to deceive and dissuade. He can do nothing about the other. But, in personal salvation, as also in universal salvation, there is a way that has been provided by God our Heavenly Father. Our Elder Brother, Jesus Christ, is the author of this plan. [^5]

And through him only, comes personal salvation. [^6]

The gospel plan of personal salvation is found in obedience to certain laws and commandments which have been given by the author of the plan, Jesus Christ, as stated, and as this plan is applied. There is a spiritual power connected with the gospel which is the witness unto all who receive it. This power will ever provide a personal protection in our search for the true endowment of life. This power actually must be more than a physical knowledge. It is a communion of the spirit with our Heavenly Father, with the Holy Ghost testifying unto us by confirmation of obedience by choice to the commandments of God.

The Power of Change Rebirth unto Righteousness

This inward force, and of its need for spiritual rebirth, is taught most convincingly to Nicodemus by the Savior when upon an occasion this much-disturbed Jewish leader, a member of the Sanhedrin, came to the Christ in search of wisdom. The Christ taught him what the motivating power of conviction really was. But, it was too difficult for the learned lawyer to understand for it involved the subtle implications of the Spirit. The Christ said unto him in answer to his question concerning eternal life:

Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: So is everyone that is born of the Spirit. [^7]

Nicodemus was even more confused at this statement, for he was thinking of some sort of physical rebirth, and Christ was speaking of an inward change. Christ then chided him with:

Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things. [^8]

The Power and Necessity of Testimony

Thus it is, by the power of conviction, the power of inward change, a change for the better is made possible through repentance. In repentance we see exhibited the very highest form of agency, for a man to repent truly must, within himself, will it so. It must be voluntary or it is no repentance at all; and when it is voluntary it represents the individual selection of right over wrong. This would not be possible if man did not or could not know the difference. Thus we see the whole plan of life and salvation as it affects the individual, based on the fundamental requirement of agency.

The Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos saw this also, for he saw the overcoming of Lucifer and his kingdom, first by the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ as to universal salvation, and the testimony of the saints as to personal salvation. Ponder this statement of John:

And they overcame him, (meaning Lucifer who had been cast down upon the earth,) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; [^9]

What is testimony? It is the rock of the Church. It is the power that binds man and God together, while he sojourns here in this life. It requires the administration of the Holy Ghost to obtain it and requires conformity to gospel principles to keep it. Every time a man bears his testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ, of Joseph Smith, a true prophet of God, and of the true Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth, there is a miracle taking place. Man need have no fear of evil, if his testimony is alive—if he is not borrowing from a bygone inspiration. If the Holy Ghost is bearing witness to him today, this very minute, then he is in tune with God. This then is how evil is to be overcome.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] P. of G.P., Moses 5:6.
[^2] Ibid., 5:9.
[^3] Ibid., 5:11.
[^4] Alma 12:24.
[^5] P. of G.P., Moses 5:9; 4:2.
[^6] D&C 109:4; Mosiah 4:2-6.
[^7] John 3:7-8.
[^8] Ibid., 3:10.
[^9] Rev. 12:11.
