Neal A. Maxwell, Time to Choose ( 1972)

1

Discipleship in Our Day

"And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them . . . And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound." (D&C 45:26-27.)

"Freedom, free thought and science, will lead (mankind) into such straits and will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries, that some . . . will destroy themselves, others . . . will destroy one another, while the rest, weak and unhappy, will . . . whine . . . 'save us from ourselves!'" (Dostoevsky, The Brothers Karamazov.)

"The individual in our culture is tending increasingly to 'travel light': he encumbers himself with fewer children, moves his place of residence more frequently, commits himself irrevocably to fewer things, often avoids making friendships with those who may become liabilities, and he even seeks subtly to disencumber himself from in-laws and the now vanishing lateral kinship degrees." (Robert S. Lynd, Elements of the American Culture.)

The world of today's disciples—particularly of the young—reflects a great human ambivalence about many things: about authority, about freedom, and about science and technology. The sense of perplexity is not unlike Dostoevsky's words. An avalanche of apocalyptic advice from secular prophets swirls about young and old alike; there is an abundance of earnest Paul Reveres who warn us about what is coming, or is already here.

The disciple—one who has committed himself to Christ—is not insulated from the realities of such an unsettled world, yet he will see it differently:

"We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." (2 Corinthians 4:8-9.)

Part of the reason for the different view is the vantage point of a disciple. He walks the strait and narrow path—even if only by struggling effort—and the perspective from that path is profoundly different.

The paths of Christ and the world have always been divergent. Yet this divergence is more pronounced now than fifty or one hundred years ago when there was some kind of loose Christian consensus about man's identity, immortality, the resurrection, the Lordship of Jesus, and the literalness of his second coming. So far as contemporary American and most western societies are concerned, it is difficult to conceive of any issues around which there could be such profound separation as now exists. The divergence exists not only around central theological issues but also around the role and mission of the home or family, the importance of chastity, the spiritual necessity of work, the solution for poverty, and the nature of human brotherhood. If, for instance, the latter kinship is only biological and transitory, that is a vastly different perspective than seeing life and one's fellows both with the premortal personality prevailing into the present and with postmortal obligations. Those differences are part of the demands of discipleship to which LDS youth, as well as adults, are called.

Some assessment of our strategic situation is required. We have a larger corps—quantitatively and qualitatively—of outstanding, almost elite, young people in the Church than we have ever had in this dispensation. They are committed. They want to serve. They believe the Gospel is true. They strive to apply it, and have already made some difficult life choices consistent with their beliefs. They are vibrant with burgeoning knowledge and increasing commitment.

Not all LDS youth, however, fit in this category. There is also a wide center band of reasonably active and informed young Mormons in the spectrum who are impressive, but who are not yet as thoroughly committed and versed in the Gospel as the "elite." To one side of the spectrum's center are numerous inactive LDS youth who are basically good, but bored. They feel no need for Church activity or prefer the illusory "autonomy" of non-involvement with the Church. At the other end of the spectrum, we have the disenchanted, the dissenters, the rebels and the defectors. Some of the rebels are more distant from us than any star and more determined in their differences than ever. Their rebellion is not simply reflexive—some of it is issue-oriented. Fortunately, some of the latter group are still of active concern to their LDS peers who desire to reach them.

The entire spectrum oscillates to some degree in response to the tides in human affairs. For instance, the wave of anti-establishment feelings (or at least of very low confidence in national institutions and our historical ways of doing society's business) among some of the young in America and the way they act it out (ranging from passivity to hostility) will not wash over the youth of the Church completely; but some will be sprayed by the surf, and this could dampen their ardor. A few youths will experience irritation in their interface with the Church as an institution; the lubricant of love must be used in generous proportions to facilitate that relationship because in an age in which their peers are increasingly suspicious of institutions, LDS youth may be more easily chaffed by institutional requirements and the visible human failings with which most involved adult members have learned to cope.

Paradoxically, there is a developing fundamentalism among many young people in the Church in which they will declare themselves more openly for the Church, taking their lumps for that declaration if necessary. Some of them, while still young, are facing the same question that the disciples of the Master confronted when he questioned whether they also would depart from him. Disappointed with fads and fashion in human institutions and with nonconforming but, alas, "chameleon companions," some LDS youths will assume a posture of rational fundamentalism, which will give them a leap into maturity.

The fad of communalism in which some of the American young are involved (an estimated 500 communes with 10,000 individuals) may soon pass or assume new forms. Communalism expresses—however distortedly—the need to belong and to push the hurly-burly world away. There is also an element of anti-materialism in it—a deliberate apostasy from affluence. Perhaps this has been brought about because these young people have been raised in an affluent society in which they ironically haven't had to worry about "things." Youth can also find rational anti-materialism in the Gospel and, in its finest forms, anti-materialism is very healthy. It will be a necessary antidote to the quiet hedonism of suburbia; many adults are inclined to barbeque hamburgers on their patios and let the world go by, measuring their satisfaction by the things with which they can surround themselves and enjoying their "privacy" by ignoring the problems just outside their sanctuary. One of the strengths of the rising generation, therefore, is that they are much less inclined to measure their fellowmen materialistically, and they are less inclined to believe that individual wealth is essential. That strength will be tested in America, at least, in the next decade when economic realities press in upon youth.

Along with more older people than care to admit it, many of the young hunger for deeper relationships with other people. The need is heightened as today's sense of traditional community diminishes. Modern Mormons are being asked to function in megalopolis, in the hectic, fraying life in urban centers, which can be overwhelming. Yet deep relationships can be found in the kingdom, for the ward and our friendship circles stay human-sized. This legitimate need of youth for "community" needs to be guided and directed—and it can be met in a Gospel context.

In just a few years, approximately thirty percent of the Church membership will live in cities of a million or more, and only twelve percent in towns of ten thousand or less—almost a total inversion of the distribution pattern of Church members just a few decades ago.

Caught up in today's megalopolis, our youth need some special help that might never have been required in the pastoral, rural settings in which some of their parents and many of their grandparents lived out their lives.

Parental authority will be tested and probed more than ever before. Youth, in their jargon, often "psych out" the areas where adults are weakest and attack those areas where adult performance has been poorest. Sometimes they will raise issues out of deep questioning and a search for understanding; other times, they will question not for answer but in order to inflict pain. Withholding visible allegiance to the Church long after it is otherwise ready to flow is often youth's way of depriving parents of the satisfaction parents wish most to have. However, parents need to recognize that such delay has little to do with the validity of the Gospel and everything to do with maturity. Adults need to make allowance for youth's probing and pressing, which is actually a shaky search for faith. Too often, young people experience the sensation one has when he puts his finger in a marshmallow: there is no solid center and when the finger is removed the marshmallow resumes its former shape. The shouts and barbs from those in doubt are sometimes not criticism at all, but frustration at not yet having found the "iron rod"—something solid in a world of too many marshmallow men and too many chameleon causes.

Coping with generational differences about issues where the predecessor generation, allegedly or actually, has not performed well is one of our great challenges. How we love our youth in that kind of context is terribly important. The interplay of imagination and experience, of idealism and aptitude, will constitute a continuing tug-of-war which can either be good sport or bitter fratricide.

Too many adults want to take the young on a tour of their "Maginot Line," to point with pride to the things they have done at much cost or pain. But youth may regard these achievements as irrelevant or ineffective. What youth wants to see is the buoyant commitment that should flow from discipleship, which shows in how we treat people, how we view life, how well we live at peace with nature, and how we appreciate the beauty of the world that God has given us.

Adults would do well to distinguish between our secular accomplishments and our spiritual commitments. The former is subject to question—as a possibly atrophying "arm of flesh"—while the latter is both what we most cherish and what gives us certitude. A simultaneous defense of the American economic system and the reality of modern revelation is unwise even when we believe in both, because the one is changing and managed by frail mortals while the other is unchanging and managed by God.

The new youth subculture that we see in America is baffling. It has its own music, its own jargon, and in a sense, its own folk heroes, and its own "scriptures." It is like a solar flare on the sun, and just as that burst of flame seen through telescopes tells us the earth will subsequently experience magnetic and weather consequences, so life on this planet is going to to be different, because of the emergence of the youth subculture, even though that subculture is already different than it was four years ago. Many of the facades in our society will eventually be torn down, sometimes cruelly, sometimes irrationally, and sometimes for the wrong reasons, in a kind of ritual of hopelessness in which so many of the young in this nation will participate. The religion of nonconformity is dogmatic and intolerant; it venerates freedom but does not emulate the purposeful lifestyle which is a precondition to the maintenance of freedom. Emancipation from adult control is often replaced by peer-run "prisons." David Reisman has observed that the disintegration of adult authority simply intensifies the young's control of each other.

The youth of the Church can become "idealists without illusions," by seeing the world as it is and then testing and implementing the ideals of the Gospel in their lives. Unfortunately, the idealism of the young can slip into cynicism. We must nurture and keep youthful idealism alive to serve as an infusion of adrenalin throughout the Church—something which is very much needed in our time—without making the tragic error of being taken in by irrelevant "relevancies."

We are going to have to do a better job in helping the young to see that there is a connection between the Gospel and the problems of the real world, and that the Gospel does contain the solutions to human problems. The over-used word relevance is still at issue since young people must come to see that the Gospel is something we do, not simply something we talk about. The relevance of the Gospel, in terms of how it can solve the real human problems, needs to be borne home more consistently, more artfully, and more spiritually than has been done in the past.

Youth are extensively involved in education about which they, too, have reforming notions. But students experience frustration because they do not realize that within each of their circles of concern is their much smaller circle of competency, which encompasses the things they can really do something about.

This disparity often develops a feeling of cynicism or futility on the part of the young. A close correlation between the world of work and education could lessen that sense of fruitlessness, and this disjunction between work and learning is part of the underlying malaise that encompasses so much in higher education. It has been observed that young people cannot continually assimilate new information. "Most young people cannot absorb information usefully from books and lectures for more than three or four hours in the twenty-four, and the consolidation of this new knowledge might well occur more effectively if the remaining hours of the working day were spent in practical physical tasks." (London Times, June 2, 1971.) With such a union there could be a fresh appreciation for what is offered in the classroom, following an internship or appropriate apprenticeship. There would be more relevance in terms of what is sought and taught.

Educational uniformity, with all of the efficiency it has produced, tends also to produce a kind of bureaucratic, deadening effect. Too much uniformity can turn young people off and make it difficult for them to respond.

The youthful concern about equal learning opportunities has a scriptural base, too. It was, after all, a Nephite prophet who noted that his "people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning." (3 Nephi 6:12.) General inequality was actually a key factor in the church's being "broken up."

One of the paradoxes youthful disciples face, along with senior saints, is that we are accurately told in the scriptures and by modern prophets that "the time speedily cometh when peace shall be taken from the earth" and that we must be watchful; we must not be naive about the frequency of war.

Yet we are also told by the prophets that we have the job of proclaiming peace, of being peacemakers. The twin vision has to be appreciated by young and old alike and reconciled in our lifestyle, so that we can be wary of promises in a world in which there will be no real "peace in our time" and yet in which we must try to be peacemakers.

LDS youth can, of course, do what some adults in the Church do, and that is to become modern Jonahs, to prophesy disaster for today's Ninevehs and then run up on the hill, build a shelter, and wait for the cataclysm. The Lord chided Jonah, lovingly and yet firmly, for having too great an investment in disaster. We must all work in the Ninevehs of our lives, doing all we can, even though we may have a sense of impending disaster. We should not desert our post nor can we indulge ourselves in the luxury of wanting disaster, for our goal is salvation, not vindication!

Father Lehi is a good model in this regard. He had information that revealed that he might not succeed with two of his sons. Yet, to the end, he loved them, blessed them, exhorted them and served them. That has to be our lifestyle and the lifestyle of the young. Neither can we do as Jonah did in trying to flee to Tarshish in order to avoid self-confrontation. We must proceed to our rendezvous and destination even when filled with foreboding.

If adults will stay at their tasks as long as the Lord keeps them there, it will be easier for the young people of the Church to do the same. We need not be naive about the impending realities in the prophecies, but let us not run to the foothills too soon.

LDS youth need help in understanding that activity in the Church and commitment to the kingdom do not require one to lose his individuality. Youth see us, at times, inferring a kind of sameness among saints, when, in fact, the Gospel really is luxuriant and many splendored in the way it lets us contribute uniquely out of our individuality. Far from suppressing individuality, the Gospel opens new doors to individual development, doors we can open in no other way. How much more interesting was the Peter of Pentecost than the Simon who stood on the shore of Galilee a few years earlier.

Neither does commitment ask us to forgo adventure. The high adventure of commitment in the kingdom is so intense, so demanding, and so unrelenting that, far from producing any kind of boredom, it more often produces a kind of combat fatigue because we are continually in the trenches of human affairs. The true disciple needs renewal more than perpetual reassurance; adventure is often self-renewing, while the ennui of disbelief causes men to hang back.

We must help the young appreciate the adventure of orthodoxy. They must know it is not simply a word which is muttered correctively to align the ambivalent, but which describes the conceptual ecology by which the powerful Gospel principles are woven together in a way which keeps them in check and balance with each other.

The doctrines of Jesus Christ by themselves are dangerous, as G. K. Chesterton observed. Any principle of the Gospel, isolated, spun off, and practiced in solitude, can go wild. The incomplete insight is no insight at all! Seeing the landscape of life illuminated briefly by lightning can be helpful, but we walk through a mortal minefield which requires the full steady light of the Gospel in order to survive. Just as the people of the Church need each other "that all may be edified together," the doctrines of the Church need each other.

Some of the subcultures in America focus on the principle of love without the principles of chastity, discipline, and justice. To focus on one principle of the Gospel and to exclude the others produces an unbalanced life. Vigor is maintained only by constantly exercising all the Gospel teachings. After all, one can make the mistake of consigning himself to "the clean, well-lit prison of one idea." Preserving orthodoxy is a delicate challenge. It is also one of the missions of the Church, because human happiness will be greater with orthodoxy than it will be following satellite belief systems whose outcome is always less than the sum required for full happiness.

Our youth must learn to cope with the imperfections they see around them. But when they hear adults say with sour countenance that the Gospel is joyful, or when the Sunday School lesson is not adequate because the teacher is casual in preparation, and when the sacrament meeting speaker is not prepared, then there is some justification in their questioning whether adult commitment is yet at the level where discipleship concerns itself with quality in service to others.

Every generation has ideas that outrun its experience, and this generation of youth is no exception. Today's young may be unusually deaf to history, for the din of "nowness" has drowned out the moans and sighs of the past. If LDS youth are deaf to history, they will not only miss the secular lessons of the past, but the great lessons of the scriptures as well.

The consequences of ideological overbite mean we have to be especially loving and patient with youth, for then is not the time to desert them or refuse to deal with their ideas. It is a time to love them until the Spirit and experience confirm the validity of the Gospel, as they will. Perhaps we can even help them secure those confirming spiritual experiences during the time when they are intellectually exposed.

We speak reverently, not only about that marvelous theophany in the spring of 1820 in which Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son, but of other dramatic events; revelations indicate that an array of Old Testament personages appeared to Joseph Smith. We ask youth to believe a great deal, especially in a world that doesn't even believe there is anybody "up there" in the clouds, while the disciple speaks knowingly of "clouds of witnesses."

When the imperfections of individuals seem to cast a shadow on the cross, all of us, and especially youth with their special expectations, need to remember that it is precisely because the Church is organized love and administered affection, as well as ordinances and authority, that we are able to succeed where others fail. Of course our love is imperfect, our affection uneven, because the Kingdom is no easy, abstract exercise in the intellectual validation of some short-lived, mortal concept; it is an encounter with human and physical reality from which, ironically, only the truly meek will emerge.

Life isn't any sandpile that we go to each day to start from scratch—we inherit yesterday. Time, unlike some material things, cannot be recycled. In terms of the speed with which time moves, it will close in on youth very fast, and their habits and lifestyle will lock into place quite rigidly in their late teens and twenties. This should be a cause of great concern to each of us—to do as much improving as we can while we are most plastic in terms of our personality and character. We must care about self-improvement, for this is appropriate in a church that teaches that we shall be together a million years from now—and longer! We have a real stake in each other's improvement and an even greater stake centuries from now.

It is important to understand that obedience is not simply a requirement of capricious God who wants us to jump hurdles for the entertainment of a royal court. It is really the pleading of a loving Father for you and me to discover, as quickly as we can, that there are key concepts and principles that will bring happiness in a planned but otherwise cold universe. We simply have to rely on faith and obedience to carry us forward when our personal experience and knowledge are inadequate.

This generation of youth is rightfully concerned about ecology, and we ought to be concerned about the environment we transmit to our successors. But we really cannot have the full spirit of stewardship unless we are also concerned with the stewardship of self, because we inevitably transmit ourselves, too. We are part of the total environment, and if we are not put together spiritually, this can be just as devastating to others as failing to transmit our physical environment in good shape. The unloved individual can be as dangerous as untreated sewage, and the sewage of sin is so devastating downstream in life that it deserves at least equal time in the priorities of planning for man. The consequences of unchastity may be less visible than those of drugs, but can be just as destructive. Both may be rooted in loneliness, or thrill-seeking, and both produce tragic human debris with which we must deal. It is good that we care about our environment, but disciples differ from the world in that they have other concerns as well. We must remember that tomorrow always exists prenatally in today; the fetus of tomorrow is being formed now, and this is true of nations and individuals.

The insensitivity of the people at the time of Noah could give us some interesting insights and parallels to our own time, if we had all the sociological and political data. The insensitivity was gross and widespread, and it probably lasted until the great rain began. Similarly, when the Church expresses concerns through its contemporary prophets, it is trying to guard against our being encrusted with the kind of insensitivity that leads to widespread tragedy. Otherwise, we may be like Louis XVI who, standing on the scaffold, reportedly said, "I have seen all of this coming for ten years. How was it possible that I never wanted to believe it?"

Although the sincerity of the prescriptions the world offers for mankind's problems are impressive, one can still question some of the secular diagnoses. The world's approach sometimes fails to diagnose the problem and, therefore, to provide any real and lasting cure. Wringing one's hands and looking for miracle medicines connotes anguish, but it is not the same as competency. And being concerned does not necessarily produce insights. The perceptions necessary for the ultimate diagnosis of human ills are, in my judgment, contained in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Some secular prescriptions, ironically, would amount to giving mankind an aspirin when surgery is required. What the world often prescribes falls short of real reform simply because the root causes of human misery are not examined.

Sin is a special form of insanity. It reflects a kind of blackout in which we either lack or lose perspective about the consequences of our thoughts, words, and actions. Thus, each of us in small ways (and in gross ways) loses our sense of perspective about the consequences of what we do. Often we wouldn't really hurt people if we knew the ultimate cost and price we all pay. Each of us remembers words we would recall and acts we wouldn't have committed if we had the choice to make again. It is that lack of perspective that causes much sin, although some transgressions are sheer defiance. Nevertheless, part of what the Gospel attempts to do is give us a perspective about each other that will reduce our tendency to hurt ourselves and others.

Some young people belong to peer groups in which there is an almost constant celebration of the senses: tactile, visual, and aural. It is significant that three prophets (Nephi, Paul, and Mormon) in three different cultures and at three different times, each used the same two words to describe a people who had celebrated the senses so much that they had lost their capacity to feel. The words "past feeling" appear in the scriptures to depict people who had become sufficiently encrusted in their excesses that they killed their capacity to feel. The very capacity to feel which they celebrated was lost in the process of celebration. They were in a situation in which increasingly stronger stimulants were needed to feel anything, and finally no dose was large enough to appease their appetites.

The disciple cares about his capacity to feel for people, for beauty, for life, for nature, and this caring imposes a self-discipline upon us to keep that capacity alive and not to become encrusted in experiential excesses. It is very significant that the residue of the people not caught upon into heaven in Enoch's time were described as being "without affection." (Moses 7:33.) Ether said, similarly, "except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place . . . in the mansions of thy Father." (Ether 12:34.) Celestial customs will invariably refuse admission to a disciple devoid of love.

Discipleship in our day, as in all eras, has as a goal not our being different from other men, but our need to be more like God. He does not seek to arbitrarily anoint a chosen few; rather, only a few men choose to walk in his path. A saint is not given power until, among other things, he is full of love towards all men and his motives and thoughts are unceasingly virtuous. It is then that the disciple receives "an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth" and "an everlasting dominion" . . . "without compulsory means." How we use our time on earth, therefore, makes all the difference in the world—and in worlds to come.
