Neal A. Maxwell, Time to Choose ( 1972)

2

The Demands of Discipleship

"And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Nephi 1:15-16.)

"How much larger your life would be if your self could become smaller in it; if you could really look at other men with common curiosity and pleasure. . . . You would begin to be interested in them, because they were not interested in you. You would break out of this tiny and tawdry theatre in which your own little plot is always being played, and you would find yourself under a freer sky, in a street full of splendid strangers." (G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy.)

There is a real risk that members of the Church—particularly the young—may perceive the "strait and narrow way" too narrowly. References to this concept appear many times in the scriptures, essentially as a description of a clearly marked corridor to salvation and exaltation—a path of high adventure for the brave. It is not for the intolerant. It is not an ecclesiastical country club situated on a narrow theological terrace. The straight and narrow way and its environs are "full of splendid strangers" who are waiting to be known, to be loved, to serve and to be served.

The "way" is as wide as infinity in terms of its focus on love and truth. It confines us simply by marking those peril points along the path of life that only a fool would ignore, and fools are never really free; they are not brave—they are ignorant.

The strait and narrow way is a precise path we must pursue under the terms given by Jesus Christ. There can be no apologies for this doctrine, because ". . . this is the way; and there is none other way . . ." (2 Nephi 31:21); no amount of mortal argument can create an alternative for man. When we exercise our individuality by choosing to follow this path, we are refusing to be "conformed to this world." (Romans 12:2.) We will experience the dogmatism of the doubter and misunderstanding from those who feel there is no such exclusive path to salvation, and derision or amusement from those who believe there are no paths leading anywhere after death. We will be scolded statistically by alarmists who will use values involving "feet and inches" to describe the "failures" of the disciples—yet these alarmists hold, inconsistently, that there is no cosmic yardstick by which, ultimately, men and values can be measured.

In the fourteenth chapter of Exodus the Children of Israel chide Moses for taking them to the Red Sea with the Pharaoh's armies at their heels. They did not expect to see a narrow path created for them. But it happened! The real choice the Children of Israel faced at that moment of truth was whether or not they would follow Moses between those immense, terrifying walls of water. They were hardly in a position to argue with their Benefactor or to call for a different exit from Egypt, for impotence cannot dictate terms to Omnipotence; it must have been painfully clear to them that there was "none other way." Man is in the same relationship with Jesus Christ, who has ransomed us and identified the solitary, salvational path.

"Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

The idea of straightness, or exactitude, appears in a number of scriptures as a reflection of universal laws with predictability about what obedience or disobedience to them will produce. Ambiguity is not a helpful thing, and God has repeatedly and clearly advised us what we must do in order to have eternal life and escape from the miseries of sin and the inadequacies of self. We cannot help others towards salvation unless we ourselves are on the straight path. Having found the only passage, we should behave tolerantly and lovingly, and willingly serve as guides for other wanderers. There will be bitter irony if the guides follow the meandering multitudes, for to follow them is really to fail them. Leaving our sector is a special kind of desertion.

Why me? Why us? It is natural to wonder why we are so fortunate as to have found the way, but those kinds of questions are not really productive, because we lack the critical data; besides, what is painfully clear are the sober duties which fall upon us.

Perhaps some who prefer the "broad" way seem to find the values and standards of the Gospel too confining, "too strait for me." Unfortunately, those who want "wiggle room" may not only be avoiding the exactness of the Gospel, but the proximity which real brotherhood bring. Arm's length brotherhood makes few demands other than occasional and therapeutic rhetoric. On the straight and narrow way, we feel the pressures and presence of others. Marching shoulder-to-shoulder means literally feeling the closeness and frailties of others. A young Latter-day Saint living on the east bench of Salt Lake City needs to know that his traveling companions are inspiring young Tongans, Fijians, Latins, Germans, Scots, etc. They, too, have elected to travel the path of high adventure.

The simplicity of the saving messages of Jesus Christ poses a special paradox for many people; "because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished." (1 Nephi 17:41.) We are also warned by Alma not to be slothful because of the easiness of the way. Jacob comments on the human folly of those who were always "looking beyond the mark," seeking "for things that they could not understand," who desired ecclestiastical embroidery on the simple Gospel messages. We must not complicate the elementary content of Christ's clarion call to mankind.

Even after we have found the way to eternal life, our work is not finished.

"And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

"Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:19-20.)

We will stray from the path if we do not press forward and develop our capacity to love all men.

Only when we are, in the words of Nephi, "reconciled unto Christ" can we "walk in the straight path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation." (2 Nephi 33:9.) Unless we become a "man of Christ," we will not be able to travel "in a straight and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery. . . ." (Helaman 3:20.)

Perhaps it is not really the pedestrians on the straight and narrow path who are narrow, but all those onlookers who see Christ and man's strategic situation too narrowly. They shall look upon him and ask, "Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms?" (2 Nephi 24:16.) The same attitude of disbelief and surprise will prevail at the Second Coming. Zechariah indicates that Jesus will be asked about the wounds in his hands, and will refer to them as "those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends."

To risk leaving the straight and narrow way is to risk sliding into sensuality or tumbling into terror—so much so that divine reminders are appropriate.

Joshua prepared the Children of Israel to receive their inheritance and was counseled repeatedly and directly by the Lord:

"Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.

"Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest." (Joshua 1:6-7.)

This kind of steadfastness—swerving neither right nor left—is for our own good. It requires us to forgo false popularity and a sensuous or selfish lifestyle. The Lord's forecast concerning the small volume of traffic on the precise path is not an outcome a loving Savior would want, for "few there be that find it."

Thus, far from the smugness which some wrongly see in the straight and narrow path; far from the Jonahlike pattern of viewing mankind in its misery safely from the hillside; far from disengaging us from service to the multitude—the Gospel of Jesus Christ calls us to help others and hurry home where a divine parent is expecting us. In the words of C. S. Lewis:

"We shall of course be very muddy and tattered children by the time we reach home. But the bathrooms are all ready, the towels put out, and the clean clothes in the airing cupboard." (Letters of C. S. Lewis.)

Being in the world but not of it can be a special challenge. We see the world and the people in it differently because the Gospel is like the lens of a cosmic kaleidoscope which enables us to see pattern, design, beauty, and purpose in our lives. It is this particularized vision which can give us a special sense of proportion about the things in life which matter most. Yet many may be unaware of the full implications of our different outlook. Jesus pointed out that it is better to pluck out an offending, lusting eye than to suffer eternal consequences, because what we do in this sliver of time skews all of eternity.

The Gospel is the counsel of a Super Intelligence as to how we can progress in a cold universe which responds only to law. Man did not get to the moon with random trajectories and with each astronaut "doing his own thing." The price for reaching the moon was obedience to universal law. In many ways, God has paid man the supreme compliment by believing in him enough to change his behavior, slowly but lastingly, rather than holding man in condescending, cosmic contempt; the disciple can do no less.

We will never build the city of man with justice and love—in which there is no hate, malice, or poverty—until we can rule ourselves. Self-control is essential, for without it we are vulnerable to countless outside pressures. Those who quest to build our modern cultures on a scale of quality that would surpass what we now know would do well to remember that our first task is to rule over our own spirit. In Proverbs we are told: "He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without walls."

We possess some absolute truths which, when properly applied, can place us on the path, and we are also told there "is none other way" for salvation. All of this suggests an ecclesiastical exclusivity which seems to embarrass some in the Church, for it implies not only an institutional exclusivity, but a conceptual superiority with regard to salvational things.

Joseph Smith did not go into the grove seeking to become a prophet or to found a church. His assumption in the spring of 1820 was that one of the contending sects was probably right, and it was his task to find out which one he should join. God's reply may seem harsh in its indictment. (Parenthetically, this should remind us that, in a sense, God cares little for cosmetic public relations and everything for human relations!) The vision at Palmyra displayed God's perfection in his attributes of truth and love. He loved us enough to appear, and having appeared, he told the truth! Joseph Smith was equally truthful in reporting the episode. He said he could do nothing else, "For I had seen a vision; I knew it and I knew that God knew it." Many of us know the same basic truths on our own scale of action, and we cannot deny them by our silence. We must share our personal Palmyra with others. We cannot shrink from the fact of the Church's ecclesiastical exclusivity merely because it makes us uncomfortable with nonbelievers. Paul's counsel still applies: "Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them; for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee." (1 Timothy 4:16.) It is not just for our own sake that we should sanctify ourselves, but for the sake of others—so that they may hear us.

The word disciple is related to the concept of discipline. Self-discipline can keep us sensitive to others, whereas hedonism and pleasure-seeking rob us of our capacity to feel and to empathize. If we care about our capacity to feel for people, for beauty, for life, for nature, then we must impose a self-discipline upon ourselves to keep that capacity alive.

Discipleship also has to do with how we cope with disappointment. A good part of youth's concern swirls about the differences that lie between generations. One should not down play the significance of different experiences, but the basic issue is simple: Today's young people have noticed repeatedly that adult generations are imperfect. It is not the discovery that is either surprising or important, but how youth deals with it. One of Jesus' prophets counseled:

"Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been." (Mormon 9:31.)

How beautiful and succinct! Imperfections in predecessors should be expected, but their faults should be seen as an opportunity for improvement—not as damaging evidence.

Predecessors provide a perspective for the present generations, so that we can see our lives as part of a longer span than just our own.

The Prophet Mormon lamented the joyless lot of those who choose to float through the see of life without truth and perspective.

". . . behold, they are . . . as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her. . . ." (Mormon 5:18.)

The disciple must signal anchorless souls drifting on the "gulf of misery and woe," even though the signal may not be seen. It was in this spirit that our ancestors flashed us the experiential distillation of their discipleship, ". . . writing upon plates diligently." They were probably as busy as we, but were "willing to communicate."

Engraving on the plates was difficult. One can imagine the countless ways in which this arduous, meticulous, regular task of writing for an unborn audience could have been easily set aside to give attention to other pressing tasks. Since only a small degree of knowledge could be transmitted, it is sobering to note what they chose to place upon the plates: genealogy, exhortations about chastity, prophecies about Christ, and testimonies about the reality of resurrection and judgment—all simple, unvarnished Gospel truths! Although they were city builders, there were few details about cities or urban-planning, probably because these people who lived in perishable places had their eyes on a continuing city, ". . . a city . . . whose builder and maker is God." (Hebrews 11:10.)

A disciple of Christ will be tolerant, but he will also be constant and consistent. A few years ago, student peer groups practiced a kind of fashionable tolerance that was really one-sided. Some students simply were not tolerating the returned missionary as much as the swinger, and some were much less understanding of the believer than of the agnostic.

It is a useful perception in the quietude of our own ponderings to remember that the straight and narrow is a heroic path to travel. It challenges us to love, to forgive, to be chaste, to render service, and to focus on basic things. It isn't heavily populated because most people prefer the foothills; it is not crowded on the west side of Everest. Many need assistance, and we can help them best by not abandoning our role as guides along the way.

Those who seek to herd humanity through the wide gate are herding humanity in a box canyon, into a conceptual cul-de-sac. The herders are lost themselves and are the blind leading the blind; nevertheless, they are infused with a sense of strange power.

C. S. Lewis wrote very wisely about how bad people don't know anything about temptation because they have never resisted it: they always give in. Jesus had the most significant temptations of any person ever to live on the earth. He can tell us about temptation because he knew how strong it was and how strong it can become—because he resisted it! Lewis also noted that one can't feel how strong the wind is when he lies down, since it's only when he walks against it that he truly knows. In the same sense, we must not expect any messages about the thrills and satisfactions of traveling the straight and narrow from those who don't walk that path at all.

I am firmly persuaded that a disciple cannot prevail, individually, without cultivating his capacity for individual revelation and inspiration, however difficult that may be. The men whom I admire most have made a special point of cultivating their capacity to receive that extra dimension of guidance that comes through the gift of the Holy Ghost. I have had the privilege of some small proximity which made me privy to the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve as they discussed matters with which I was involved. These men drew on a divine data bank for guidance, not fully understanding the implications of the inspired answers they received, but following them obediently because they accepted the divine guidance they sought. That pattern not only takes humility and faith to receive inspiration, but the courage to follow as well. This must be our style, too, if we are to be secure.

The Gospel places heavy stress on the individual and his ultimate challenge to govern himself according to righteous principles. It rests on changing the inner man, not the outward circumstances. That is a slow, unglamorous way to lift the quality of life on this planet, especially since the world usually seeks its goals by imposing new laws or outer controls on man. As Edmund Burke wisely observed years ago, any person who cannot checkreign his own appetites can never really be free, because his passions "forge his fetters." One of the great paradoxes of our time is that we live in a world that seeks to chain itself in order to obtain peace, while resisting the very message that would help change the inner man and bring true tranquillity to mankind.

Surely, what has been learned through the long and painful experience of Alcoholics Anonymous can be transferred to many other human situations: the individual who is ill must first face the fact that he needs help; then he must commit himself to self-governance and abstinence, being ever humble lest he succumb again!

"The trouble is that no one wants to correct himself and everyone meddles at correcting others: thus everything stays as it is." (San Pedro of Alcantara.)

Fortunately, the Gospel can also give us what each of us needs: redemptive medicine, the healing balm of repentance and forgiveness, when we fail and fall short. It is this wise interplay of the prevention of sin and sorrow and redemption from those effects that makes the Gospel of Jesus Christ the only solution for human ills. Thus the formation of positive habits is extremely important for the disciple. As Samuel Johnson observed: "The chains of habit are generally too small to be felt until they are too strong to be broken." But without individual reform, there can be no societal reform.

For the boneyard of history is full of the debris of those who thought they could handle a little power, a little liquor, and a little adultery—of those who thought their particular adultery was somehow noble—of those who loved mankind but not their neighbor.

The Gospel is not anti-institution, but it takes a very realistic view of human institutions and their limitations.

"Governments, like clocks, go from the motion men give them; and as governments are made and move by men, so by them are ruined too. Wherefore governments rather depend on men, than men upon governments. Let men be good, and the government cannot be bad; if it be ill, they will cure it." (William Penn.)

If one sometimes wonders if he is doing enough, and none of us is, it might be wise to remember that a shepherd is able to look for his lost sheep because the other ninety-nine are relatively secure. It is the very fact that some members of the Church have spiritual health that permits them to search for the lost or to help the few who are faltering. That outcome of the Gospel is often overlooked because conspicuous goodness—doing the glamorous things—often overshadows the quiet Christianity that brings into our lives the preventive medicine that gives the relative health which permits us to help others.

Quiet Christianity is a necessary conterpoint to the rumble of the kettle drums and the crash of cymbals of those Christian acts which are, by their very nature, visible and hard to ignore. We also need the behavioral equivalent of the flute and the violin in order to have the kind of symphony that can make a difference in mortality.

While divine justice requires all men to meet the same rigorous standards, the scriptures give us interesting examples, not only of Christ's customizing challenges, but also of Jesus' particularizing the opportunities he gives to his disciples. In the last scenes of the post-resurrection visits to the Western Hemisphere, Jesus "spake unto his disciples, one by one, saying unto them, What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father?"

The trust level was so high that our Resurrected Lord let his disciples ask, and it was given not simply because Jesus knew their thoughts, but because true disciples do not use their fervent faith to ask for anything which is not right. Up to that developmental point, a condition is attached to the petitions of the faithful.

If we can achieve a significant milestone in discipleship, we will find that "he that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh." (D&C 46:30.) In that stage of advanced allegiance, Jesus' disciples prayed not only "without ceasing" but "they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire." (3 Nephi 19:24.)

Some of us seem to "multiply words" even in brief pro-forma prayers; the above insights serve as sobering reminders as to how far that milestone—which marks pure motivation—is down the straight and narrow path; yet what exquisite ecstasy awaits those of us who will press forward and so purify ourselves so that our behavior is based on Christ-like motives.

God's power can only be controlled by the principles of righteousness. No mortal constitutions can safeguard access to secular power as firmly. God only shares his power with those who will not abuse it, nor use it to cover their sins, gratify their pride, ambition, or control other men. The developmental dimensions of discipleship and the rigorous calisthenics essential to continuing Christian commitment insure us against premature access to power. Our Father also shields us from Icarian insights—dazzling sunbursts of celestial sense which we cannot comprehend. Otherwise, like Icarus, we will fly too high and too close to the sun on wings which premature proximity melts, sending us crashing back to earth, never to rise again.

It is a loving Father who balances his eagerness to tell with his children's readiness to know. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye are little children . . . And ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along." (D&C 78:17-18.)

The disciple is also in a position to avoid over-reacting to the fads of his time—intellectually, behaviorally and politically. The disregard of those in Noah's era is a classic example of insensitive preoccupation with things not spiritual. On a much smaller scale, the 1920s in America saw some Americans so busy "doing their own thing" that as a nation we ignored the warning signals which preceded the great depression; we were also unready to face the onrushing realities of Fascism and Communism—whereas today many are blind to the dangers of self-oppression, the chains we put on ourselves, which is the real tyranny of our time. The point is not to suggest that men can be sensitive to all the warning signals swirling about them, but that the disciple, by keeping himself attuned to the Source of information, will know which signals to respond to; inspiration frees him from the limitations of his own experience! In a secular analogy, research has shown that there were many warnings about an impending attack on Pearl Harbor, but the very volume of those indicators virtually insured their being ignored.

Another demand of discipleship is to not only know there must be opposition in all things, but something about the nature of that opposition. So often cleverness seems to be a special attribute of those who are agnostic or flippant about sacred things. Perhaps this is because cause Satanic "salesmen" must try to make up in cleverness what they lack in content, while righteousness often has advocates who are, unintentionally, halting, even clumsy in their advocacy of that which is right. This points up our need to fall in love with the Gospel itself and to make allowance for each other—the faulty human conduits through whom the message comes.

There is no force more compelling than the persuasiveness of the Spirit, and even the cleverness of men dissolves in its presence. Surely discipleship demands that we be as articulate as possible lest the cleverness of mere men keep others from discovering the "pearl of great price," but, most of all, we need divine direction.

The sophist, who is often a carrier of cleverness, is really an intellectual guerrilla, a forlorn man without a country who draws his delight and satisfaction from the process of verbal combat and encounter itself; he does not seek resolution, but disruption. He has no homeland and, therefore, seeks always to fight his battles on the homefront of the believer. The sophist has nothing to defend. He takes no real risks because he believes in nothing. Perhaps, in a strange and twisted way, he wants to create the condition of anomy and drift that he experiences, by using the sword of speciousness to cut other men away from the eternal things that anchor them.

Cleverness in advocating bad causes often lies tauntingly just beyond the believer's capacity for refutation; the dialectic of the disbeliever seldom lends itself to a discussion of spiritual things. As G. K. Chesterton observed:

"If you argue with a madman, it is extremely probable that you will get the worst of it; for in many ways his mind moves all the quicker for not being delayed by the things that will go with good judgment. He is not hampered by a sense of humour or by charity, or by the dumb certainties of experience." (Orthodoxy.)

The disciple will often rely on "the dumb certainties of experience"—including spiritual experience—of which he may be only able to articulate just a fraction.

The sophist's dialectics are an end in themselves, and the tactical flexibility of the faithless lies in their ability to shift the grounds of their argument because there is no theological terrain that they must hold. The believer, of course, must hold his ground even when, by the world's criteria, his position is implausible.

The barbed questions of the faithless do not deserve answers any more than the taunts which Christ himself suffered while on the cross. The inquiring probes of some nonbelievers are not really questions at all, but simply a reconnaissance aimed at discovering any breeches in the defenses of the believer who holds the fortress of faith.

We do not know to what extent Paul stirred his audience when he spoke "in the midst of Mars' Hill," but we do know that the Athenians enjoyed semantical sport. Yet the Spirit blessed Paul on that occasion so that the essential truths were spoken with simplicity and force. Consequently, the few who did not mock the teaching about the resurrection of the dead, and who really wanted answers to their questions, "clave unto" Paul "and believed." Though some Athenians said to Paul, "We will hear thee again"—a desire for "round two"—there was no encore, since the honest in heart had been found, and their counterparts were already awaiting Paul in Corinth.

It is not simply that believers should shrink automatically from encounters, but that the nonbeliever often does not really care to know. He seeks to have his sport, to work up a semantical sweat, grasping what pleasures he can from a life filled with forlornness. Others, who are having their first "wild doubts of doubt," are anxious to put down any challenge to their disbelief.

There are, of course, those who wish they could believe in a life after death and who find no pleasure in forcing their disbelief on believers. William Pepperell Montague said of the conclusion that there is nothing after death: "A man may well believe that this dreadful thing is true. But only the fool will say in his heart that he is glad." (Belief Unbound.)

A loving Father watches his Son's disciples struggle with some of the great truths he gives to us. His prophets warn us, for instance, that affluence is usually no friend of spirituality, and, oh, how we hope that teaching is not true—and, oh, how our teeth chatter when the chills of experience tell us it is true!

Discernment, therefore, about both principles and people is another demand of discipleship in order to know, as the Master did, whether or not the questions of others are rhetorical; whether or not they deserve a full response or silence; and whether or not one should sally forth to do battle.

In speaking of Christ, Paul observed, "But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness." (1 Corinthians 1:23.) Being aware of the background of men to whom we take the message is as important as realizing the implications of the message we bear.

Because some men "are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (D&C 123:12), we must harvest where the wheat is ripe, rather than pursuing unproductive forays.

Being realistic about the different responses to the Gospel will give us a fresh appreciation for Jesus' parable of the sower in which some seeds fell upon "stony places where they had not much earth," and "when the sun was up they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away." (See Matthew 13.)

Jesus gives as much attention to this rootlessness as he does to disciples who are too preoccupied with riches and worldly things. The latter withhold their time and talents from the kingdom not because their agenda is crowded, but because they are simply too unconcerned.

The disciple who is planted in "stony places" finally buckles from the pressure of those who do not share his beliefs or because of the conduct of those who offend him. It is significant that the Savior said such an individual "heareth the word, and anon with joy received it." He experiences exultant feelings for the Gospel and the Church at the beginning of his discipleship—a sharp contrast to what happens as he "withers away."

The true disciple is described as "good ground" and as being "fruitful." One cannot help but wonder if the key to this member's success is that he gives himself so fully in service to the Lord that his beliefs are reinforced simply as a function of how he lives and by repeatedly witnessing the gospel at work in the lives of others. The disciple who has no deepness of earth and has not rooted himself presumably does not bring forth much fruit in others even though his initial belief sprang up quickly and visibly.

A wise comment on the parable of the sower was made by James E. Talmage when he wrote:

"In the parable we are considering, the Teacher depicted the varied grades of spiritual receptivity existing among men, and characterized with incisive brevity each of the specified grades. He neither said nor intimated that the hard-baked soil of the wayside might not be plowed, harrowed, fertilized, and so be rendered productive; nor that the stony impediment to growth might not be broken up and removed, or an increase of good soil be made by actual addition, nor that the thorns could never be uprooted, and their former habitat be rendered fit to support good plants." (Jesus the Christ.)

The "hard-baked" disciple often experiences the harrowing necessary to disrupt the unyielding terrain of his life so he can receive and retain the Gospel seed.

A remarkable parallel to this biblical parable is contained in the words of Alma wherein he calls our attention to the need disciples have to endure "tribulation and persecution" which comes "because of the word"—by virtue of membership in the Church and a belief in its teachings. When some individuals reach the critical point in commitment they are often "offended," and there is, as Jesus observed, a certain inevitability about offenses.

How we develop our early expectations about membership in the Church and how we cope with tribulation, with persecution, with riches and with the cares of this world, are measures as to whether or not we can be characterized as a "man of Christ."

Not only is the simplicity of the Gospel majestic in its significance, but the everlastingness of the Gospel principles is equally important. As disciples, we must be realistic about the longevity of men's ideas. Mortal concepts, particularly in the sciences, have a decreasing lifespan. In fact, obsolescence is not limited to the products of men's hands, but touches the products of their minds as well. For instance, it has been noted that the system of Ptolemy lasted 14,000 years; the Copernican concepts of the universe lasted only three centuries; and some of the concepts of Einstein lasted but a quarter of a century.

Etienne Gilson [^1] concluded that while the progress of science continues at a steady pace, ". . . the fact remains that, by reason of its accelerated progress, modern science is exhibiting an always decreasing stability."

The issue is not the need to slow down the rate of turbulence at the frontier of knowledge nor of fruitlessly trying to contain the knowledge explosion, but rather our need to anchor to basic fundamental truths about man and the universe, which are everlasting.

It has been observed that there is no democracy of facts, since some facts and truths are of significance and others are transitory information at best. Tying oneself to the intellectual fads and fashionable facts of the day is to create an alienation as to perspective about life from which an individual may never recover.

Indeed, the scripture that describes man in the last days as "ever learning but never coming to a knowledge of the truth" reflects man's tendency to learn those things that are not really crucial to the eternities that lie ahead. By being overwhelmed with a deluge of nonsalvational data, man may be prevented from grasping the eternal essentials.

The disciple—particularly youth in the sometimes intense and heady processes of formal education—needs to strike a balance between the Scylla of the enthusiastic, heedless pursuit of knowledge for its own sake and the Charybdis of ascetic disdain and disregard for any secular knowledge, for the latter could rob youth of some of the excitement of living in an age of great discovery. The instability of human knowledge is cause for proceeding with caution in education—but proceed we must!

God is omniscient and loving. That is a truth which will not change, and it can provide an anchor for men to cope more effectively with an unstable world.

Dr. Gregory Zilboorg pointed out that a society which is too absorbed in scientism can develop severe narcissism and an unjustified worship of the human mind. Worshiping even the idol of the intellect inevitably will lead to the fall of that idol simply because our finite reason and experience are not adequate to help us function in an infinite universe.

In contrast, the Gospel provides us with stable, profound parameters within which human problems must be solved. We are not deluged with details, since the "how" of applying these deep and pervasive Gospel principles is the very exercise each of us needs to undertake in the interplay of our intelligence and free agency. If we are serious about being committed, our capacity to discern good causes is yet another demand of discipleship. What better test is there than time management for those who will know the opportunities of eternity, and what better preparation for those to whom the Father may one day give even greater dominion, than to learn—personally and irrevocably—how to lead and how to use power wisely?

Genes and environment by themselves will never provide an adequate explanation for human differences because there is a third factor in the equation of this life: all that occurred before we came here. The Gospel makes it clear that we came to earth trailing traits from our lengthy and extensive experience in the premortal existence. This is no reason for the disciple to be arrogant, but rather for him to be "wise as serpents" in assessing the limitations of human knowledge, because mortals are deprived of data which are essential to the full explanation of human behavior.

We all know individuals who are without hope so far as belief in a literal resurrection is concerned, but who do much good and render much service to their fellowmen. However, a collective sense of hopelessness about a better world to come inevitably affects human behavior and especially the pattern of choices we make as individuals and as nations.

The disciple is, because of his insights, also asked to be capable of enthusiasm—to avoid not only fatalism, but boredom.

"For grown-up people are not strong enough to exult in monotony. But perhaps God is strong enough to exult in monotony. It is possible that God says every morning, 'Do it again' to the sun; and every evening, 'Do it again' to the moon. It may not be automatic necessity that makes all daisies alike; it may be that God makes every daisy separately, but has never got tired of making them. . . . we have sinned and grown old, and our Father is younger than we. The repetition in Nature may not be a mere recurrence; it may be a theatrical encore." (G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy.)

The disciple worships a God whose "course is one eternal round" (D&C 3:2), yet whose perfect love for men underwrites, in ways we can only marvel at, his persistence in his task—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. As quoted by Dr. Gregory Zilboorg in "Scientific Psychopathology and Religious Issues," Journal of Mental Science, Vol. 100 (1954), pp. 402-410.
