Neal A. Maxwell, Time to Choose ( 1972)

3

The Need to Choose

". . . they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land. But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved. . . . " (D&C 45:31-32.)

"Without the Faith, one is free, and that is a pleasant feeling at first. There are no questions of conscience, no constraints, except the constraints of custom, convention and the law, and these are flexible enough for most purposes. It is only later that the terror comes. One is free—but free in chaos, in an unexplained and unexplainable world. One is free in a desert, from which there is no retreat but inward, toward the hollow core of oneself. There is nothing to build on but the small rock of one's own pride, and this is nothing. . . . " (Morris West, The Devil's Advocate.)

There is a special sense of urgency infusing itself into many Church members everywhere that says, quietly, but insistently—this is the time for us to choose! It is not just that God will insist that we choose for our own sake, but that those who depend upon us, or use us as a reference point, need and deserve to know which way we are going. It is no good posing as a lifeguard if one is a non-swimmer. It is no good being a guide if one leaves his post and wanders with the multitude in search of another way, "for there is none other way," especially at a time when there is a sharper and sharper divergence in the way of the world and the straight and narrow way. The disciple must not only stand in "holy places" but on holy issues and "not be moved."

In short, the events of our time and spiritual decay in the world have produced for us the equivalent situation faced by many of the disciples who followed Jesus. They followed him until he began to preach the "hard sayings"—the doctrines that really demand not only belief, but performance; doctrines which would distinguish them from their contemporary society. The Lord wants us to put some distance—behaviorally—between ourselves and the world, not because we love mankind less, but precisely because we do love men. It is for the world's sake that we must sanctify ourselves. When Jesus' followers faced their moment of truth, John records, "From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him," Jesus turned to the remainder and queried them, "Will ye also go away?" (John 6:66-67.)

As we face the peer group pain of pursuing lifestyles that differ increasingly from those of the world, we may come to know better what Jesus meant when he said, "Blessed are ye, when men shall . . . separate you from their company, and shall reproach you. . . ." (Luke 6:22.)

Each of us must not only decide what we think about Christ, but whether or not we are really willing to walk with him, because the costs of discipleship are real and even harsh in some respects. Christ gives us meaningful but uncomfortable choices. We cannot regard him merely as a moral teacher and still accept his fundamental teaching about who he was and the resurrection; we cannot really use his teachings as periodic therapy. The basic choice to be made will frame itself in many individual ways and with many ironies, but at the testing point it will often take the form of this question: Do I have the faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in his modern prophets?

There is no way to have an arm's length relationship with a living God, his living church and his living prophets. If one's answer is affirmative, then we can obtain the divine help needed to serve our fellowmen as did Joseph in Egypt. Joseph lived most of his life in an alien culture which did not share his beliefs, and yet he kept them operative in his life. If Joseph had lost his faith, his chastity, his courage, had not refused to surrender when falsely accused, and had not refused to become bitter—he would have been just one more hungry mouth to feed when famine came. Indeed, the cataclysmic content of the scriptures, instead of causing us to pull away, ought to keep us at our posts as long as we can help to save a single soul.

C. S. Lewis describes our relationship with a living God in a way that can help us appreciate why total involvement in a living church is necessary for spiritual growth to occur:

"Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently, he starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of—throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage: but He is building a palace." (Mere Christianity.)

Accepting the reality of the call to change from being a "decent little cottage" is dependent on our willingness to choose.

The twin trait of choosing is enduring. Course corrections along the straight and narrow require almost constant attention, for while the gift of the Holy Ghost can give us companionship and guidance, we cannot view that gift as if it were an automatic pilot. The Holy Ghost tells us what we should do, but we must still do it.

Thus, "enduring" calls for the same basic skills in the disciple as choosing, the faith and courage to commit. It also adds another requirement: a willingness "to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him. . . ." (Mosiah 3:19.) Enduring is more than just surviving, for ". . . if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high." (D&C 121:8.) Enduring "well" means passing the breaking point without breaking, having cause to be bitter—as men measure cause—without being bitter. Enduring "well" means the disciple in the very trough of his difficulties avoids, as Job wisely did, having "charged God foolishly." The "murmuring" so often mentioned in the Book of Mormon is kindred to the feelings we may sometimes have when we do not really question God's existence but rather his fair play, and we wrongly begin to make demands of him. (Helaman 16:17-20.) Murmuring may have no single cause, but a lack of perspective is suggested: "They did murmur because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them." (1 Nephi 2:12.) A brighter time will come when they that murmured "shall learn doctrine," suggesting that conceptual inadequacy can cause us to murmur and complain.

Suffering is the sweat of salvation.

The straight and narrow is the path of perspiration and is too arduous to be free from adversity. There are many ways in which the disciple can suffer as a Christian, and for righteousness' sake. Practical, perceptive Peter said, "For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take is patiently, this is acceptable with God." (1 Peter 2:20. Italics added.)

Perhaps the lack of divine patience with those who are lukewarm is not as harsh as it seems, for divine love seeks a commitment so God can work with us. But we must decide, even if we only start with a "desire to believe."

Of course, commitment means involvement. It means occasional disappointment in a divine church full of imperfect people. It means getting banged about a bit—but it also means everlasting joy.

Suffering as a result of commitment is something to be expected and not to be sad about. Perhaps it is also necessary for the disciple to know what Paul called ". . . the fellowship of his sufferings . . ." in terms of what Christ underwent for man. Khalil Gibran observed that the cavity carved out of our soul by suffering will also be the receptacle of our joy. In this sense, those who have suffered most, and for the right reasons, will have stretched their capacity for joy and happiness.

Peter says, "If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, . . . but let none of you suffer as a murderer or as a thief. . . ." To "suffer as a Christian" or for "righteousness' sake" is a consequence to be considered as separate and apart from the self-inflicted misery that too often grows out of our failures to be Christian.

We need to make allowance for the role of irony in our individual lives and as a people. For instance, those chosen for service by the Lord would appear to be improbable selections. The same God who had his Only Begotten Son born in a manger and reared in despised Nazareth as the least appreciated but most beneficial individual in human history, also improbably chose Moses, who was not eloquent but "slow of speech, and of a slow tongue," to lead one of the greatest migrations in history. God also chose shepherds and fishermen, sent a mere boy to face Goliath, chose Paul (a persecutor of Christians) as an apostle, and selected an obscure boy to receive the remarkable divine manifestation at Palmyra. This same God has said that he will bring The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints forth out of obscurity as the "only true and living Church upon the face of the earth." Thus God's divine style is different from mortal ways, and God does use the weak things of the world to confound the wise.

Perhaps, too, there is a divine delight in showing what the Gospel can do "for the least of these" as an ironical reminder to men. As Paul observes, the kingdom and church will never be flooded with the prestigious people out of the establishment:

"For you see your calling, brethren, how not many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called." (1 Corinthians 1:26.)

This is not a way of saying others don't count. It is not to caress our ego. It is not because God enjoys tricking the mortal establishment. It is, rather, that life in the world is too compromising, too corrosive for most; marching to a celestial cadence requires the meekness of Moses and the simple trust in God that David had when he went forth "in the name of the Lord of hosts" with a sling and five smooth stones.

Mere mortals who possess power are generally inclined to abuse power. They often find themselves trapped in the ironic consequences of circumstances that they either helped to create or which they could not control. When the hunger for power is accompanied by iniquity in the individual, and when it is unchecked by humility and the access to divine wisdom through prayer, tragedy follows. (Mosiah 29:16, 17, and 21.)

Disciples are not perfect, but, having chosen the Christian course, they are put together with principle rather than being a bundle of appetites. However, we need to keep those special sayings about being "chosen" in our hearts with Mary-like wonderment.

If we had all the data which is available to God, we could see that what looks like irony is simply the smooth flow of events and decisions that are part of a much larger plan. Perhaps, too, the implausible individuals God selects have more staying power; their answer to Christ's question, "Will ye also go away?" is in the negative even when that courageous response is rooted in their faith rather than intellect. The willingness of the committed individual to bend himself to divine purposes provides the plasticity that is needed.

Irony also may be a function of God's plan not to have his kingdom (as it is being developed) spread so visibly that it becomes too prominent a feature on the landscape of human affairs. Better to let his work be a stumbling block for the unready and foolishness for still others, so that the harvest of those who will hear can go on quietly and unheralded.

The same pattern of irony continues in the emphases of the Gospel as it is set off against the methodology and concerns of men. For instance, while Jesus emphasizes a freedom that comes from the truths of the Gospel—a total perspective about man and his circumstances "as they are, as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24)—the world often opts for freedom which is basically an absence of restraints; but such freedom is notably without purpose, and freedom alone is not enough. In the lyrics of one modern ballad, freedom is described as that condition "when you got nothing left to lose." The rules of the spiritual universe are as demanding as those of the physical universe. The immutable laws which must be obeyed for happiness on this spaceship Earth are just as fixed as the physical laws which we also violate at our own peril.

The ironies of the human drama find many unwilling to face their time to choose. They run away from themselves in a screaming search for identity. Some leave home in an unrequited search for love and belonging, while others create violence in search of peace. One can only hope that this plethora of prodigals will soon "spend themselves and come to" and do as the original prodigal did—act with resolution: "I will arise and return."

Jesus' message carries the same invitation to choose which was given to Peter: "Come, follow me." Christ will also bid us in various and equivalent ways to venture as Peter did, "walking on the water."

If we are serious about our discipleship, Jesus will eventually request each of us to do those very things which are most difficult for us to do, just as Jesus challenged the wealthy young man to "sell all that thou hast and give it to the poor." Christ focuses his challenges because he loves us and because real growth is no more random than it is easy.

Unfortunately, many push Christ away and choose forms of religion which are ornamental or cosmetic. It is not, of course, that those who fail to follow Christ valiantly are "bad" people; it is simply that they will never know how good they really are!

One can live and achieve in the world—without being compromised by it—if he has developed a personal relationship with God, and if he follows the teachings of his Son, Jesus Christ.

It seems clear that Jesus intended his disciples to be the "salt," the "leaven," the "light" which could flavor, lift, and guide other people. It is not that his disciples are perfect, but that they are committed to a path that concerns itself with ultimate outcome.

There is a critical mass of basically good people which is essential to the functioning of any society or culture. The exact number cannot be mathematically determined by us, but without this critical mass the world rapidly deteriorates. These good people give more to society than they demand of it. Though imperfect themselves, they furnish not only the goods, but the good will, without which little could be done for others.

Disciples understand in a special way that God places great weight on the importance of the wise use of our experience while we are in mortality. Witness his response to Joseph Smith in the midst of the Prophet's agonies in Liberty Jail in 1839, when our Father through Jesus observed: "That all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.) God is a loving Father who wants us to have the happiness that results from proven righteousness, not from mere innocence. At times, he will not deflect life's harsh learning experiences that may come to each of us, even though he will help us cope with them. God is neither a silent, indifferent monarch in the sky, nor is he an indulgent grandfather figure who will give his children the incomplete therapy of partial truth.

So much of what God would have us avoid, we must avoid by simple faith in his divine "do" or "don't." This leaves us in a position similar to Adam who, when asked the inevitable "Why?" said: "I know not, save the Lord commanded me."

The disciple's expectations about his experience should "make place" for the wisdom of Paul when he observed, ". . . tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope. . . ." This harsh schooling requires man to choose and to commit before he knows—absolutely and surely, ". . . for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

". . . Until one is committed there is hesitancy, the chance to draw back, always ineffectiveness. Concerning all acts of initiative (and creation), there is one elementary truth, the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the moment one definitely commits oneself, then Providence moves too. All sorts of things occur to help one that would never have otherwise occurred." (W. H. Murray Everest, The West Ridge.)

The word "hope" occurs in many places in the scriptures—modern and ancient. The Book of Mormon stresses the need for faith which can produce hope and says this quality "maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works. . . ."

Further, as both Paul and Moroni suggest, there is a link between the qualities of faith, hope, and charity. They stand together as an essential triad of traits for the disciple. "Ye also may have hope . . . if ye will but have faith."

The capacity to love grows out of "faith unfeigned." The Gospel of Jesus Christ offers to man "a more excellent hope," a perspective about life that infuses it with purpose, even with its tragedy. The Gospel reveals a continuity in human affairs and makes it clear that life is not just a brief encounter.

It is easy to see, though lamentable, why increasing numbers of individuals suffer from exquisite, existential despair. Unsupported by the heavenly gift of the Holy Ghost, even the believer would come to despair. Faith and meekness permit the Holy Ghost to bless us, and the "Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth. . . ." (Moroni 8:26.)

Thus, the disciple can be anchored and have hope. He can have the capacity for love. He can be steadfast in an unsteady world, and he will "always [be] abounding in good works."

Disciples must be willing, with their tithes, to help people in less affluent cultures who are not so privileged as they—and to do it gladly, not resentfully, and without condescension.

In the absence of good will and real brotherhood, the tides of nationalism have, in many cases, ruined man's secular efforts aimed at communicating with, or giving effective aid to, peoples of other cultures. The Gospel can help us cross cultures because of a common core commitment, though it will still not necessarily be easy.

The Gospel also permits us to bring knowledge and love together. Gandhi worried about what he called the coldness of some intellectuals—their lack of heart, lack of warmth, and lack of love for the people whom they wanted to help. Commitment to the principle of love would mean, in effect, that our knowledge—as we seek to transmit it and share our insights—is encapsulated in love. This love underlies a kind of brotherhood that can transcend not only nationalism but also the problems of differential economic status. Knowledge is power, but it is a dangerous kind of power without love. We should not seek knowledge to control, to manipulate, or merely to exhibit.

The diverse responsiveness of emerging disciples to the various facets of the Gospel and the Church is a fact of life. President Harold B. Lee has observed that in one respect or another, each of us is somewhat inactive, or less involved, with some dimensions of Gospel life than we should be.

A disciple can be too choosy; in other words, by pursuing our preferences, we miss the chance for symmetrical development. An appropriate analogy for viewing this phenomenon is the piano keyboard. We find ourselves responding and vibrating when our particular keys or causes are struck, but we are somewhat indifferent when other keys on the Gospel keyboard are pressed. Of course, there are certain chords which cause a wide response. The point is that we must become better acquainted with the unfamiliar notes, for they contain new music which can bring harmony and lilt to our lives. The doctrines which excite us least may be the very ones we most need to incorporate into our lives! The need for us to deliberately choose to study and apply less appealing concepts rests on the fact that all the Gospel truths apply with equal force and validity to each of us.

The disciple knows that just as the star that shone over Bethlehem was no random, mutant star but was placed in precise trajectory centuries before Bethlehem, so this is not a random, mutant planet. It is a special place, a planet with a purpose. Isaiah observed that the Lord "formed it to be inhabited." As a result of our experience in choosing and enduring on this sphere, we will form imperishable traits and these traits are the extensions of our choices.

Since the past is not plastic, the disciple must not moodily contemplate the sores and wounds of life. For us to incessantly pick at the soul scabs of the past, rather than let the healing influence of the Gospel operate fully in our lives, reflects on our capacity for self-forgiveness. The disciple must do as Paul: ". . . but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind and reaching forth unto those things which are before."

Contrary to the unbelievers, discipleship increases our individuality. Dr. Arthur Henry King of Brigham Young University made the intriguing comment that sin robs us of our individuality. It is sin that really does homogenize us! It grinds us down to a single plane of appetite and action, which then makes us dependent on outer stimuli and we throb in unison like everybody else. There is a connection between this devastating feature of sin and the scripture which says of Satan, "for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

The disciple is a change agent. Our twin need for liberty versus order makes it difficult for us to make decisions involving change. Will and Ariel Durant have written, "If liberty destroys order, the hunger for order will destroy liberty." Our passion for order is real and understandable, but it can block even desirable change, yet misused liberty can destroy discipleship, too.

In his Prebend Sermons, John Donne observed that "I do not love a man, except I hate his vices, because those vices are the enemies and the destruction of that friend whom I love." Discipleship dares to seek change not only in self, but in others.

The disciple must choose to feast upon the word of God, for the scriptures are his manna. The manna the Israelites received in the wilderness tasted "like wafers made with honey." But elsewhere we read it tasted to every man according to that which he liked best; its flavor depended on the consumer. So, too, the Gospel can give each of us the nourishment and flavor we most need to receive.

The Prophet Joseph Smith described himself as "a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain; and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else. . . . Thus I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty. . . ." The "contact with something else" (usually people) can be painful, but personal progress is often born of such challenges.

In many ways, when one chooses to be a disciple, he is really choosing "to be," for the fullness of the gospel makes for fullness in the individual!
