Neal A. Maxwell, Time to Choose ( 1972)

4

The Relevance of the Message

". . . But behold, for none of these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the straight path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation." (2 Nephi 33:9.)

"The weakness of liberal theology was that it conceded to the world the right to determine Christ's place in the world . . . it accepted the comparatively easy terms of peace that the world dictates." (Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Letter from Prison.)

The scriptures not only witness the truth about Christ and his relevance for mankind, but are, in a sense, like a songbook. There are many melodies that need to be sung and heard, and adult favorites are not necessarily those that attract or are relevant for the young. Only through personal involvement with the scriptures can we find the particular scriptural songs to meet our needs. We cannot depend entirely on group study of the Gospel to fill all our individual requirements. We must—ourselves—open the songbook and hear the music. The answers are there and the music of the Gospel, like its physical counterpart, suffers from too much filtering without high fidelity.

Nephi suggests we need a "steadfastness in Christ," a "perfect brightness of hope," "a love of God and of all men," that we need "to press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ," and "to endure to the end." If we do not "feast" upon the scriptures and utterances of modern prophets on a continuing basis, we will not obtain the customized help needed to guide us along the straight and narrow path.

The scriptures are doors with immense truths behind them, divine insights of major proportions; there is an eternal curriculum—things God would have all men and women upon the face of the earth learn for their happiness.

"Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." (Joseph Smith.)

These eternal laws are not capricious rules, but rather, the insights of a Personality who prevailed, who found how to survive and have a fullness of joy in a seemingly cold universe. The counsels of God represent the religious counterpart to secular education, which helps us learn the lessons which "the tides of history have washed to our feet." In religious education, we must learn the lessons of eternity which are divinely divulged for us and necessary for our survival and happiness.

Where the world's concerns must of necessity be tactical (here and now), the concerns of the Gospel must, in addition, be strategic or eternal. Therefore, a man cannot be truly "learned" if he deliberately seeks to ignore the wisdom—not only of the ages, but of the eternities. If during his mortal journey he drinks only worldly water, he will find that his deepest thirsts are unslaked and inextinguishable. We can obtain "living water" from only one stream.

A little girl in one of C. S. Lewis's stories wants a drink of water but finds the lion Aslan (Christ) between her and the water.

"Are you not thirsty?" said the Lion.

"I'm dying of thirst," said Jill.

"Then drink," said the Lion.

"May I—could I—would you mind going away while I do?" said Jill.

The Lion answered this only by a look and a very low growl. . .

"I daren't come and drink," said Jill.

"Then you will die of thirst," said the Lion.

"Oh dear!" said Jill, coming another step nearer. "I suppose I must go and look for another stream then."

"There is no other stream," said the Lion.

("C. S. Lewis, Speaker and Teacher.")

This is not said to criticize the importance of secular streams of knowledge or the sincere, even feverish efforts of so many good people to find solutions for the immense problems that seem to be closing in on them. It is necessary, however, for us to understand that there is a qualitative difference between the concepts the Gospel of Jesus Christ presents to us and secular concepts, which are helpful, and which may even be true, but which belong to a lower order of significance.

For instance, the divine distillation that God has given us in the scriptures includes a clear statement that the principle of work is eternal. We often ignore the fact that work is a spiritual necessity at the peril of our souls. The scripture which suggests that we must "hearken unto the counsels of God" also includes those which have not been given to us yet.

In a sense, what President Spencer W. Kimball has called "education for eternity" constitutes such a continuing quest. Education is not an indiscriminate quest. The Gospel seeks to help us focus on those facts which have overwhelming importance, not only for this life, but for worlds to come. The relevancy and congruency of the scriptures are shown in many ways.

Our Nephite predecessors could have given us their remarkable formula for cement, but instead, they graphically described the glue of the Gospel which puts our lives together and gives us ingredients for the chemistry of salvation. There are paragraphs about battles and tactics, but also many pages about necessary strategy not only for endless survival, but for spiritual victory on acceptable terms. There are a few remarkable insights into Nephite government, but numerous chapters on the ultimate need for self-government.

The basic message being given to our generation by those who have faced their "time to choose" is quite simple and uniform but by no means dull. We must remember, the repetition of a truth may make it harder to bear, but never makes it false. Often what we ask to be rescued from is not triteness, but the renewed and painful presence of truths in familiar form, reminding us how often we have not responded to them before.

Perhaps ignoring Gospel truths is like ignoring their unrecognized Author: "Lord, when saw we thee . . . ?" Our failure to perceive is fatal.

The compatibility of the Nephite scriptures with the Old and New Testaments on the core issues of Christianity has been well documented. But the conceptual compatibility exists at other levels too; prophets, regardless of their environment, draw on the same living water, so it is little wonder that there are such striking similarities, such congruencies in their prescriptions for improving human behavior.

Some men may justify sin by saying the level of temptation and trial they experience is unavoidable or that it is beyond their ability to cope with it. However, we have the double assurance of Paul writing on one continent and Alma on another, that there is nothing in the mathematics of life to excuse us when we sin:

". . . but God . . . will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." (1 Corinthians 10:13.)

"Pray continually, that ye may not be tempted above that which ye can bear. . . ." (Alma 13:28.)

Prayerful people will not be pressed beyond their limits, although, as C. S. Lewis observed, some of us quit or surrender just before the relief column comes into sight. We can, and often do, of course, dig pits for ourselves and burn the escape ladder; but such irrationality is of our own willful doing—not God's!

Closely allied with these ideas is our ability to carry out God's commandments and his commitment to prepare the way for the fulfillment of our task. Most of us recall the well-known observation of Nephi:

". . . I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.)

But we do not link this insight with Paul's recitation of Old Testament characters such as Abraham who believed and practiced this principle.

"He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform." (Romans 4:20-21.)

The assurance that our capacity to perform can rise to meet the promises and commandments given to us should be quietly contemplated along with the documented realization that we are partners with God in his work.

When ancient Israel was afflicted by fiery serpents, God had Moses make a brass serpent on a pole so that one bitten had only to look upon the brass serpent and he lived. Nephi elaborates on this episode by observing that the only "labor" those bitten had to perform was to look, but "because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished."

Even though the ancients were in real pain and facing certain death by serpents, they were immobilized and would not do what was both obvious and required. Today many go on suffering the real and persistent pains of sin, dying spiritually, without doing what is obvious, required, and simple.

In a radiance of spiritual insight, Mormon observed:

". . . I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear." (Moroni 8:16.)

Mormon sounds very much like his brother John in faraway Jerusalem, who, in the "sunset" of his life, also said:

"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love." (1 John 4:18.)

Only men free of fear and tenderized by the spiritual experiences that flow from living in basic accord with the commandments of Christ can focus so congruently—though continents and centuries apart—on the rewards of the first and second great commandments.

The purity of the Gospel as it is recorded in the Book of Mormon is underscored by three refining words in the Nephi record of Jesus' words on faith:

"And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20. Italics added.)

"And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another." (Mosiah 4:21. Italics added.)

The New Testament reads:

"And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." (Matthew 21:22.)

The Doctrine and Covenants reads:

"Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given to you, that is expedient for you." (D&C 88:64.)

The prayers of the faithful are to be answered, so long as they are unwavering and making a request of God "which is right" and which is expedient for the petitioner. There is, therefore, according to modern revelation, a significant condition to this basic promise of God. But it is a welcome qualification for those of us who know that God wants us to share all that he has, and it may explain why some prayers of the faithful are not answered as might have been expected, as Elder Marion G. Romney has so ably pointed out in his book Look To God and Live.

Not only is there conceptual congruency between the Book of Mormon and the Bible, but there is also congruency with latter-day revelation. In his confrontation with Korihor, Alma testified:

". . . and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." (Alma 30:44.)

Leaving Alma and moving hundreds of years into the future, the 88th section of the Doctrine and Covenants describes our universe and the kingdoms in it, the order in the cosmos, and then the Lord says, speaking of the stars:

"Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand? Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power." (D&C 88:46-47.)

The many concepts of the Book of Mormon are not only relevant and congruent, but they also show God moving "in his majesty and power."

But real religion is more than feeling, for faith "is the moving cause of all action." C. S. Lewis put it well when he had the adversary explain one tactical device he uses to subdue man:

"The more often a man feels without acting, the less he will ever be able to act, and in the long run, the less he will ever be able to feel." (Screwtape Letters.)

Our capacity to feel controls our behavior in many ways, and by inaction when our feelings prompt us to do good, we deaden that capacity to feel. It was Jesus' striking sensitivity to the needs of those about him that made it possible for him to respond in action.

At the other end of the spiritual spectrum are individuals such as Nephi's erring brothers; Nephi noted their increasing insensitivity to things spiritual: "[God] hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words."

When we become too encrusted with error, our spiritual antennae wilt and we slip beyond mortal reach. This can happen to entire civilizations. In his lamentation to his son Moroni, Mormon notes the deterioration of the Nephite society. The symptoms include a wickedness so profound that Mormon's people were described by him as being "past feeling." The Apostle Paul lamented the destructive lasciviousness of Church members in Ephesus because they had developed such insensitivity in their satiation that they were "past feeling." A sexsaturated society cannot really feel the needs of its suffering members because, instead of developing the love that looks outward, it turns man selfishly inward. Imperviousness to the promptings of the still small voice of God will also mean that we have ears but cannot hear, not only the promptings of God, but also the pleas of men.

One of the great services the Church renders—in addition to bringing us pure doctrine and the ordinances of salvation—is the subtle and direct pressure to perform as Christians; the Church keeps us feeling and acting so that conscience and conduct can finally coalesce after being pushed together by exhortation and experience.

Sick societies seldom suffer from just one disease, but rather experience several illnesses simultaneously. Mormon noted other symptoms in his people in addition to being "past feeling." "They have lost their love, one towards another." "[They] are without civilization." "They are without order and without mercy." "They have become strong in their perversion." "They are without principle." Decay had engulfed Mormon's people at several levels, and the relevance of these key symptoms should not escape us today—nor their recurring interrelationship!

At another time in Nephite history the Prophet Jacob denounced unchastity, which was apparently widespread. He was anguished by wives with broken hearts and by the shattered and sobbing children who had lost confidence in their unchaste fathers. Jacob observed how the consequences of unchastity included a condition in which "many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds." (Jacob 2:35.) Clearly there are psychological scars left in the wake of unchastity, however sophisticated the indulgent society may believe itself to be. Unchastity can cause a kind of inner death, resulting in bitterness, emptiness, or in equally disabling and profound passivity. Children also pay a price: witness what might be called the Sayonara syndrome—the resentment of thousands of young Japanese men and women now coming of age who were fathered by American serviceman and were abandoned, cruelly stranded between two cultures. At least the Lieutenant Pinkerton in Puccini's Madame Butterfly had to face the consequence of his abandonment of Cho-Cho San.

Time and time again, the harsh consequences of such a heedless eat, drink, and be merry lifestyle are underscored by the Book of Mormon. It gives us a longitudinal look at real people under the real pressures of life. We must not lose our capacity for love, order, civilization, morality, or to earn the confidence of our children or our capacity to feel.

For instance, all ages have probably had a generation gap, but in our time another dimension has been added: the experience gap. At one time, man's way of life was so stable that the ordinary life experiences of young and old were very similar. Now events that once stretched over decades are compressed into months or even weeks; technology and the knowledge explosion have resulted in a condition in which parents and their children have grown up in very different worlds.

The older generation, having learned some vital things at great pain and sacifice, is understandably anxious to transmit these lessons without having its imperfections obscure the very things it most wants the next generation to hear. The succeeding generations are counseled not to be too quick to condemn, for they have yet to wear the moccasins of responsibility.

In the solemn stillness that he experienced, Moroni had reasons to rage at the failures of his ancestors, but instead he urged us to be glad and give thanks unto God for what we could learn from the past.

So it should be in our homes, our politics, and our classrooms. The generations need not be adversaries. Instead, they can relate as friends who seek to read the past in order to fashion a better future; their evaluations are made as they touch each other intellectually and spiritually, even though they are on different levels of experience. Complete compatibility of experience is unlikely, but a flow of trust between the generations can compensate for it in large measure.

The relevance of the Book of Mormon is also verified by the impact a faithful member can have on the lives of those who are anxious to believe. A powerful king and his household were converted by Aaron and his brethren partly on the strength of Aaron's testimony. The king had been "somewhat troubled in mind" by the earlier words of Ammon, whom he had freed from prison. Aaron pressed the king by saying, "Believest thou that there is a God?" The king answered: "I know that the Amalekites say that there is a God, and I have granted unto them that they should build sanctuaries, that they may assemble themselves together to worship him. And if now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe."

Relying on the faith of others is, hopefully, a temporary trust until one can have the witness of the spirit and know of a surety. The stripling Ammonites clearly drew upon the faith of their mothers, who had taught them so well that the young could say, "We do not doubt our mothers knew it." Two gifts of the spirit are significantly germane to this concept:

"To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world.

"To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful." (D&C 46:13-14.)

Acknowledging a reliance on testimony can help us in our homes, in our classes, and in the world of work. It should sober those of us who "know," for we need to live sufficiently free of hypocrisy that believing on our words is not difficult for others who must rely upon us, in part, for their faith.

Another relevant insight in Nephite scripture that can help us understand the plight of people trying to extricate themselves from the emotional entanglements of sin is found in Mormon: A large number of people appear to be repenting, but only superficially. Mormon describes their regret as "the sorrowing of the damned," because they have found themselves in a psychological no-man's land, shorn of old behavior patterns, but without the renewal that could bring them spiritual support and joy. We often see those who no longer find pleasure in sin, but who cannot sorrow unto full repentance. As Thomas Merton observed, it is not enough just to leave Egypt; one must also travel to the promised land. Too many of us simply leave our "Egypts," thinking that is enough, only to find ourselves in a vast uncharted wilderness.

Jacob urges each of us: "Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you." The principle of imparting of our substance after we know what others specifically need is a concept that ought to be operative in our lives. Nor is our "substance" limited to material goods. As President Harold B. Lee has counseled, others often need fellowshipping more than food, and rapport with another human more than raiment.

The size and compartmentalization of our social environment often result in our touching others without feeling them. It is an environment in which indifference is institutionalized, and we often know others only as functions. It is, therefore, easy for us to fulfill one of Moroni's prophecies when he asked why we let those with obvious needs "pass by you, and notice them not." It is a special challenge for a Mormon in megalopolis to notice his brothers and be familiar with their needs. We so often depersonalize our assistance to others that we might be called "checkbook Christians." We pay our taxes and offerings and unintentionally move away from the personal acts of brotherhood which Jacob and Mormon prescribed.

We should also model after our predecessors who at one stage were described as ". . . distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men" and as "perfectly honest and upright in all things." (Alma 27:27.)

Our capacity to develop empathy which leads to action can be measured, in part, by the lofty standards advanced in the Nephite scriptures, which prescribe a high level of integrity in our interpersonal relations.

Alma, in talking to Church members about the need for spiritual rebirth, inquires, "Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" In a significant amplification of that query, he continues: ". . . If ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?"

Sin, and time not well spent, can erode even bright spiritual experiences unless we are constantly active and growing. Further, since our feelings do ebb and flow, we need to be harvesting the fruits of Gospel living now, without inordinate reliance on past experiences for present joy. Previous satisfaction in Church service—isolated by time or inactivity—is not a sufficient basis for faith to meet today's challenges. Without incoming experiences to reinforce us, our faith is often at the mercy of our moods and circumstances.

Over-reliance on reason alone, without the intelligent interplay of experience and inspiration, can reproduce the same skepticism and arrogance that afflicted the Nephite society just before the birth of Jesus. Even when great signs were given in fulfillment of earlier utterances, the skeptics rationalized by saying, "Some things they may have guessed right, among so many." They reasoned impertinently with regard to the promised coming of Christ, "Why will he not show himself unto us as well as to them who shall be at Jerusalem?" Tying their faith to geography, the Nephite skeptics complained about being asked to believe "in some great and marvelous thing which should come to pass, but not among us, but in a land which is far distant, a land which we know not." (See Helaman 16.)

Many of us make the same kind of demands of God as a condition of our belief, requiring that he pass certain tests and meet certain criteria. But the point is that neither experience nor reason can prepare us for some unique events, such as the birth of Christ or the resurrection. Only the inspiration of God and faith can save us. Craving a sign is actually an inversion of the teacher-pupil relationship: The pupil demands of a Divine Teacher that he perpetually produce proof—when it is the pupil who must produce!

The ironies and stresses of life, Church standards, and evaluations we sometimes receive, all combine to provide ample feedback about our failures and multiply our chances to learn and succeed. When we are guilty of error and are confronted, we will feel pain: "Wherefore, the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center." (1 Nephi 16:2.) How we cope with cuts to the very center of our self-esteem is one way of telling how well we are doing. "He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding." (Proverbs 15:32.)

Especially relevant is the scripture which tells us that those who have planted the seed of the Gospel and worked to grow a tree of testimony often neglect to nourish that trec. We do this at our peril, for "when the heat of the sun cometh and scorcheth it," we may "pluck it up and cast it out," thinking the tree has no value. (Alma 32:38.) Each of us will have our own experiences that will constitute "the heat of the sun," and these experiences will most likely come to us when we least want them or feel least prepared.

We must search the scriptures regularly. Unstudied, unapplied, dormant doctrines will seem to shrink in importance and relevance, for this is the atrophy that precedes indifference or apostasy. According to Alma, keeping the tree of testimony alive requires "faith . . . diligence . . . patience, and long suffering."

King Benjamin makes a promise to those of us who have been blessed with testimonies and "retain in remembrance the greatness of God." He says:

—We will grow in the knowledge of God and of "that which is just and true."

—We will not be inclined to injure others but "to live peaceably and render to every man . . . his due."

—We will care for our children and teach them "to love one another, and to serve one another."

—We will "succor those that stand in need" of succor, including the poor, administering our substance accordingly. (Mosiah 4:11-16.)

What could be more relevant than a Gospel whose consequences are an understanding of God and man, justice and truth, peace, love and service to others, and happy homes? It is little wonder that it is said of Jesus that he "advocateth the cause of the children of men." (Moroni 7:28.) He is the only real and perfect friend mankind has!

A "living" church is a relevant church whose doctrines, revelations, and insights are still growing, it is not closed conceptually. It is growing and replicating itself and has the capacity to reproduce. Our youth will live to see the time when the Gospel will be heard by every man "in his own tongue, and in his own language." (D&C 90:11.) That could not be done unless the Church was living and replicating itself in countless cultures.

A living church is also one in which there is movement and action. Mormonism is not a religion of repose; it is not monastic. The Gospel of Jesus Christ deals with the realities of life, rather than leaning away from them. A living church is permanently linked with the Ultimate Source of power in the universe, lest it grow cold.

Our youth rightly say a lot about love. There are different kinds, but the only love worthy of the name is unconditional love, including, as the scriptures say, "love unfeigned." We are told to level with each other by our youthful generation and that, too, is in the scriptures in numerous places. When this is done in the context of love, then, as Jesus says, we "gain" our brother.

Other relevant scriptures tell us that poverty is not good and that sharp economic despair is a major source of sin in the world. We are warned about the greed of the rich, but we are also warned about the greed of the poor. In terms of current concerns, it is almost as though we have now reached the point Dostoevsky foresaw when he said secular sages would say, "There is no crime. There is no sin. There is only hunger." Indeed there is hunger, but there is also crime, and there is surely sin, and we cannot really treat one effectively and ignore the other two. The scriptures can give us a balanced approach to poverty through the gospel of work. They provide the boundaries within which the solution to poverty is contained.

The Doctrine and Covenants tells us it is the nature and disposition of almost all men to abuse power. One of the fortunate things in the Church is that active members are given sobering experience in receiving and administering power early in life.

The scriptures tell us: "It is not good that the man should be alone" (Genesis 2:18) and that is confirmed by volumes of sociological and behavioral data. The isolated individual is not only miserable himself but often seeks to make others as miserable as he.

The scriptures tell us war exists in the hearts and minds of our countrymen.

The scriptures tell us there are those that would manipulate our appetites, and we should not be naive; there are evil men with "designs," for such do "exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days."

The scriptures tell us the superficial solutions for human problems will not work, because there is "none other way" except to follow the Savior.

The scriptures will give each of us the tactical touches of inspiration and guidance that are so crucial to our happiness. We are told to select "good causes," and that takes judgment and some inspiration. We are told to do things of our own free will and to be "anxiously engaged" in them.

Much is often urged in the name of relevance which is not really the application of fundamental Gospel truths to real life. It is the anxious commentary of those who, in their oscillation, are too eager to bend institutions and principles to meet today's problems. There is such a thing as irrelevant relevance; for example, a tendency to be topical, to read only newspapers rather than books, to deal with tactical truths rather than strategic truths. The unsteady follower who caroms from current cause to current cause will end up being a social cipher and very lonely much of the time.

Insofar as relevance is faddish, some seek to wrap themselves in the fashionable expressions of faith; their concerns seem to be, "What are the saints wearing today?"

Those caught up in faith as a fad often display contempt for those who do not believe in the "doctrine" of the day. John Lukacs, in The Passing of the Modern Age, observed that, in some respects, the opening of windows to the world can result in "letting in neon light rather than sunlight, gasoline fumes rather than fresh air, the din of publicity rather than the harmonies of nature."

It is worth remembering that relevance for ancient Israel, as it made its way to the Promised Land, was achieving spiritual maturation. Mortal man would have chosen a more direct route to the Promised Land rather than wandering in the wilderness, but God had other priorities. Sincere, secular solutions to one problem often create an equally difficult problem in its place. The abuses that required legislation prohibiting child labor were gruesome and real enough, but in responding to that challenge, we now have idleness, some youth who do not know how to work, and many of our youth who cannot find jobs even if they are willing to work.

In short, the case against irrelevant relevance is not a case for unconcern and uninvolvement. It is not that the Gospel is unconcerned, for instance, with slums, but that it is also concerned with correcting the conditions that create slums. Public housing which does not also seek to deal with the nature of the family, with the responsibilities of fatherhood, and with the creation of community and belonging, is not fully relevant.

Artificial relevancy is as much to be avoided by the disciples as is becoming an unconcerned, smug, middleclass Christian. Confirmation about relevancy can come the same way as the confirmation about a principle.

Brigham Young once said:

"You may know whether you are led right or wrong, as well as you know the way home; for every principle God has revealed carries its own convictions of its truth to the human mind, and there is no calling of God to man on earth but what brings with it the evidences of its authenticity." (Journal of Discourses 9:149.)

This important insight is completely consistent with the 32nd chapter of Alma: We come to know the truth of individual Gospel principles when we experiment with them in our lives and our knowledge can become "perfect in that thing."

There can be times, Jesus observed, when the disciple will find that "men shall separate you from their company," and Peter also knew the penetrating power of peers. Later in his life, Peter observed that those who pull themselves away from the world will find that some of their former comrades will turn on them and will "think it strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you." (1 Peter 4:4.)

Once the disciple is on the straight and narrow path, he is counseled to "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ." This means there can be no repose and perhaps precious little time for reflection. His posture on the path is also characterized by "having a perfect brightness of hope." Finally, the disciple is required to "endure to the end." The disciple must not only "love your enemies," which is more than a mere absence of hate, but he must actually pray for those who "despitefully use" him and "do good to them that hate" him. There are many practical ways in which the disciple is tested to see if he is developing a love of "all men," but those two specific tests can be most shattering. Affirmative action in behalf on an "enemy" calls for more than just the release which can come from rhetoric. It calls for concern which leaps over self and looks for those who need, but do not "deserve," love.

The concept of "unfeigned love" appears, significantly, in the writings of Peter, of Paul, and in a revelation given to Joseph Smith. (1 Peter 1:22; 2 Corinthians 6:6, and D&C 121:41.)

Again, one is struck not only with the verbatim expression but with the stress on our need to express unaffected love, to develop love which is free from hypocrisy.

We are rediscovering "moderation" and seeing afresh the importance of "quiet," of "smallness," and of "green." Sound at shock levels, dazzling strobe lights which titillate the senses, if not overwhelm them, are a poor preparation for those who want to see a sunset or watch the grass grow. The cacophony that often attaches to the celebration of sensuous things may prevent us from hearing the little sounds of life so that, figuratively, we are diverted from noise only by a larger noise, such as the rumblings of an atomic bomb. Those who are surfeited with fatalism, whose diet is the equivalent of a constant clash of cymbals, are not only apt to lose their capacity to feel, but may find themselves losing the very sensitiveness to other humans which the lyrics of much modern music celebrate. In the same way, addiction to large headlines and TV bulletins can distract us from reading the relevant scriptures. Insensitivities come in clusters, but the result is the same: we shut out people, nature, and God.

Too often we have condemned the indifferent rich man who passes by the poor and notices them not, but preoccupation with sensual things can cause us to lose our capacity to notice. Sensuality reminds us of our own needs so much of the time that we pass others by and "notice them not." The selfishness of sensuality is at least as intense as the selfishness of riches. When we listen only to the loudest things and act only in response to rage, we will lose our capacity to hear that still small voice.

In this context, it is of more than passing significance that the voice of the Father, as he introduced his Son to those on the American continent, was described on that occasion in these words: "It was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and not withstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that would hear to the center . . . to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn." (3 Nephi 11:3.)

The symphonic strains of scriptural music can give our lives lilt and tone, a way of tuning our lives by reference to a celestial scale. The melodies are the marching music for the traveler on the strait and narrow way!
