Neal A. Maxwell, Time to Choose ( 1972)

5

Sharing the Message

"And it came to pass that when Ammon had said these words, his brother Aaron rebuked him, saying: Ammon, I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away into boasting. But Ammon said unto him . . . Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? . . . Who can say too much of his great power . . .? Behold, I say unto you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel." (Alma 26:10-11, 16.)

". . . We know more than we can tell . . . we know a person's face, and can recognize it among a thousand, indeed among a million. Yet we usually cannot tell how we recognize a face we know. . . . this knowledge cannot be put into words." (Michael Polyani, The Tacit Dimension, Doubleday Anchor, 1967, pp. 4, 6.)

We do "know more than we can tell," but a disciple has an obligation to increase his communication skills in a way that is consistent with the majesty of the message. Since so much of our time is spent communicating—writing, speaking, listening—we naturally assume it is done well. But our performance level is usually poor, and this can reflect a lack of caring about the quality of our communication skills. Paul urges disciples to be "willing to communicate" as an extra responsibility clearly incumbent on those who are committed. There are several relevant scriptures dealing with communication skills or situations.

"Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian." (Acts 26:28.)

Sometimes even the most articulate and inspiring words fail to bring the desired change because of the hearer's refusal to listen, but we need to be ready even if he is not. Ready not only with content, but with conviction. A casual, uncaring testimony may not be an effective witness at all.

At other times feelings and spiritual insights lie just below the level of articulation. They seem beyond the power of tongue to transmit, and a person may lament with Ammon that his tongue cannot transmit things of deep import: "Behold, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel."

In such situations, we witness as best we can, relying on the Spirit to help others understand the things we cannot say. Even though we feel inadequate and may not persuade others, Peter instructs us to "be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness. . . ."

Just as we must be responsive to the Spirit, we also need to be ready with the special reasons why we believe and why we find the Gospel compelling and fulfilling. It is apparent that if we have the Spirit and have thought and prayed things through, others may more readily believe us, even if they do not fully understand—because they know we believe.

"And they rehearsed unto me the words of their mothers, saying: We do not doubt our mothers knew it." (Alma 56:48.)

"To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful." (D&C 46:13-14.)

The effectiveness of our communications can be increased by a lifestyle which reflects and openly acknowledges God's goodness to us, rather than resignation or resentment about the injustices of life. Paul so counseled Philemon: "That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you."

Sometimes we miss the chance to say summational things and communicate with impact, simply because we don't prepare, pray, and ponder. Usually the things of most worth are simply stated, though majestic in concept. The distillation of experience adds to one's ability to communicate. Just as there is a whip sentence in writing, there are words with wallop in verbal communications—words that crash through our defenses, that force us to face reality, or that compress a vital concept into spear-like succinctness. It was not just the courage of Naaman's servants in giving feedback when he expected his cleansing of leprosy to be dramatic and not mundane, but their skill in thrusting the relevant question into the heart of the matter: ". . . if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it?"

Unmet expectations—some we may not even be aware of—can often be a source of discouragement and low performance. Unrealistic expectations can produce unnecessary problems, too, simply because they are not tested against reality.

"It is an evil thing to expect too much either from ourselves or from others. Disappointment in ourselves does not moderate our expectations from others; on the contrary, it raises them. It is as if we wished to be disappointed with our fellow men.

"One does not really love mankind when one expects too much from them." (Eric Hoffer, The Passionate State of Mind.)

Because the Gospel sets lofty goals, we cannot fully agree with Hoffer, but the dynamics of human relations—whether planning an evening's activity or choosing a mate or career—suggest it is wise to share and refine our expectations before disappointments cause the kind of depression in which the devil delights.

In Gracian's Manual we read:

"For however great may be a man's excellencies, they will not suffice to satisfy what was imagined of him, and when men see themselves cheated in their extravagant anticipations, they turn more quickly to disparagement than to praise."

The point is not necessarily to scale down our expectations, but that too much silence and too much unreality about our important dreams can produce unnecessary nightmares.

Much of our life is spent generating expectations, yet many go unrealized. Often it is a matter of miscommunication. When we give an assignment, call an individual to a position of responsibility, or simply work closely with others, we seldom make an effort to share our expectations, to match or refine them. Whether we know it or not, we are almost always in the process of either creating, violating, testing, or fulfilling "expectations."

Jesus spent time creating realistic expectations for his original Twelve in terms of what they could anticipate as they carried the Gospel to the world. He also helped modify and refine their expectations as to status—who would sit on his right hand—emphasizing the primacy of love and service, not the Mosaic Law. "In my father's house are many mansions," said Jesus, and he even chided onlookers about their expectations about John the Baptist: "What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind."

We read in Proverbs that "without counsel, purposes are disappointed." Purposes and expectations are often disappointed simply because we are unaware or do not counsel concerning them.

It may be helpful to use some geometric figures.

If one person's expectations about a task are star-shaped and another individual has a different conception, there can be difficulties unless they take the time to share expectations, match expectations, or to make appropriate adjustments.

Sometimes an individual comes into a situation with unformed expectations, whereas others may have precise plans and expectations about what is going to be done and by whom. In such a circumstance, someone's "purposes" are going to be "disappointed."

By loving and listening and taking time, we can share, match, and refine expectations to produce greater effectiveness and greater satisfaction.

Receiving counsel and instruction concerning expectations is consistent with the disciple's need to deal with reality. "He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding." (Proverbs 15:32.)

All of us must deal with mundane matters much of the time, but there are special opportunities for sharing insights, for risking redundancy in order to focus on truth. There are several scriptural examples which deal with the need for us to be honest as well as loving with each other.

"But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ." (Ephesians 4:15.)

"Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother." (Matthew 18:15.)

The lessons to be learned from the scriptures include the need for each of us to receive feedback and even reproof in order to grow; the need to speak the truth in love, not just to be candid, to shock, or to show power; and the need for us to deal with impasses in human relationships at the working level. Or, as Jesus suggests, to bring about circumstances in which we are willing to take the initiative, to be candid, and to resolve differences in privacy, if possible.

The guidelines for reproof are clear:

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

"That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." (D&C 121:43-44.)

But sharp reproof should come as a matter of inspiration, not to meet an ego need which requires putting someone else in his place!

"So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

"Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him." (2 Corinthians 2:7-8.)

Paul stresses the need to reassure the reproved individual beyond the usual levels of love and affection. Verbal putdowns can create a sense of defeat and despair that only the most resilient can rise above—unless the reassurance comes quickly. When we know we are loved by the reprover, we are more likely to consider the merits of his criticism; otherwise, we may live out our lives inside a fortified view of ourselves, with a network of tripwires alerting us to the probes of friend and foe. The passwords which permit the friend's words to be heard are "love unfeigned," which let him inside with his sometimes precious communiques which we need to hear.

"And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the Lord. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.

"Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here am I.

"And he said, What is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee: I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

"And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good." (1 Samuel 3:15-18.)

Here is a delicate human relationship which could have caused considerable hedging; we see one man leveling with another in the spirit of love, hiding nothing from him in order that full communication can occur along with growth and change. Much of communicating consists of listening, and this includes listening out of love to those who so often go unheard, such as the poor, for, "the poor man's wisdom is despised and his words are not heard." (Ecclesiastes 9:16.)

God has leveled with us about who we are and about the nature of the universe and his plans and requirements for all mankind. Can we do less in our relationships with each other? Gracian wisely observed that the "no" of one man is more esteemed than the "yes" of another; the loving reproof of an inspired colleague is to be more treasured than the superficial praise of a fair-weather friend.

Among the beliefs of our youthful generation are the concern for peace, justice, brotherhood, love, and poverty. There is no real way to achieve these without the application of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in our lives. Most of the changes that the world falsely rejoices in are superficial. Nothing has really changed under the surface. Only when we experience what Alma refers to as that "mighty change" of heart is something happening that will improve a portion of human history. In a sense, the world has the slogans; the Gospel has the solutions, which, if applied, will carry us to "a state of happiness which hath no end."

Passivity and inarticulateness about this "marvelous work and a wonder" can diminish the faith of others, for as Austin Farrer observed:

"Though argument does not create belief, the lack of it destroys belief. What seems to be proved may not be embraced, but what no one shows the ability to defend is quickly abandoned. Rational argument does not create belief, but it nourishes a climate in which belief may flourish." (Light on C. S. Lewis.)

It is the task of this generation of articulate young members of the Church to know the implications of their beliefs so that they can communicate more effectively to others. LDS youth already have many powerful examples in their brief experience that they might review for clues. Several factors in the environment of my own youth are relevant in retrospect.

Experiencing work helped to prepare me for the rigors of responsibility in adult life so that now work is not just a duty, but usually a delight. Experiencing work as a necessity before appreciating it as a life principle could not have occurred without the former. Serving as a water boy on a construction project one summer at about age fourteen helped me to see many things. I especially remember the physical courage of the steel workers who had to erect a 400-foot chimney, and the boss who never asked his men to take any risk he was not willing to take himself, nor to do anything he was not competent to do himself. There were carpenters who seemed to look alike but were widely divergent in their morality, their empathy, and in their treatment of a lowly water boy.

Being trusted by parents, teachers, 4-H Club leaders, and Church leaders reinforced my desire to avoid disappointing these adults who believed in me. This occurred before I really appreciated the importance of not disappointing a Divine Father. Those near us are not perfect, but they can help us to develop, because we care about what they think of us. We do not wish to disappoint them, especially when they have trusted and complimented us by providing meaningful things to do.

Finding my father and mother kneeling together in sincere and agonizing parental prayers made me realize they really believed in God and loved the children over whom they were praying. Tactical errors by such parents are dissolved in the warmth of the realization of their love and in the presence of their faith. The young will often be able to understand that adults really do believe—long before they fully understand what the adults believe in!

It is not only that the Gospel is true—but that it is also important. Some truths matter. They can determine our spiritual life or death! It is the core doctrines of Christianity for which the world is hungry and knows not why.

We can help the young, more than we do, to appreciate the qualitative differences in what a disciple means when he talks about brotherhood. For the secular world, brotherhood is very often simply a function of our common predicament; some maintain we are on a planet that is about to bleed and die and then be enveloped by nothingness. Brotherhood is born out of panic or of necessity in that kind of setting, but there can be no longitudinal love because the brotherhood of necessity is very temporary, after all. The Gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that we are begotten sons and daughters of God in the spirit, that our relationships with other people must be built on the assumption that they will transcend time, and that we have responsibilities to each other that extend beyond the veil of death. The Gospel teaches the necessity for more love, more candor, and more effective service.

If more widows' garbage cans were carried out and more snow was shoveled, etc., our youth could experience the Gospel in action. Then we would not have to tell them as often, for their own experience would confirm the satisfactions of service.

We read in Third Nephi, when the multitude approached Jesus on this continent, how the people "did see," "did feel," "did witness for themselves," "did thrust their hands into his side." The message of the 32nd chapter of Alma is experimentation which produces pure knowledge; we know the Gospel is true both experientially and spiritually.

Experiences will give young people and adults a spiritual reservoir from which they can draw, just as individuals can use supplies of food and clothing they have laid away anticipatorily. Each of us has times in his life when he needs to draw upon his storehouse of spiritual experience. Some storehouses are nearly empty and need replenishing, and others have never had much in them.

Discipleship can stretch our souls in ways we would never dream possible without its demands.

The harsh realities that attach themselves to growth include a willingness to stretch our souls in new adventures which are consistent with the principles and insights of the Gospel. It is a mistake to assume that the disciple must merely be filled with anxiety for mankind or with holy—but abstract—compassion. He must increase his competency as well as his concern.

The disciple must always allow for the fact that this is a divine Church full of imperfect people. Indeed, "the net gathereth of every kind." Some among us have an exclusionary condescension; some display a passivity toward others; others, fortunately, have a quiet certitude which causes them to serve, for service is but one dimension of testimony in action. The Spirit has witnessed to the latter, and they witness to others in order to maintain their integrity, leveling by telling the truth about salvational things "as they are, as they were, and as they are to come."

Joseph, who rendered significant service as a prime minister of Egypt, a remarkable public service at age thirty in an alien culture, kept his principles intact. He was described as "a man in whom the spirit of God is. . . . There is none so discreet and wise as thou art." (Genesis 41:38-39.)

Joseph was prepared in his home, though not all of his childhood was pleasant. His integrity and honesty were remarkable. He was chaste in spite of great temptation. He had the capacity to build trust with others who did not share his religious values. Joseph also had a remarkable resiliency; he refused to become bitter as he encountered personal injustice, and when people did not reciprocate his help or disappointed him. He was large of soul and deeply forgiving. His generosity of spirit with those who had once scorned and envied him—his own brothers—found him weeping in gratitude years later, because he could help them during their great poverty and need. He had forgiven them for the pain he once suffered when they hated him so much that they "could not speak peaceably unto him." (Genesis 37:4.)

Unfortunately, some want involvement without giving of themselves. Some want the wonders of religion without the work. Others want the thrills of theology without the hard doctrines. These things are not possible! The journey after getting on the safe side of the Red Sea of repentance is long, hard, and unglamorous.

Can we afford not to prepare ourselves to serve others? Can we afford not to be articulate? Any passivity and inarticulateness on our part about this "marvelous work and a wonder" can diminish the faith of others.

It is easy to see, though lamentable, why increasing numbers of individuals despair. Unsupported by the heavenly gift of the Holy Ghost, even the believer may come to despair. Faith and meekness permit the Holy Ghost to bless us, and the "Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth. . . ." (Moroni 8:26.)

Thus, the disciple can be anchored, have hope, have the capacity for love, can be steadfast in an unsteady world, and will always abound in good works.

Our best opportunity to develop discipleship is in the home, including the skills needed for communication. The family is the institution about which few people talk, and about which little is done in America. Yet we continue to use compensatory educational, economic, governmental, and political programs to solve or treat problems that are actually rooted in the home. Even though these efforts are sincere and needed, they will never deal fully with the problem of an unloved child who has not learned discipline or work, and the resultant tragedy which so often occurs.

The American home needs help badly. The pressing need for effectiveness in solving human problems will turn our attention, finally, in America, to the home as an institution. It is there that we most often learn about love, trust, self-discipline, and work. Our society rests on "obedience to the unenforceable"—a special kind of self-discipline—and this is best taught in the home. In this sense, our roles as fathers and mothers are more crucial than our public roles, for "no other success can compensate for failure in the home." If we knew the whole truth, the political assassinations of our time would probably reveal that the assassins did not experience love at home or in their marriages and, therefore, acted out their great deprivation in such a tragic way; "one sinner destroyeth much good." (Ecclesiastes 9:18.)

Concentrating on the quality of life in the home is, ultimately, the best way to raise the quality of life in society. A concern for justice in the home—experienced and discussed—could do much to assure concern for the underprivileged. This could result in wise legislation or even make legislation unnecessary. One of the best ways to prepare to replicate love, trust, discipline, and concern is for children to experience them, to know their fruits, and to refuse to be satisfied with a world devoid of such qualities.

Failure in the home clearly calls for compensatory institutions, but the home lies at the headwaters of the stream of civilization, and we must keep it happy and pure. When the home fails or is polluted, we must, of course, support "treatment" efforts downstream. But we must not become so fascinated with the filtering operation that we ignore prevention and desert our post at the headwaters. Building a happy home may not seem to have the immediate human impact of counseling in a juvenile detention center. Both are necessary, but the emphasis should fall on the home if we wish to prevent massive misery.

So far as contemporary American society is concerned, it is difficult to conceive of any issues around which there could be such profound separation as that which now exists around the role and mission of the home and family. The current indifference toward the home includes such inaccurate assertions as:

—The family is no longer vital because it is not an effective economic unit.

—The family is irrelevant because one human being cannot really meet the needs of another. This is especially true in a situation in which authority is vested in imperfect individuals such as parents who often seek to meet their needs, not those of their children.

—The family and marriage are not so crucial because we must get used to ever-changing, temporary relationships with other humans, rather than those which make continuing demands of us, such as the family.

It seems peculiar that advocates of family change become upset with some of us because we are not enthralled with their new labels for old, and unwise, practices. The anti-family proponents have simply relabeled sexual freedom as a chance for meaningful relationships, which is just a cover for fornication or adultery. Rhetoric seems to cover the need for real reform.

It is also odd that a culture which has reached a plague level of alienation would have us cut away the final moorings of the family, and that a society in danger of anarchy should seek to depose one last source of authority—parents. Our society pleads for more outer controls to compensate for our unwillingness to discipline ourselves, yet attacks the home where there is still the best chance to learn self-control.

Where can one better develop his capacity to love while he is being loved unconditionally, than in family life?

The best place for procreation is still the family which can offer a child love and a sense of belonging. We have enough data to tell us about the extra perils of children born out of wedlock, who never know their father.

The home is still one of the best places to learn the importance of work. Gibran said that "work is love made visible," and the interplay of love and work learned in a family can affect one's whole lifestyle and the quality of his subsequent service to mankind.

The best place to struggle with our need to establish a balance between freedom and order is with those who can help us with our failures—the family. It is the best place to acquire beliefs and values with which to cope with life, just as a home is the best place for sanctuary and renewal.

A committed member of the Church must understand the implications of his beliefs with regard to the home. This different commitment will mean, among many things, knowing that—

—the home is so crucial that it will be the source of our greatest failures as well as our greatest joys.

—the home is one place that will press us to practice every major Gospel principle, not just a few as may be the case in some fleeting and temporary relationships.

—the pressures of life in a family will mean we shall be known as we are, that our frailties will be exposed and, hopefully, we shall then correct them.

—the affection and thoughtfulness required in the home is no abstract exercise in love. It is real. It is no mere rhetoric concerning some distant human cause. It is an encounter with raw selfishness, with the need for civility, of taking turns, of being hurt and yet forgiving, of being at the mercy of others' moods and yet understanding why we sometimes inflict pain on each other.

—family life is a constant challenge, not a periodic performance we can render on a stage and run for the privacy of a dressing room to be alone with ourselves. The home gives us a great chance to align our public and private behavior, to reduce the hypocrisy in our lives—to be more congruent with Christ.

Committing oneself to the unglamorous demands of discipleship in family life is not a task for those who wish to run away, nor for those whose human causes are chosen precisely because the cause is distant and makes no real demands of them. It is the same for all the basic teachings of Jesus which constitute that solitary path to salvation.

What the Gospel does is to refuse us the luxury of escaping from each other. It insists that we really see if we have the capacity to grow and to develop; to see if we can do it under the real pressures of life and home, in a family and among friends. Then, perhaps, we can do more elsewhere.

The almost terrifying task of communicating with others in the home or in the world is clearly dependent on the Spirit, for it must bridge a chasm between humans. As Polyani observed in another context about communication, "Our message had left something behind that we could not tell, and its reception must rely on it that the person addressed will discover that which we have not been able to communicate."

In his communicating, the disciple will also know what it is like to experience unreciprocated love or appreciation. The Lord counseled a prophet who was having that experience thus: "If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful." (Ether 12:37.) And Paul noted how he loved more than he was loved.

In the spirit of leveling, we must also learn that while the Lord's teachings are transferable to other individuals and cultures, the testimony which transforms these truths into action is not. Gospel principles are portable, but the passion that underwrites them must be developed in each new host.

Finally, each of us somehow finds time to do the things we really want to do. For, ". . . there is a time for every purpose and for every work," including a time to choose.

For some, choosing will be a first experience; for others, seeking to get back on the straight and narrow, it will involve recommitment. Either way, the demands of discipleship are the same, and the earliest one can ever face his time to choose is now!
