nelson’s Complete Book of

BIBLE MAPS AND CHARTS

This literary structure serves to highlight several important themes. Most prom-inent is the theme of redemption. The Hebrew word for kinsman (goel) appears thir-teen times in Ruth and basically means “one who redeems.” By buying back the land of Naomi, as well as marrying Ruth and fathering a son to keep the family line alive, Boaz acts as a redeemer. This temporal redemption by Boaz points to God’s redeeming work, which reaches its climax in Christ’s giving Himself “that He might redeem us from every lawless deed” (Titus 2:14).

Another key term in the story is “kindness,” meaning covenant loyalty (1:8; 2:20; 3:10). Ruth and Boaz illustrate what covenant righteousness and loyalty are in an era when “everyone did what was right in his own eyes” (Judg. 21:25). This loyalty is expressed in the same terms as those describing God’s covenant relation-ship with His people.

The providence of God is also highlighted. Although the book describes com-mon people in common settings, they were being guided by the mysterious hand of God, who was using their uncommon faith to prepare the way for Israel’s greatest king, David (4:22). The name of God occurs twenty-three times in the eighty-five verses of Ruth. No event in the life of God’s people is insignificant, because He is constantly involved.

ruTh aT a GlanCe

focus ruth’s love demonstrated ruth’s love rewarded

Reference 1:1 –––––––––––– 1:19 –––––––––––––––3:1 –––––––––––––––– 4:1 –––––––––––4:22

Division Ruth’s Decision To Ruth’s Devotion To Ruth’s Request For Ruth’s Reward Of Redemption By

Stay With Naomi Care For Naomi Redemption By Boaz Boaz

Ruth And Naomi

Ruth And Boaz

Topic Death Of Family Ruth Cares For Boaz Cares For Ruth Birth Of Family

Naomi

Location Moab Fields Of Bethlehem Threshing Floor Of Bethlehem

Bethlehem

Time

c. 12 Years

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

when the events of ruth Occurred

udges

b. . c

0 b

Moses . f J . c . d o s . c in b rio Pe beg 1375

150

Saul b.c. c. . b id 00 Dav 10

Ezra 0 50

80

Maps and Charts.indd 80

1/18/10 4:06:23 AM
