Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

Preface

"Death of a loved one is the most severe test that you will ever face, and if you can rise above your griefs and if you will trust in God, then you will be able to surmount any other difficulty with which you may be faced." (Harold B. Lee, Ye Are the Light of the World, Deseret Book, 1974, p. 257.)

Few subjects have created greater interest in recent years than that of death and dying. In the United States in 1970 there were no more than twenty courses taught on this subject at the college and university level; by 1974, just four years later, more than eleven hundred courses were being taught. Though the emphasis has been at the college level, formal death education now exists in junior and senior high school classes; there are even classes on the subject in many preschools and elementary schools.

While there is much that is praiseworthy being taught outside The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on death and dying, with this topic, as with others, we as Latter-day Saints must look within our own teachings to find that which is unique to our own denomination. This is particularly true where the Lord has given revelation. We have much in common with other religious groups, but we also have much that is unique. And since we believe in divine revelation, we have additional insights and truths on this subject. The Prophet Joseph Smith noted, "It is but reasonable to suppose that God would reveal something in reference to the matter . . . for the world is ignorant in reference to their true condition and relation. If we have any claim on our Heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge on this important subject." (History of the Church 6:50.)

The Prophet taught not only that our Heavenly Father would give us knowledge on death and dying, but indicated also that seeking such information should be given high priority. "It is a subject," he said, "we ought to study more than any other. We ought to study it day and night." (Ibid.)

My own experience with death education came a few years ago when I was teaching at the University of Wisconsin-Stout and was asked to teach a course on death and the family. Like most people, I was apprehensive about death, since the subject was seldom discussed as I was growing up. After accepting the assignment to teach the course, however, I found some of my most meaningful teaching experiences in the class during that semester. Though most of my students were either Lutherans or Catholics, I found that we had much in common. The event of death seems to have a disruptive impact on most individuals and families, regardless of religious orientation, social class, or background. Few experiences in life evoke more emotion than the event or subject of death.

If the death of a loved one is the most severe trial that an individual and perhaps a family can undergo in life, then studying and learning about death, its consequences, and how to rise above grief ought to be an integral part of family life studies. Though it is difficult, all must eventually confront the simple reality taught by Paul—"as in Adam all die. . ." (1 Corinthians 15:22). So the beginning of death education came for me as I encountered this fact of life with my students.

As I taught the class, I began to look more closely at my own religious orientation and philosophy about death and dying. My interest was heightened when my mother, Ruth Peterson Barlow, died in December 1976. Up to that time most of my involvement with death had been on the academic and cognitive level. After her death, I gained some valuable insights into the emotional or affective area of losing a loved one through death.

In the fall of 1977, I had the opportunity of going to Brigham Young University to teach courses on marriage and the family. Shortly thereafter I proposed and taught a course titled "Death and the Latter-day Saint Family." While teaching this course I became even more aware that there was a need for a compilation of readings on the subject of death that would be oriented to the Latter-day Saint. While many fine sermons have been delivered and excellent articles written on the subject, no one volume articulates concisely some of the more pertinent LDS thought, doctrines, and philosophy on death and dying. This book is an attempt to partially fill that void.

Latter-day Saint scriptures and writings contain many important truths on death and its consequence. Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants is paramount in discussing life after death, and section 101 teaches: "Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me [Jesus Christ], your joy is full. Therefore, care not for the body, neither for the life of the body; but care for the soul, and for the life of the soul." (Vv. 36-37.) On a similar note the Prophet Joseph cautioned, "When we lose a near and dear friend, upon whom we have set our hearts, it should be a caution unto us not to set our affections too firmly upon others, knowing that they may in like manner be taken from us. Our affections should be placed upon God and His work, more intensely than upon our fellow beings." (HC 4:587.) Comparing mortality to that which awaits us after death, the Prophet stated, "When men are prepared, they are better off to go hence." (HC 6:52.)

But Latter-day Saint theology does not merely teach life after death and ignore mortal realities. We have been taught through revelation that we have social obligations to one another at the time of death. By divine decree the Lord has said, "Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die." (D&C 42:45). And not all Latter-day Saints may be aware that part of our baptismal covenants include assisting others at the time of death. Alma was able to baptize at the waters of Mormon because the candidates were "willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8-9.) Even more specifically, James declared that "pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction." (James 1:27.) Amulek, in the Book of Mormon, put the emphasis on mortality when he stated, "For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." (Alma 34:32.)

Another dimension of the teachings of the Church is that of confronting the reality of our own death. Elizabeth Kubler-Ross noted that many people think of death as something that happens "to thee and thee but not to me," and perhaps some of us are in this category. Alma the younger posed the disquieting question, "Could ye say, if ye were called to die at this time, within yourselves, that ye have been sufficiently humble?" (Alma 5:27.) Perhaps we too are like the rich fool of whom the Savior spoke in his parable: ". . . this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?" (Luke 12:20.) James posed the question "For what is your life?" and then answered: "It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away." (James 4:14.)

At the funeral of Lorenzo D. Barnes, the Prophet Joseph stated: "This has been a warning voice to us all to be sober and diligent and lay aside mirth, vanity and folly, and to be prepared to die tomorrow." (HC 5:363.) And in speaking of the joys of the resurrection, he said, "And may we contemplate these things so? Yes, if we learn how to live and how to die." (HC 5:361.)

Most Latter-day Saints have developed a comprehensive philosophy about life after death, but some of us may not have a concrete philosophy about life before death. What do we desire to do? What do we want to accomplish? If our philosophy about life before death does not include the event of our own death, perhaps our philosophy is not yet complete.

The realities are: (1) Each of us is mortal and will die; (2) death is yet in the future, whether it be tomorrow or in several decades; and (3) we each have time yet in life to make decisions and, as Amulek indicated, to perform our labors. Perhaps each of us could say with Orville E. Kelley, cancer patient and founder of Make Today Count, "I do not look upon each day as another day closer to death, but as another day of life, to be appreciated and enjoyed." On a similar note, it was Henry David Thoreau who went to the woods of Walden "because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear." (Walden, 2.)

In formulating my own ideas about death, I have arrived at this simple philosophy: We study death to more fully appreciate and experience life. Toward this goal this book of readings is dedicated.

There are many persons who should be acknowledged for assisting with the publication of this book of readings:

My students at both the University of Wisconsin-Stout and Brigham Young University, who have convinced me that the study of death can, indeed, enhance life.

Denise Skinner, a colleague at the University of Wisconsin-Stout, who assisted in my initial endeavors to teach about death.

Dr. J. Joel Moss, chairman of the Department of Child Development and Family Relationships, Brigham Young University, who gave encouragement and support for the project.

Verlene Haws and the CDFR secretarial staff, who assisted in typing and editing the manuscript.

Craig Smith and Gregory McKinnon, graduate students at Brigham Young University, who assisted me.

Lowell M. Durham, Jr., Eleanor Knowles, and Ralph Reynolds of Deseret Book.

My wife, Susan, and our children, who were patient while Dad worked on the book.

And finally, the numerous authors, many of whom are General Authorities, who have previously given much thought and attention to writing and speaking about death and dying.
