Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

From the Valley of Despair to the Mountain Peaks of Hope

President Harold B. Lee [^1]

This is to me a most significant occasion* and a most difficult assignment about which I have prayed most earnestly that I might have the proper spirit and inspiration. The purpose of this service is not to glorify war, but, from the Lord's own declaration, to set forth clearly the position of the Church with regard to war. We do not wish to enter into a controversy as to the rightness or wrongness of war, but to set at rest the torments of those who have loved ones engaged in the ugly conflicts of war. We are not here to open old wounds in hearts that have been torn with the devastation which comes with the sense of loneliness because of the loss of loved ones.

We are here to help lift the eyes of those who mourn from the valley of despair to the light upon the mountain peaks of hope, to endeavor to answer questions about war, to bring peace to troubled souls, not as the world giveth, but only that which comes from the Prince of Peace. We are here to lift all of us out of the shadows into life and light.

In our generation the true Christian's position on war is clearly set forth by a declaration in which the Lord says, "Therefore, renounce war and proclaim peace. . . ." (D&C 98:16.)

What is the position of the Church with respect to war? A declaration of the First Presidency given during World War II is still applicable in our time. The statement said: ". . . the Church is and must be against war. The Church itself cannot wage war unless and until the Lord shall issue new commands. It cannot regard war as a righteous means of settling international disputes; these should and could be settled—the nations agreeing—by peaceful negotiations and adjustments."

There is a scripture that has direct bearing here:

"And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them.

"And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me.

"Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

"And as pertaining to the law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." (D&C 98:4-7.)

Note particularly that the revelation is directed to members of the Church. Therefore, it is applicable to persons of all nations, not only those in America.

There are many who are troubled and their souls harrowed by the haunting question of the position of the soldier who in combat kills the enemy. Again, the First Presidency has commented: "When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to those principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, hearkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill, beyond the principles to be mentioned shortly: for it would be a cruel God that would punish his children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom he had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist."

God is at the helm.

I will paraphrase the next statement from the message of the First Presidency in order to make these words more applicable today. The whole world seems presently to be in commotion. As the Lord foretold, we are in a time when men's hearts fail them. There are many persons who are engaged in wars who are devout Christians. They are innocent instrumentalities—war instrumentalities, for the most part—their warring sovereignties. On each side, people believe that they are fighting for a just cause, for defense of home and country and freedom. On each side they pray to the same God, in the same name, for victory. Both sides cannot be wholly right; perhaps neither is without wrong. God will work out in his own due time and in his own sovereign way the justice and right of the conflict. But he will not hold the innocent instrumentalities of the war—our brethren in arms—responsible for the conflict.

Another question often asked is, Why was not my son or brother or husband or fiance protected on the fields of battle as were others who testify that they were miraculously spared? People who have lost their loved ones are ofttimes troubled by faith-promoting incidents of those who have been miraculously spared. They may say, "Why did it have to happen to my boy (or my husband or my brother or my fiance)?"

While this question may never be fully answered in this life, we are given some illuminating observations from sacred writings. Eternal law does apply to war and those who engage in it. This law was declared by the Master Himself when Peter struck off the ear of Malchus, who was a servant of the Jewish high priest. Jesus reproved Peter, saying, "Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword." (Matthew 26:52.)

In other words, those who are the perpetrators of war shall perish by the destructive forces that they have unloosed.

The sin, as Moroni of old said, is upon those who sit in their places of power and "in a state of thoughtless stupor" (Alma 60:7), in a frenzy of hate; who lust for unrighteous power and dominion over their fellowmen, and who have put into motion eternal forces that they do not comprehend or cannot control. In his own due time God will pass sentence upon such leaders.

Therefore, let us endeavor to banish all bitterness from our hearts and to rest judgment with God, as did the apostle Paul when he wrote, " . . . Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." (Romans 12:19.)

There is another question that is often asked: Why did he or she have to die? What is the purpose of life if it is to be so ruthlessly destroyed?

To the prophet Moses, the Lord answered this question in one sentence: "For behold, this is my work and my glory . . . to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Immortality is a free gift to all mankind, but eternal life must be won by deeds done in the flesh.

Recently I received a letter from parents in California whose son had written home just before last Christmas and then shortly thereafter his life was taken in the war in Vietnam. This is part of what he wrote: "War is an ugly thing, a vicious thing. It makes men do things they would not normally do. It breaks up families, causes immorality, cheating, and much hatred. It is not the glorious John Wayne type thing you see in the movies. It is going a month without a shower and a change of clothing. It is fear creeping up your spine when you hear a mortar tube in the jungle. It is not being able to get close enough to the ground when coming under enemy fire; hearing your buddy cry out because of being ripped with a hot piece of shrapnel. You men be proud of your American citizenship, because many brave and valiant men are here preserving your freedom. [This letter was written to his priesthood quorum back home.] God has given you the gift of a free nation, and it is the duty of each of you to help in whatever way you can to preserve it. America is the protector of our church, which is dearer to me than life itself." And then this young man said this very significant thing: "I realize now that I have already received the greatest gift of all, and that is the opportunity to gain exaltation and eternal life. If you have this gift, nothing else really matters."

It is that hope and that faith that has sustained our Latter-day Saints in the military, both the living and the dead. This hope is declared in the scriptures: ". . . therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead." (Alma 12:24.)

President Joseph F. Smith made an enlightening comment on this subject. He said, "Many things occur in the world in which it seems very difficult for most of us to find a solid reason for the acknowledgment of the hand of the Lord. I have come to the belief that the only reason I have been able to discover by which we should acknowledge the hand of God in some occurrences is the fact that the thing which has occurred has been permitted of the Lord." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 56.) It was not the will of the Lord, but it occurred by permission of the Lord.

George Washington is quoted as having said at one time, "This liberty will look easy by and by when nobody has to die to get it."

No doubt many of you fathers have said in your hearts, as did King David when the sad news of his son Absalom's death was brought to him, "O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!" (2 Samuel 18:33.)

And you mothers may have reacted as did that sainted mother of the young Royal Air Force pilot who was lost in an ill-fated flight over the North Sea. Here are the words of Sister Zina C. Brown when her young son Hugh C. was killed. This lovely wife of Elder Hugh B. Brown, our beloved associate, wrote this perhaps as she remembered the words of the Master in Gethsemane:

Forgive the clouding doubt that one instant hid Thy face from mine; With my face toward the light I shall walk by faith until my summons come. Dear Father, through Thy Son I pray, and praise Thy holy name, And, with full heart, made glad by Thy redeeming love, I humbly say, "Thy Will Be Done."

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable," said the Apostle Paul. (1 Corinthians 15:19.) If we fail to understand this great truth, we will be miserable in time of need, and then sometimes our faith may be challenged. But if we have a faith that looks beyond the grave and trusts in divine Providence to bring all things in their proper perspective in due time, then we have hope, and our fears are calmed. Life does not end with mortal death. Through temple ordinances which bind on earth and in heaven, every promised blessing predicated upon faithfulness will be realized.

One of our friends said to me recently, "I can't make my wife believe that the Lord always answers prayers; even when He says 'no,' He's answered our prayers."

"Let not your heart be troubled" were the first of the parting words of the Master when he said, "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.

"And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:1-3.)

And then he said: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

Having gone through some similar experiences in losing loved ones in death, I speak from personal experience when I say to you who mourn, do not try to live too many days ahead. The all-important thing is not that tragedies and sorrows come into our lives, but what we do with them. Death of a loved one is the most severe test that you will ever face, and if you can rise above your griefs and if you will trust in God, then you will be able to surmount any other difficulty with which you may be faced.

One of America's most gifted writers, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, wrote of this three years after his wife had died, as he longed for her still. Time had not softened his grief nor eased the torment of his memories. He had no heart for poetry. He had no heart for anything, it seemed. Life had become an empty dream. But this could not go on, he told himself. He was letting the days slip by, nursing his despondency. Life was not an empty dream. He must be up and doing. Let the past bury its dead. Suddenly Longfellow was writing in a surge of inspiration, the lines coming almost too quickly for his racing pen. Here are three verses of this immortal and inspired message to those whom he loved:

Tell me not, in mournful numbers, Life is but an empty dream!— For the soul is dead that slumbers, And things are not what they seem. Life is real! Life is earnest! And the grave is not its goal; Dust thou art, to dust returnest, Was not spoken of the soul. Let us then be up and doing, With a heart for any fate; Still achieving, still pursuing, Learn to labor and to wait.

Longfellow wrote these verses and titled his poem "The Psalm of Life." He put it aside at first, unwilling to show it to anyone. As he later explained, "It was a voice from my inmost heart, at a time when I was rallying from depression."

The immortal words of Abraham Lincoln come back for us to ponder: "With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow and his orphan, to all which may achieve a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations." (Second Inaugural Address).

The blessing to be found in pain is a right-here, right-now blessing, taking place in the very midst of suffering.

As a result of his many experiences with suffering, that great humanitarian, Dr. Albert Schweitzer, gave this advice: "Don't vex your mind by trying to explain the suffering you have to endure in this life. Don't think that God is punishing you or disciplining you or that he has rejected you. Even in the midst of your suffering, you are in his kingdom. You are always his child, and he has his protecting arms around you. Does a child understand everything his father does? No, but he can confidently nestle in his father's arms and feel perfect happiness, even while tears glisten in his eyes, because he is his father's child."

It was a wise man who said, "We cannot banish dangers, but we can banish fears. We must not demean life, by standing in awe of death."

Remember the story of Job. After his torment his wife came to him and said: "Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die." (Job 2:9.)

And in the majesty of his faith, Job said:

"For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

"And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

"Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me." Job (19:25-27.)

So to you who have lost loved ones, to you who know the pangs of loneliness, some of us have also gone through the fire and understand what it means. We say to you that in the faith that lifts you beyond the sordid trials of the day and points you to the glorious tomorrow that can be yours, you too, like the prophet Job, can say, "I know that my Redeemer lives."

I leave you my blessing, to bring you the peace that can come only from this knowledge and from the witness that you can receive if you will put your trust in your Heavenly Father.

I know that God lives. I know that he has opened the doors to the glorious resurrection. He is biding the time when he shall come again, when the trump shall sound and those who are ready to come forth in the morning of the resurrection shall come forth to be caught up in the clouds of heaven to meet him. God grant that we may live to be worthy to be among those who will be with him.

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Spoken Word" from Temple Square, presented over KSL and the Columbia Broadcasting System March 30, 1969. Copyright 1969. Reprinted In Improvement Era, June 1969, p. 82.
