Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

Against the Mystery of Death

Richard L. Evans [^1]

We come again to the most urgent questions of life: What is man? Where did he come from? Why is he here? Where does he go? What is the meaning, the purpose, of life? What is the assurance of everlasting life? In searching deeply for the answers, we would cite some lines of certainty and assurance on the reality of the resurrection: "Against the . . . mystery o f . . . death—comes this glory of the risen Christ, this victory of the spirit over the weakness of the body, this disclosure of immortality, not as a vision but as a fact. . . . Hosts of men and women would live their lives in all purity and honor [even] if they knew there was no fair country beyond the gates of death; many men and women are living in heroic constancy and patience without that [assurance]. . . . But if that hope were to die out of society, the light would go out of the world, . . . the mystery of life would degenerate into a meaningless tragedy. The . . . rising of one man out of the grave, the triumph of one spirit over death has changed all life, and made the world a home instead of a sepulcher. . . ."(The Outlook, April 22, 1905.) Our eternal continuance is assured, but "the modern world is full of unhappiness because it is full of unbelief. . . . To be happy in such an age as this is the first duty of every man who believes in God and his care for his children; for happiness is the state of those who know that, while all kinds of pain and sorrow may meet them on the way . . . there is nevertheless a divine purpose being worked out. . . . Men need the joy and freedom of a great renewal of faith; . . . let them take counsel with their noblest aspirations instead of with the . . . despair of those . . . who rest [life's] mysteries without the light of the Resurrection; let them rest not in the guidance of their fellows, blind and baffled like themselves . . ." (The Outlook, April 22, 1906) but in Him who showed the way and who gave us the assurance that life is purposeful and everlasting. Thank God for the reality of the resurrection, and for the awareness that loved ones await us in literal personal reality beyond the limits of this life. "I know that my redeemer liveth." (Job 19:25.)

---
Notas:
[^1] That "we came into the world to receive a body and present it pure before God in the Celestial Kingdom." That oppression in our pre-embodied condition arose because we lacked a body . Foreword to "The Favor of the Gods," annual oration of the Society for Health and Human Values, by Ronald Berman, San Francisco, California, November 11, 1976.
