Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

When a Loved One Passes Away

Reed H. Bradford [^1]

Cathleen's parents had been married several years before she was born. They had wanted a child more than they had wanted anything. They had tried to "walk uprightly before the Lord" so that they might be worthy to be parents. They had consulted the best medical authorities and had been told there was nothing of a physiological nature to prevent them from having children. But still no child came. They were almost ready to accept the idea that they would not have a child and were considering adoption proceedings, when it was discovered that a baby was coming. You can imagine the joy that was theirs.

Cathleen was born normally and from all appearances was in excellent health. For three years she was a pride and joy to her parents, and they loved her with all their hearts. Then one day their joy turned to sorrow. They discovered that she had a rare disease for which medical science had not found a cure. Everything that could be done was done. She was administered to by righteous men of great faith. On several occasions the family fasted and prayed for her. The best medical specialists that could be found treated her. But one spring evening she quietly passed away.

"How can we best adjust to her leaving?" her parents asked. It is a question that countless individuals have asked themselves. It may not be a child that leaves us; it may be a mother, father, brother, sister, or someone else who is close to us. Perhaps it is our mate. But in any case, how we adjust to such an event has a profound bearing upon life. Some people never quite seem to recover from it; sorrow becomes their constant companion. Others learn from the experience and acquire characteristics that make them a little more divine. For any of us faced with this aspect of life, perhaps the following thoughts might be useful:

Our Heavenly Father, the Savior, and the Holy Ghost are three divine personages who are vitally interested in everyone who comes to this earth. It was the Savior who said: "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. . . . He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14:18, 21.) If we seek His Spirit and the influence of the Holy Ghost, not only in times of sorrow, but always, we will find an abiding peace in our souls. We will experience a fulfillment of the promise of the Savior.

Death is a passing from one phase of eternity to another. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have the opportunity of having their family ties protected. If a man and woman are married by the proper authority of the priesthood, and if they give devotion to the principles of the Gospel, they have the promise that they and their children will be sealed to one another forever.

Alexander Graham Bell, the Scottish-American inventor, said, "When one door closes, another opens; but we often look so long and so regretfully upon the closed door that we do not see the one which has opened for us." When a loved one leaves us, it is often easy to think of the past in terms of what was but is no more. Under such circumstances, memory produces pain. But it should not be so. Life presents many other opportunities for growth and enjoyment. We must find them and partake of them.

Death makes us painfully aware of our mistakes of omission and commission with respect to those who have passed on. We wish we might have done things differently. But the past cannot be altered. Rather we would do well to look to the present day and conclude that the most mature way to honor those we love is to live in accordance with the eternal principles of the Gospel. One person has gone on, but there are many others who need us and whom we can help. If we illumine the life of just one human soul each day, we may be sure that we bring light to others whose lives he in turn may touch.

One of the purposes of this life is to be tested and to learn to live as our Heavenly Father would have us live that we may "become His sons and daughters." "If thou art called to pass through tribulation; . . . if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; . . . and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; . . . know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:5, 7-8.) One woman who suffered a long time from cancer wrote these lines shortly before her death:

"I have had an experience which I think others might like to hear. It was mine to have—but not mine to keep. . . . What I want others to know is the experience that came because of this.

"The spirit of humility was poured down upon us, and the knowledge that God is all-powerful was made known unto us. . . .

"The spirit of repentance permeated our home. We must live better, we must do better if we would expect the Lord to bless us. . . .

"The spirit of love toward each other, toward the children, and the children toward each other was felt. We must show each other every day the affection which we had for each other. Days might be numbered—love would guide us through. . . .

"And there came to us gifts of all kinds, flowers, food, and clothes (from genuine friends).

"And people say to me, 'Oh, how terrible! What an awful experience your sickness has been. You must try and forget it and start a new life.'

"It must not be that way! I never want to forget. . . .I know that the memory of it will make me a happier and a better person." [^2]

If a person is young when he or she passes on, we who are left behind often ask "why?" It is a natural question, and we could find several explanations, but our knowledge may be insufficient to say: "this was the reason." But we can know that our Heavenly Father is just, kind, and loving. In the eternity that includes more than just this life, He provides opportunities for lasting joy.

"Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die. . . ." (D&C 42:45.) When a loved one dies, our sorrow seems like a heavy blanket pressing down upon us. But as we adjust our lives in accordance with the ways already indicated, the blanket disappears. We are able to think of the past and have feelings of gratitude in connection with the association of those who have gone on, rather than having sorrow as the dominant feeling. We can testify, as did Anne Johnson Flint:

God hath not promised skies always blue, Flower-strewn pathways all our lives through, God hath not promised sun without rain, Joy without sorrow, peace without pain. But God hath promised strength for the day, Rest for the Laborer, light on the way, Grace for the trial, help from above, Unfailing sympathy, undying love. [^3]

---
Notas:
[^1] Virginia Driggs Clark. Used by permission of her husband, Harold Glen Clark.
[^2] Anne Johnson Flint, "What God Hath Promised": World's Best-Loved Poems, New York (1927), p. 377.
[^3] From Instructor, April 1964, pp. 146-48.
