Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

And What of Death?

Richard L. Evans [^1]

Some of the loneliest of loneliness in life comes with the loss of loved ones, and some of the most sobering concern comes with wondering where they are and when we again shall see them. Moved by such searching thoughts, Andrew Jackson said: "Heaven will not be heaven to me if I do not meet my wife there." Heaven to be heaven must have within it that which makes of heaven a wonderfully happy home—with loved ones as a part of all that makes completeness in an everlastingness of life. How could it be otherwise? How could all this order, all this beauty—the earth, the sky, the sea, the glory of spring, the magnificent succession of all seasons, the love of life, the love of loved ones, the endless evidence of Providence, of plan, of purpose, the mind and memory of man—how could all this be other than eternal and of personal continuance? "When I consider the wonderful activity of the mind," said Cicero, "so great a memory of what is past, and such capacity for penetrating the future; when I behold such a number of arts and sciences, and such a multitude of discoveries . . . I believe and am firmly persuaded that a nature which contains so many things within itself cannot but be immortal." "Seems it strange that thou shouldst live forever?" asked Edward Young. "Is it less strange that thou shouldst live at all?" Life is the miracle, and that it should be always is no more a miracle than that it is at all. And so the meaning, the message of this moment: that He who gave us birth and life and loved ones has given us also the limitless possibilities of everlasting life. And what of death?

Ay! It will come,—the bitter hour!—but bringing A better love beyond, more subtle-sweet; A higher road to tread, with happier singing, And no cross-ways to part familiar feet! —Edwin Arnold, "The New Lucian"

---
Notas:
[^1] Address delivered at the 139th Semiannual General Conference of the Church, October 1969. Published in Improvement Era, December 1969, pp. 78-80.
