Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

The Death of a Child: A Prophet's Perspective

Brent A. Barlow

When a couple marry and begin to have children, they usually anticipate many joyful and fulfilling experiences as a family. There are traditional festive celebrations, such as Thanksgiving and Christmas, birthdays, vacations and visits to relatives, and many other pleasant occasions that are often shared and enjoyed by families. For Latter-day Saints there are also weekly family home evenings, participation in Church activities and programs, and family prayers, all of which tend to solidify and promote family unity.

With the many pleasant experiences in family life, however, there are often also times of stress. Many of these situations are external or arise outside the family unit, such as unemployment of the providing parent, or extended absence of a parent because of military service or other obligations away from home. Other kinds of family stress include severe illness of a family member, particularly if it requires hospitalization, alcoholism, drug addiction, delinquency, desertion, divorce, imprisonment, suicide, institutionalization for mental illness, and the death of a child, spouse, or parent.

Death is a unique form of family crisis, one that all families will experience. Though we may try to deny death, we know we will eventually encounter it, often beginning with the loss of a grandparent or an elderly relative. As we grow older, we also realize that we will lose both our parents through death. After marriage, it is understood that one spouse will sustain the loss of the other through the process of dying. Gradually we begin to accept the fact that death is an inevitable part of living.

Another reality of death is that the vast majority of people die after living several decades, usually after age sixty, and have usually lived productive, fulfilling lives. We generally have an opportunity to prepare gradually for the death of an aging loved one as we begin to witness a decline in health or notice other events related to the aging process.

Though the death of any member of the family produces stress, the death of a younger family member, a child, is particularly difficult to face. "Why our child?" parents may ask. Few events are more emotionally painful for a husband and wife to experience than losing a child through death.

Perhaps some perspective can be placed on this question by examining the life and teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He had to face this question in his own life several times, and was called upon to comfort and reassure other parents who lost children through death.

On March 20, 1842, at a service for the deceased child of Windsor P. Lyon, the Prophet commented, ". . .in my leisure moments I have meditated upon the subject, and asked the question, why it is that infants, innocent children, are taken away from us, especially those that seem to be the most intelligent and interesting." (History of the Church 4:553.) His concern with the death of children was of more than fleeting interest. Just seven months earlier, on August 15, 1841, he had recorded in his journal: "Sunday, 15.—My infant son, Don Carlos, died, aged 14 months, 2 days." (HC 4:402.) This was, indeed, a tragic event in the life of the Prophet and his wife Emma. It was not, however, the first time—nor would it be the last time—they would experience the death of a child. During their marriage nine children were born to them, and they also adopted two others. Six of these eleven children died at birth or during infancy.

We sometimes fail to remember that in addition to being the prophet who ushered in the dispensation of the fulness of times, Joseph Smith was also a husband and father. As such, he would have had the same tender feelings toward his wife and children as would any other man.

The reality of being separated from his family was difficult for Joseph to bear. While imprisoned in Missouri he once wrote to Emma: "O, God grant that I may have the privilege of seeing once more my lovely family, in the enjoyment of the sweets of liberty and social life; to press them to my bosom and kiss their lovely cheeks would fill my heart with unspeakable gratitude. Tell the children that I am alive and trust that I shall come and see them before long. Comfort their hearts all you can, and try to be comforted yourself, all you can." (As quoted in E. Cecil McGavin, The Family of Joseph Smith, Bookcraft, 1963, p. 159.)

One can hardly imagine, therefore, the emotional heartaches of Joseph and Emma when their first four children died at birth or soon thereafter. Alva, their first son, was born June 15, 1828, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, and lived but a few minutes. Joseph's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, wrote of this incident: "Shortly after Mr. [Martin] Harris left, Joseph's wife became the mother of a son, which, however, remained with her but a short time before it was snatched from her arms by the hand of death. And the mother seemed, for some time, more like sinking with her infant into the mansion of the dead, than remaining with her husband among the living. Her situation was such for two weeks, that Joseph slept not an hour in undisturbed quiet." (History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, Bookcraft, 1958, p. 125.)

Three years after they moved to Ohio, Emma gave birth to twins, a boy, Thaddeus, and a girl, Louisa, on April 30, 1831. Both lived only two or three hours. On the same day the Smith twins died, another Latter-day Saint woman, a Sister Murdock, also gave birth to twins in nearby Orange, Ohio. She died shortly after the birth, but the twins survived. Nine days later the father, John Murdock, took the twins to the bereaved Joseph and Emma and asked them to adopt the infants. The Smiths received them gladly and did adopt them. They named the boy Joseph Smith Murdock, and the girl, Julia. It was indeed a rare but timely gift for the Prophet and his wife.

Little did the Smiths realize that their new son, Joseph, would die before his first birthday. On March 24, 1832, Joseph and Emma were living in Hiram, Ohio. That evening they were attending to the twins, who had measles, and Emma had retired with Julia, while Joseph was tending their son, who was very ill. Suddenly vicious mobbers broke into the home and dragged the Prophet to a nearby field, where they tarred and feathered him. The sick infant, Joseph Smith Murdock, barely eleven months old, was left in the home exposed to the inclement weather, caught a severe cold, and died soon after.

Fortunately, Joseph and Emma did have children who lived. The adopted Julia lived to be their oldest child, and two other children, sons, were born while the family was living in Ohio. Joseph Smith III was born November 6, 1832, and Frederick Granger Williams Smith was born on June 20, 1836. After the Saints moved to Missouri, Emma gave birth to Alexander Hale Smith on June 2, 1838. Shortly after they settled in Nauvoo, Illinois, Don Carlos Smith was born on June 13, 1840; he died fourteen months later, on August 15, 1841. Another infant son, unnamed, died at birth on December 26, 1842, one day after Christmas and three days after the Prophet's birthday. David Hyrum Smith, whom the Prophet never saw, was born in Nauvoo on November 27, 1844, just five months after his father's martyrdom. Having lost six children by death, it is little wonder that Joseph Smith often contemplated why infants, innocent children, are taken away from us.

Perhaps it was because of his frequent experiences with the deaths of his own children that the Prophet was able to give us important insights into the status of children after death, parent-child relationships after death, and some understanding of why infants die. As Latter-day Saints, we should be grateful for a prophet's perspective to help us understand, in part, this painful and often difficult event so many parents have experienced or may yet encounter.

Status of Children after Death

Undoubtedly many parents of deceased children wonder about the condition of their children after death and ask what, if any, are the possibilities of salvation. While there are many beliefs on this subject among various religious denominations, Joseph Smith's teachings and revelations on the status of all children after death are both concise and consoling.

His first insights on the subject were probably gained while he was translating the Book of Mormon. In Mosiah we read Abinadi's statement that "little children also have eternal life." (Mosiah 15:25.) Mormon's great epistle to his son Moroni pertaining to the status of children and salvation teaches us that "little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin," and "little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism!" (Moroni 8:8, 12.) Even though Joseph Smith was not directly responsible for these particular teachings, he was instrumental in bringing about these important but lost truths when he translated and published the Book of Mormon.

On September 26, 1830, in Fayette, New York, just seven months before the deaths of Thaddeus and Louisa, the Lord revealed to the Prophet, ". . . behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten." (D&C 29:46.) In January 1832, at Hiram, Ohio, just two months before the death of Joseph Smith Murdock, the Prophet learned that "little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ." (D&C 74:7.)

Four years later, on January 21, 1832, he received the following revelation while in the Kirtland Temple: "All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom; For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts." Then the Prophet added: "And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D&C 137:7-10.)

On March 20, 1842, just seven months after the death of their infant son Don Carlos, the Prophet declared at the memorial service of another deceased child: "The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, not supported in Holy Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God. All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham. The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable, wicked world. Notwithstanding all this glory, we for a moment lose sight of it, and mourn the loss, but we do not mourn as those without hope." (HC 4:554.)

By way of summary, one of the most comforting truths ever uttered by the Prophet is found in the succinct statement: "all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven."

Parent-Child Relationships after Death

Another consoling and unique aspect of Latter-day Saint theology came from Joseph Smith's teachings about the possibility of a parent-and-child relationship after death. In a meeting in the Nauvoo Temple on Sunday, April 16, 1843, just four months after the death of their newborn son, the Prophet read a letter from Parley P. Pratt informing the Saints of the death of a prominent missionary, Lorenzo Dow Barnes, who died en route to a foreign mission. After reading the letter, the Prophet spoke for two hours, trying to console the grieving Saints, many of whom had recently lost loved ones through death. He promised them, "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." (HC 5:362.)

On the condition that they prove to be faithful, the Saints were given the assurance that any loss of a loved one sustained during mortality would be made up to them after the resurrection. For the Prophet, the reuniting of family members after death was more than just a pleasant thought, for he actually saw it in vision and described it:

"Would you think it strange if I relate what I have seen in vision in relation to this interesting theme? Those who have died in Jesus Christ may expect to enter into all that fruition of joy when they come forth, which they possessed or anticipated here.

"So plain was the vision, that I actually saw men, before they had ascended from the tomb, as though they were getting up slowly. They took each other by the hand and said to each other, 'My father, my son, my mother, my daughter, my brother, my sister.' And when the voice calls for the dead to arise, suppose I am laid by the side of my father, what would be the first joy of my heart? To meet my father, my mother, my brother, my sister; and when they are by my side, I embrace them and they me." (HC 5:361-62.)

On the conditions specified, the joyful reuniting of family members during the resurrection was apparently only the commencement of the family or parent-child relationship, "provided you continue faithful."

It was evidently at the funeral service of his niece Sophronia that Joseph Smith first taught this doctrine. The child died in October 1843, and her father, Don Carlos Smith, had died two years earlier on August 7, 1841, at the age of twenty-five. At the child's funeral service the Prophet pointed to Agnes Smith, the grieving mother, and said, "You will have the joy, the pleasure, and satisfaction of nurturing this child, after its resurrection, until it reaches the full stature of its spirit." (As quoted in Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 1928 ed., p. 575.)

President Joseph F. Smith, who was a nephew of the Prophet and later the sixth president of the Church, wrote: "I met with my aunt, the wife of my uncle, Don Carlos Smith, who was the mother of that little girl that Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was speaking about when he told the mother that she should have the joy, the pleasure and satisfaction of rearing the child, after the resurrection, until it reached the full stature of its spirit; and that it would be a far greater joy than she could possibly have in mortality, because she would be free from the sorrow and fear and disabilities of mortal life, and she would know more than she could know in this life. I met that widow, the mother of that child, and she told me this circumstance and bore testimony to me that this was what the Prophet Joseph Smith said when he was speaking at the funeral of her little girl." (Ibid. Italics added.)

President Joseph F. Smith also reported a conversation with his brother-in-law, Lorin Walker, who mentioned he was present at the funeral of Sophronia Smith. President Smith asked, "Lorin, what did the Prophet say?" According to President Smith, Lorin Walker repeated, "as nearly as he could remember, what the Prophet Joseph said in relation to little children. The body remains undeveloped in the grave, but the spirit returns to God who gave it. Afterwards, in the resurrection, the spirit and body will be reunited; the body will develop and grow to the full stature of the spirit; and the resurrected soul will go on to perfection." (Ibid., pp. 575-76.)

M. Isabella Horne recalled a conversation with the Prophet in Nauvoo in which "the subject of children in the resurrection was broached. I believe it was in Sister Leonora Cannon Taylor's house. She had just lost one of her children, and I had also lost one previously. The Prophet wanted to comfort us, and he told us that we should receive those children in the morning of the resurrection just as we laid them down, in purity and innocence, and we should nourish and care for them as their mothers. He said that children would be raised in the resurrection just as they were laid down, and that they would obtain all the intelligence necessary to occupy thrones, principalities and powers. The idea that I got from what he said was that the children would grow and develop in the Millennium, and that the mothers would have the pleasure of training and caring for them, which they had been deprived of in this life." (HC 4:556.)

Joseph Horne, Isabella's husband, added, "I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say that mothers should receive their children just as they laid them down, and that they would have the privilege of doing for them what they could not do here, the Prophet remarked, 'How would you know them if you did not receive them as you laid them down?' I also got the idea that children would grow and develop after the resurrection, and that the mothers would care for them and train them." (HC 4:556-57.)

On Sunday, April 7, 1844, just two months before his own death, the Prophet delivered a sermon to about twenty thousand Saints gathered in Nauvoo for general conference. Part of his remarks pertained to family members who had died. He said:

"I have a father, brothers, children, and friends who have gone to a world of spirits. They are only absent for a moment. They are in the spirit, and we shall soon meet again. . . . A question may be asked—'Will mothers have their children in eternity?' Yes! Yes! Mothers, you shall have your children; for they shall have eternal life, for their debt is paid. There is no damnation awaiting them for they are in the spirit. But as the child dies, so shall it rise from the dead, and be for ever living in the learning of God. It will never grow [in the grave]; it will still be the child, in the same precise form [when it rises] as it appeared before it died out of its mother's arms, but possessing all the intelligence of a God." (HC 6:316.)

Not only did the Prophet assure the young Agnes Smith and other mothers of a continued relationship with their deceased children, but he also taught that it "would be a far greater joy" than they possibly could have had during mortality. Apparently other Saints who have lost a child during this life will have a similar opportunity for a joyous parentage after the resurrection, provided they heed the Prophet's counsel to "continue faithful." Perhaps we now better understand and appreciate Paul's comment to the Saints in Corinth when he wrote, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men [and women] most miserable." (1 Corinthians 15:19.)

Why Infants Die

The Prophet Joseph Smith probably struggled even harder to obtain an answer to his query, "why it is that infants, innocent children, are taken away from us." (HC 4:553.) A belief prevalent in many religious denominations at that time was that death resulted from spiritual transgression or was used by God as punishment for the survivors. Often the death of a child was considered as the latter by many parents who felt they had sinned in some way and were being punished. Such beliefs were apparently also being entertained by some of the Saints, for on September 29, 1839, Joseph Smith addressed the topic and said, " . . . it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, 'Judge not, lest ye be judged.' " (HG 4:11.) He further elaborated: " . . . it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and 'the righteous shall hardly escape;' . . . many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the Kingdom of God." (HC 4:11.)

As to why infants or children die, the Prophet stated that it was not necessarily because of sin on the part of parents or a family member. He taught that all flesh, including infants and children, is subject to suffer and may "fall prey to disease, pestilence, etc.," including accidents. In essence, all mortals are subject to death, regardless of age. He also gave some additional insights as to why infants or children die. He declared:

"The strongest reasons that present themselves to my mind are these: This world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the 'world grows weaker and wiser;' if that is the case, the world grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a righteous man, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present day: but in these days such a man is much opposed and persecuted by most of the inhabitants of the earth, and he has much sorrow to pass through here. The Lord takes many away, even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again." (HC 4:553.)

Here, then, are some perspectives of the Prophet Joseph Smith on the death of children. For such, we thank thee, O God, for a prophet!
