Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

Explaining Death to the Latter-day Saint Child

Brent Barlow

President Joseph F. Smith made the following statement: "Children are sure to be brought into some acquaintanceship with the incident of death, even during the kindergarten period; and it would be a great relief to the puzzled and perplexed conditions of their minds if some intelligent statements of the reason for death were made to them." (Juvenile Instructor, June 1, 1905, p. 336.)

It is evident both from President Smith's statement and daily observation of the Latter-day Saint child that the child is constantly learning about death. Many children's stories, at least in the original versions, have death themes, such as "Snow White," "Little Red Riding Hood," and "The Three Little Pigs." In addition; some children's songs ("Rock-a-Bye Baby") and rhymes ("Humpty Dumpty") may be interpreted by children to refer to death. Contemporary Latter-day Saint children also differ from children of previous generations in that many view a great deal of television, which is heavily imbued with death and death-related incidents. One survey indicated that the average child in the U.S. watches television six hours a day, seven days a week, which is 50 percent more time than he spends in school. Watching television is the second largest activity in many children's lives, second only to sleep. On any given day a child can view several deaths, which compound into literally hundreds and even thousands by the time adulthood is attained. Questions are now being raised about the numerous synthetic, quick deaths children observe in movies or on television. Tonight's villain is killed, only to appear next week on another program in another role, thereby giving the child the impression that death is a temporary, emotionless event.

President Smith also observed: "It is a principle widely accepted that it is not desirable to teach these little ones those things that are horrifying to childish nature. And what may be said of children is equally true in all stages of student life. But death is not an unmixed horror. With it are associated some of the profoundest and most important truths of human life. Although painful in the extreme to those who must suffer the departure of dear ones, death is one of the grandest blessings in divine economy; and we think children should be taught something of its true meaning as early in life as possible." (Ibid. Italics added.)

Children have differing views of death at different ages. In general, few children under the age of three have much comprehension of death, other than being separated from the deceased person, and are primarily concerned about someone caring for their physical, and to some degree, emotional needs. When a child experiences the death of a loved one, he needs to be assured verbally and perhaps by touch that there are others who still love him and will care for him.

Between the ages of about three and six, most children begin to understand death as a separation, but it is often perceived to be temporary or reversible, as symbolized in the fairy tale by the prince kissing Snow White and awakening her from her "sleep." Children during these ages can "kill" each other while playing cops and robbers because of the temporary nature of death.

From the age of six to about eight or nine, the child begins to understand the significance of death for others and the permanence of death during mortality. It is at about the age of nine that most children begin to realize the reality of their own death.

Several books and articles have recently been written with suggestions for explaining death to children. The following general guidelines have been condensed and modified for use by Latter-day Saint parents:

In addition to these suggestions, Latter-day Saints should give some additional explanations to their children on at least three other significant aspects of death.

Perhaps this latter statement by President Smith is among the most intelligent statements that could be made to children about death.
