Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

A Future Where Loved Ones Wait

Richard L. Evans [^1]

There were scenes of light and triumph, overcoming scenes of darkness, death, and despair. We often see people bereaved and wonder how they face the irrevocable fact. But they face it because life goes on, and because the fact is there to face. They face it with an awareness that all of us shall face this ultimate eventuality. We all one day leave life and loved ones, or our loved ones leave us, and we go on, calmly as we can, as we must, because we must. "In every. . . age the thoughts of men have traveled. . . beyond the narrow bounds of mortal life," wrote a distinguished writer, "and, while the mystery of death has been deeply and often tragically felt, it has never been accepted as a finality in human experience. . . . The tide of vitality in the heart and soul of man. . .sweeps past the mystery of death. . .into the undiscovered world beyond." (Editorial, The Outlook, March 29, 1902.) "How [then] shall we think of the dead?. . .I can tell you how I think of. . .[them]. I think that there are no dead; I think that there is no death; . . . that life goes on unbroken by what we call death. . . . I think of death as a glad awakening from this . . . life; . . . as a graduation from this primary department into some higher rank . . . of learning. I think of the dead as possessing a more splendid equipment for a larger life . . . than was possible to them on earth—a life in which I shall in due time join them if I am counted worthy of their fellowship in the life eternal." (Dr. Lyman Abbott.) It is this that sustains us as our loved ones leave—not the immortality of memory only, but the immortality of a literal personal continuance. And so we come again to a reaffirmation of faith—faith in the eternal continuance of truth, of intelligence, of personality, of progress—faith in the eternal plan and purpose of our Father, who made us in his own image, and whose intent it is that we should have everlasting life with our loved ones, with family and friends. As Henry de Lafayette Webster said, "There is a future, O thank God!"—a future where our loved ones wait.

---
Notas:
[^1] Address delivered at the 134th Annual General Conference of the Church, April 1964. Published in Improvement Era, June 1964, pp. 465-67.
