Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

After Death, What?

W. Cleon Skousen [^1]

Fifteen thousand more days to live!

This is the prospect—or remaining life span—for the average young adult today. It simply means that in 15,000 days will come a transitional experience called death, which sweeps each of us into a whole new dimension of cosmic reality. For countless years people have asked just what happens at death.

Now that the gospel has been restored, we have received a tremendous vista of knowledge concerning life after death. We know that the separation of the spirit from the body is a very necessary part of God's plan and not a major tragedy, as many had supposed. What we call death is simply the temporary separation of the spirit from the body so that the spirit can be prepared for the resurrection. We are told that this is done in a place just outside our own dimension of reality, a place called the spirit world.

Preparation for the resurrection involves discipline, evaluation, reform, and hard work. For a certain few the transition from mortality to the resurrection can be accomplished in the "twinkling of an eye" (see D&C 63:51 and 101:31), but for all the rest extensive preparation is required.

God's justice requires that all be given an opportunity to hear and embrace the gospel plan for happy living. Since many persons never received that opportunity here on earth, they will have such an opportunity in the spirit world. Even those who did hear the gospel here on earth will apparently find many things to be done in the spirit world before they are ready for the resurrection. The spirit world, therefore, is an essential and busy interval in our preparation for the future eternities.

It is also in the spirit world that each personality is eventually judged and a determination made concerning the degree of eternal glory to which that individual is entitled. A modern revelation indicates that at the time of its resurrection, each spirit is elevated to whatever degree of glory it has earned. For example, speaking of those who are celestial spirits, the Lord says, " . . . and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened." (D&C 88:28. Italics added.)

Thus, those who can be elevated to a celestial glory will receive celestial bodies; those who cannot abide such a glory will be given either terrestrial or telestial bodies, depending upon the level of glory their spirits are worthy to receive.

It was Jesus who said, "In my Father's house are many mansions" (John 14:2), but only in the writings of the apostle Paul and in modern scripture do we have direct reference to the fact that mankind will be resurrected to a variety of glories, depending upon their worthiness. This means that there must be different kingdoms designed to accommodate people of different glories. In other words, our human family will not all be together in the eternities. Here is the way Paul describes it:

"There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another, and the telestial is another. [This last phrase appears only in the Joseph Smith Translation.]

"There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another in glory.

"So also is the resurrection of the dead. . . ." (1 Corinthians 15:40-42.)

Paul was very obscure in discussing the origin of this knowledge, because when it was revealed to him it included many things that he said were "not lawful for a man to utter." (2 Corinthians 12:4.) In fact, the vision in which Paul received this information is treated so modestly in his writings that one has to analyze them very carefully to realize he is talking about himself. He said:

"I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago. . . such an one caught up to the third heaven. And I knew such a man. . . how that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself I will not glory. . . ." (2 Corinthians 12:2-5.)

As a result of this magnificent revelation, Paul gave us his famous teachings on the resurrection and made specific reference to the different glories we will inherit according to our worthiness. Nevertheless, the details were left obscure, and it was not until modern times that we gained a thrilling and comprehensive understanding of the things Paul had seen.

It was on February 16, 1832, while Joseph Smith was residing at the Johnson home in Hiram, Ohio, that he and Sidney Rigdon unexpectedly received a vision of the glories similar to the one received by Paul. [This vision is recorded as section [^2] in the Doctrine and Covenants.] As far as we know, Paul never recorded the details of that which he was shown, but Joseph Smith states that the modern vision had barely begun when "the Lord commanded us that we should write the vision." (D&C 76:28.)

Once this definitive revelation had been given concerning the resurrection, many other revelations (both ancient and modern) began to take on a whole new dimension of highly significant meaning. It not only demonstrated the literal reality of the "many mansions" referred to by the Savior, but it also revealed extremely important information concerning the kind of people who will go to each of these various glories or kingdoms.

We are told first of all that the celestial kingdom belongs to all those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ without undue procrastination. (See D&C 76:51-53.)

Verses 71 to 79 [of section 76] state that if a person has an opportunity to embrace the fullness of the gospel during earth life but postpones accepting it until he reaches the spirit world, then he cannot be an heir to the celestial kingdom. He drops down to the next level, the terrestrial. Of course, if a person never even hears the gospel until he reaches the spirit world (and that has been the case with the majority of mankind), then he can accept it in the spirit world without any penalty, provided he would have accepted it in the flesh. In due time the ordinance work will be done for him vicariously (such as baptism for the dead referred to by Paul in 1 Corinthians 15:29), and then that person will be resurrected to the celestial glory just as though he had accepted the gospel while in earth life.

Modern revelation has further disclosed that the celestial kingdom is divided into three heavens or degrees. (D&C 131:1.) To attain the highest degree, one must be married for time and eternity by the power of God's holy priesthood. (D&C 131:2-3.) Only those who qualify for this highest discipline enjoy a continuing family relationship in the eternal worlds. (D&C 132:19.) And only those who qualify for this level will have the privilege of being tutored to follow in the footsteps of the Father and share in his infinite power. (D&C 132:20.) To these the Father says he will give "all things." Then the scripture adds, "They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory. . . . Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God." (D&C 76:55-56, 58.)

Much of this, of course, is presently beyond rational comprehension. Paul warned us after receiving his great revelation that "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Corinthians 2:9. See also Isaiah 64:4.)

But what about those who do not reach the celestial kingdom?

Paul pointed out that the terrestrial glory is of a different order and definitely inferior to that of the celestial kingdom, even as the moon is far less glorious than the brilliant illumination of the sun. (1 Corinthians 15:41-42.) Modern revelation has verified the accuracy of Paul's statement. (See D&C 76:70-71.)

As we have already mentioned, this is the kingdom where the Father's children go who have had a chance to embrace the gospel and help establish the kingdom of God on earth, but who have passed by the opportunity and have not come forward to receive the plan of salvation until they reached the spirit world. (D&C 76:74.) They will enjoy a great glory, but it is far less than what they might have had.

These include that class of persons who are basically honorable men and women, but who have passed by the gospel of Jesus Christ by allowing themselves to be deceived by the craftiness of the philosophies of men. (D&C 76:75.) They were too sophisticated for anything so humble and simple as the gospel plan. In the spirit world they recognize their mistake, and, as the scales of their blindness, pride, and man-made illusions crumble away, they come forth at last to drink at the one glorious fountain whose living waters are such that the recipient need never thirst again. These have come lately, but at least they have come. Theirs is the glory of the moon.

In the parable of the ten virgins, the Lord suggests that in the terrestrial kingdom will be found some of those who have professed to be his followers. What has happened to them?

It seems they were not valiant. They did not keep their lamps lighted. They are likened unto five foolish virgins. When the Father needed them to help save more of their brothers and sisters, they did not come. They were slothful, waiting to be commanded in all things. They did not openly fight against the Church; they just let others do all the work, go on all the missions, serve in all the jobs of teachers and officers in the kingdom, pay all the tithes, take care of all the poor, administer to all the sick, visit all the orphans and widows and those in prison. In the heat of God's great battle against his apostate son Lucifer, they let others carry the burden of the fight. They stood back when they should have stood up—for freedom, for righteousness, for truth.

These are they of whom Christ will say at his coming, "Verily I say unto you, I know you not." (See Matthew 25:8-12.)

Last of all come those who go to the lowest of all of God's kingdoms. This is the glory telestial.

One unusual thing about this kingdom is the fact that all of the people assigned to this dimension are not of the same glory. Collectively, they are similar, even as the stars in the firmament are similar when compared with the luster of the moon or the magnificent glory of the sun. Nevertheless, individually they differ in glory as "one star differs from another." (D&C 76:98.)

These are they who did not embrace the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ when it came to them. (See D&C 76:101.) They gloried in the infatuating doctrines concocted by the imagination of men and "received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant." (D&C 76:99-101.)

When the glory of the Savior is manifest, these will bow the knee and confess that he is the Christ. (See D&C 76:110.)

The telestial kingdom will include all those who have spent their lives in profligate living without the slightest virtue of repentance in this life. The Lord says these are they who are liars, sorcerers, adulterers, whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. (See D&C 76:103.)

These are they who will not be gathered with the Saints nor caught up in the cloud to meet the Lord when he comes. (D&C 76:102.) These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth. (D&C 76:104.) These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire while they are waiting in the spirit world. (D&C 76:105.) Unfortunately, these are as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven or as the sand upon the seashore. (D&C 76:109.)

The most that any of these can expect in the vast reaches of eternity will be their role as "servants of the Most High." This means they can never achieve godhood. (D&C 76:112.) Where Christ and the Father dwell they cannot go, "worlds without end." (D&C 76:112.)

These are they who, when they die, must remain with Lucifer and his angels until the end of the millennium, when they are resurrected as third-class citizens in the eternities of God's great cosmos. (D&C 76:84-85.)

One of the most astonishing passages in modern revelation on the resurrection informs us that the very least of God's kingdoms—the telestial glory—is so magnificent that it "surpasses all understanding." (D&C 76:89. Italics added.)

This means that God, in his mercy and anxiety for our welfare, has prepared a series of glorious kingdoms, the least of which is too marvelous for us to imagine.

And if such superlatives apply to the minimal glory of the kingdom like unto the stars, what of the kingdom of glory like unto the moon? And, even more importantly, what can be said of the supreme exaltation of them all, the glory like unto the sun?

It is this highest degree of the highest glory for which the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is specifically designed to prepare us. Among all of God's endowments, this is the most glorious. At this stage of our development, none of us could be given more. And knowing as much as we do of the coming resurrection, who would dare aspire to anything less?

Each day we make decisions that help determine our place in the eternities. Our task is to live the kind of lives that will make it possible for us to win the supreme prize—the fullness of the glory of the sun—the highest degree of the celestial kingdom.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Spoken Word" from Temple Square, presented over KSL and the Columbia Broadcasting System, May 31, 1964. Copyright 1964. Reprinted in Improvement Era, August 1964, p. 684.
[^2] Discuss death with children before it occurs to someone they love. Much of death education is ex post facto—after the event. It would be helpful for most children to discuss death not only when it occurs, but also at a time when they are not experiencing the loss of a loved one. Explain that there is a life after death. While it may be questionable to imply that the child will see a deceased loved one again during mortality, it is certainly advisable to convey to the child our belief of the reuniting of loved ones in a life hereafter.
