Brent A. Barlow, Understanding Death ( 1979)

The Final Awakening

Richard L. Evans [^1]

Recently we recalled a scene from The Blue Bird by Maurice Maeterlinck as the children leave their home in heaven to be born on earth, with anxiety and anticipation, some not wanting to leave their friends, some fearing to come to earth. Then there was the sound of gladness, the song of mothers coming out to meet the children sent from their heavenly home. Suppose now we follow through a further sequence suggested by this scene—through the living and learning of life, with its problems and opportunities, its choosing and growing, its doing and enduring and understanding—and then after all the experiences of earth there comes a return to the heavenly home—again with anxiety and anticipation and with reluctance to leave friends and family. Leaving where we lived before and coming here we call birth. Leaving here and going on to the other opportunities we call death, one being as natural and essential as the other. And how blessed it is to have the sense of assurance that reunion with friends and family is a part of our Father's plan and purpose, as we leave this life with an everlasting future before us. And there the knowledge of our premortal past and of life's ever-continuing purpose will give us the answers we so much seek, with full meaning to our memories. Scripture gives us this assurance. Our own conviction within our souls gives us this assurance. God our Father has not planned for us to pass fleetingly into a nothingness, through the swift littleness of mortal life, but has given us truth and intelligence and the awareness of ourselves and the love of loved ones and life as an everlasting literal reality. "Is death the last sleep?" asked Sir Walter Scott. And then he answered his own question: "No, it is the last and final awakening." And to those who have lost those they love: May the acuteness of sorrow be softened by the assurance that these things are so, and that life is worth all the doing and enduring, and that beyond time there is eternity with continued consciousness and purpose and a literal reality of resurrection—with a continuing personal awareness as real as we have here. You who mourn and you who remember, take comfort to your hearts this day—and always with the assurance that these things are so.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Spoken Word" from Temple Square, presented over KSL and the Columbia Broadcasting System, May 31, 1964. Copyright 1964. Reprinted in Improvement Era, August 1964, p. 684.
