Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Turning Point

Robert permitted himself the delicious luxury of a small smile. Not a big guffaw, of course, or even a broad grin. Given his position and reputation in the community, such a display of self-indulgence would have been inappropriate—perhaps even unseemly.

As he strolled through the central square, the nods of recognition and deferential greetings from neighbors and even strangers added to his considerable pleasure. Robert—known as "Rob" to his family and the small handful of business associates who were both successful and presumptive enough to assume a first-name basis—was secure in the satisfying knowledge that even if he didn't know everyone who greeted him by name, they certainly knew who he was.

Robert always returned the many admiring but respectful salutations with carefully calibrated modesty—a slight inclination of the head here, a short wave of the hand there. To those few whom he regarded as his true peers, a warm but brief handclasp was in order.

All in all, it was a very fine day indeed. So nice that he decided to treat himself to a few rare moments alone.

Detouring into a nearby park, Robert sank down on a bench for a brief respite. The impending visit with one of his close kindred—a family duty that as the unspoken patriarch of the clan he cheerfully shouldered—could wait.

He frowned.

The nagging unease was back.

He hated that now-familiar but unwelcome feeling. It disturbed the cherished sense of well-being he had nurtured so assiduously. As on many previous occasions, he tried to push the restlessness back into the far recesses of his mind. Unlike those earlier times, the uneasy feeling simply wouldn't cooperate. It refused to disappear.

Robert would have been hard put to describe exactly what was bothering him. It was . . . nameless. Every time he tried to pin the feeling down, it eluded him. But it was always there, lurking around the distant edges of his consciousness and eroding his much-valued peace of mind.

He tried one of his old mental tricks: Look on the bright side. Accentuate the positive. Dismiss the negative. Robert mentally rehearsed his array of accomplishments. His professional stature and considerable reputation were enviable. He counted numerous influential and famous people among his friends and acquaintances. He was rich, not just your average, run-of-the-mill rich, but really rich. Best of all, he'd made his fortune himself. His father had left him their distinguished family name and lineage but little else. The money had come as the reward of Robert's own unrelenting hard work.

Except for a never-ending struggle with weight, Robert was in excellent health. His wife was a handsome woman who still turned heads when they walked into the dining room at the club. The children—growing up too fast, as children do—were popular and doing well in school.

What more could a guy possibly want? Robert thought to himself for the umpteenth time. I've got everything I ever dreamed would make me happy. Why do I feel unsatisfied, so empty inside?

Turning his face toward the brassy midday sun, Robert shut his eyes with a grateful sigh. That was better. The sun's glow gradually seeped through his tightly closed eyelids, a riot of color and swirling patterns of light that nudged his overtired brain toward the precipice of sleep.

He suddenly started, jolted from somnolence by the distinct feeling that someone was quietly watching him. In itself, that wasn't unusual; he was used to being observed closely. Partially blinded by the bright sun, he stood up and slowly peered around the park.

No one.

Still, he had the eerie feeling he wasn't alone. As his eyes gradually readjusted, he scanned the park again.

Empty.

He was certain. Someone was there.

Behind him.

Afraid to turn, he froze. He actually felt the hairs on the back of his neck rise.

Then he heard it, so softly, so sweetly he almost believed it was his imagination.

His name.

He turned as the gentle but irresistible voice banished his fears. The radiant figure standing behind him made the sunlight seem weak, almost insubstantial. A wildly irrational thought crossed Robert's mind: I wish I'd watched that TV program Sarah and the kids like so much.

As though it could read his thoughts, the figure waited silently until Robert's confused mind cleared. Then it spoke.

"Go home," the figure commanded. "Prepare yourself and your family to receive a very special guest. He is a holy man, a prophet of the Lord. He has been chosen by God Himself to teach the people. He has fasted many days in preparation and is hungry. You will feed him and listen to him. You will heed his counsel. And he will bless you and all your house."

Years later, Rob would recount this story, his voice still filled with wonder at the memory. And, despite the considerable sacrifices and intervening hardships, he always spoke without regret or reservation.

"I really thought I had it all: money, reputation, family. I'd worked hard and deserved it, or so I told myself. Despite everything, in the back of my mind I guess I always knew there was something missing.

"I suppose I'd always believed in God, but I mostly ignored those feelings. Church was a matter of convenience—mostly inconvenience, at that! I was too busy expanding the business. There never seemed to be enough time. So I just kept on going, until one day . . .

"I didn't really believe all that crackpot, hokey stuff. You know, being `touched by an angel' or having dreams or visions. But it actually happened. To me! It changed my whole life. I could have ignored the figure or dismissed the whole episode as my imagination. But it was real.

"I went home. And the man came, just as the figure had said. He taught. I listened. I knew instinctively that what he said was true. And I've been sharing that message ever since."

Robert is, of course, a figment of my own imagination, a completely fictional Everyman. But Amulek, one of the ancient American prophets in the Book of Mormon, is not. His is a true story. A well-known and wealthy man in his own community, Amulek came from a distinguished family and had accomplished much. He had a comfortable life. In his own words, he tells us:

I never have known much of the ways of the Lord, and his mysteries and marvelous power. I said I never had known much of these things; but behold, I mistake, for I have seen much of his mysteries and his marvelous power; yea, even in the preservation of the lives of this people.

Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God . . .

—Alma 10:5-6

Amulek knew, yet he would not know. For a long time he resisted his feelings. But when at last he came to the critical turning point of his life, he made the right decision.

Many of us, myself included, have had similar feelings. We often know, but don't yet consciously recognize, that there is more to life than we are currently experiencing or are willing to admit to ourselves. We sense that being successful—at least in conventional terms—is somehow not enough. We feel an insistent inner yearning, a longing that comes from the deepest wellsprings of our souls.

We silently ask, Is there more to life? and desperately hope that indeed there is. We may also instinctively resist those feelings. After all, change is often inconvenient and almost always unsettling.

Like Amulek, we all face crucial decision points that may change our lives forever. Amulek's timeless example leaps from the pages of scriptures. He answers our heartfelt queries with a resounding example of faith, commitment, and perseverance. Yes, he assures us from the perspective of his own experience, there is indeed an eternally more rewarding path, harder though it may be.

Amulek's alternative was to choose—and then to endure—the less-traveled road.
