Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Laurel

Laurel is the daughter I never had. I really do love her. She is a genuinely good person, one of the best I've ever known. She has tried to do the right things her entire life: to help other people, live faithfully, study the scriptures, pray often, and always keep a prayerful heart.

It's always unsettling when bad things happen to good people, especially to those closest to us. I struggle with why Laurel, the youngest of Ron's four children, has had such a difficult life. Her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer when Laurel was only six; Claire died from its complications during Laurel's senior year in high school. Her father, newly called as a General Authority, moved to Salt Lake City just before Laurel left for Brigham Young University.

"Home" during holidays and breaks was no longer their cherished dream house on Longden Circle in the hills of Los Altos, California. Rather than remain cooped up in Ron's impersonal city apartment, Laurel often spent vacations traveling or visiting with friends.

She met and married a spectacularly talented student who was embarking on a career in cosmetic dentistry. After his graduation from dental school, they moved to Los Angeles. Her husband borrowed heavily to set up a practice in Westwood, perhaps hoping to become a "dentist to the stars." A young mother of one, then two, then three beautiful children, Laurel stayed home and finished college with correspondence courses.

The marriage, often rocky, was shaken to its very foundations when Laurel began to suspect—first with disbelief and then with growing concern—that her husband might be using drugs. Drug Enforcement Agency agents began investigating him for alleged prescription violations. Under threat of imminent prosecution, family "crisis intervention" resulted in his admission to first one and then another drug treatment program.

Laurel hung in there as her husband's behavior became increasingly erratic and occasionally even violent. She was eventually left at home to struggle with their three small children by herself. Ron and I spent many tear-filled hours with her, agonizing and praying over her difficult situation.

"Daddy," she would say with grim determination, "I went to the temple and made a solemn covenant. And I'm going to do everything I possibly can to keep it." Neither she nor we mentioned divorce.

One day Ron came home, his face bleak. "Laurel called me at the office this afternoon," he recounted. "I could tell she'd been crying."

Ron was near tears himself. "She said just one word, `Daddy.' I could hear some small choking sounds. Then there was a long pause as she fought for control. She finally sighed and asked me, `Daddy, did I agree to this before I came to earth? Did I know it would be so hard?'"

I waited as he stopped, struggling for composure himself.

"I finally said to her, `Yes, dear, you did. We all did.'" He continued, "There was another prolonged pause. Then I heard her choke. `Oh, Daddy,' she said pleadingly, `Did I shout for joy?'"

Yes, Laurel, you did. And you will again.

God himself has declared, "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25) and "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

The gospel teaches us that before birth we existed as spirit children of our Father in Heaven. In order to realize a fulness of joy and progress toward our destiny of eternal life, we needed to experience mortality.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has summarized the essential role of mortality:

God's premortal children could not become like him and enjoy his breadth of blessings unless they obtained both a physical body and temporal experience in an arena where both good and evil were present . . . such a temporal experience must be predicated upon moral agency, which includes the moral and intellectual ability to distinguish right from wrong and the attendant freedom to make choices based on that knowledge.

—Christ and the New Covenant (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997), p. 200

As God's spirit children, we knew that mortality would bring both risks and opportunities. Just how much detail and what specifics of our forthcoming mortal experience we knew in advance isn't really known. However, we did understand that we would be tried and tested in the crucible of life's experiences. We knew that no one would be exempt from either trials or temptations. No one would be immune from pain and suffering.

We recognized that an essential part of our mortal experience would be to exercise the power of choice we call agency. There would be real choices between attractive alternatives, what Elder Holland calls "contending enticements."

We also knew we would often make those decisions in the face of opposition (see 2 Ne. 2:16; D&C 29:39). Our choices would, in turn, have real consequences. Some of those consequences would have eternal significance. If we remained faithful and were obedient to God's commandments, we could return to our Father in Heaven to share eternal life and exaltation with Him.

Prophets throughout the ages have called God's design for us by various names, including the "plan of salvation" and "the great plan of happiness" (Alma 42:8). The scriptures record that when this great plan of happiness was presented to us in the premortal existence, we "shouted for joy" (Job 38:7).

As part of the great plan, we would retain no conscious memory of what preceded our birth. Learning to walk by faith would be a necessary part of the mortal experience. In mortality we would have ample opportunity to learn, grow, and prove ourselves by understanding God's laws and keeping His commandments.

Our loving Father promised that He would not leave us without guidance, alone and comfortless. We would not walk without assistance. To help us find our way, He would give us His word through the scriptures and inspired counsel from holy prophets. We could then choose to make life's decisions based on the Lord's plan rather than the worldly opinions of others.

In mortality we could also learn to seek personal revelation through fasting and prayer. As we grew and gained experience, we would learn to trust the promptings of the Holy Ghost. Our maturing spiritual instincts would tell us whether or not we were heading in the right direction. With the Holy Ghost as our guide, we could choose to follow righteous but narrow paths, less-traveled roads whose proximate twists and ultimate end would often be hidden from our limited mortal view.

God's design for us, immortality and eternal life, would be the destination. We would be free to choose this path of growth toward godhood.

There would be times when, try as hard as we could to obey the commandments and make the right choices for ourselves, we would experience the unwanted consequences of someone else's exercise of his or her own agency. The gift of agency and choice would of necessity cut both ways. Patient endurance would be an essential part of the celestial equation.

There was an alternative to the great plan of salvation. In the premortal existence, Lucifer proposed a fundamental modification of the Father's plan. It was a deceptively easier and more expedient concept. He, Lucifer himself, would predetermine the outcome and guarantee the results. But in so doing, he would destroy our agency and claim the glory and honor for his own.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks describes Satan's modification:

He would save all the spirit children of God by eliminating the possibility of sin. He would assure that result by removing their power to choose (Moses 4:1, 3).

Lucifer's modification could not be accepted because his proposed means were repugnant to the end sought to be achieved. In the world of ends and means, ends are inexorably shaped by the means used to achieve them. The objective of eternal life for the children of God could be attained only by the methods God would approve. As he has said in another setting: "It must needs be done in mine own way" (D&C 104:16).

Lucifer's methods could not achieve God's objective. They would corrupt it. Saving everyone at the price of taking away everyone's agency would deny God's children the growth toward eternal life they were intended to receive from the creation of the world and their venture into mortality.

—The Lord's Way (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991), pp. viii-ix

The scriptures record that Satan's selfish proposal was rejected. As spirit children of God, those of us who subsequently came into mortality participated in rejecting that modification. Satan rebelled in anger and induced one-third of all the hosts of heaven to follow him.

For those who chose to follow Lucifer, the Father's "plan of happiness" was unacceptable. Perhaps the risk seemed too great and the way too difficult. They may have wanted an easier, safer path, the guaranteed results that were promised by Satan. The price might well have seemed deceptively small: loss of our power to choose.

But the power to choose—our moral agency—is absolutely essential to the plan of happiness and the further progression we must seek in mortality. With agency, we can learn, grow, improve, and progress. We are free to choose our own path. We can decide what we will do and who we will become.

The crucial importance of agency is reaffirmed again and again in the scriptures: "Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself" (2 Ne. 2:16) "Remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life" (2 Ne. 10:23) "Behold I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself" (D&C 29:35).

The Lord's servants have repeatedly reminded us that agency is a "sovereign principle. According to the plan [of salvation] agency must be honored. It was so from the beginning" (Boyd K. Packer, Conference Report, April 1988, p. 82). The scriptures indicate we probably have had our agency—and that God Himself honors and has vouchsafed it—at every stage of our existence:

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.

Behold, here is the agency of man . . .

—D&C 93:29-31; italics added

The war in our premortal existence was fought over the issue of agency. As spirit children of God, we clearly had agency. We chose to follow the Father's plan, rejecting Satan's proposed modification that would have guaranteed the results but at the price of destroying our agency (Moses 4:3).

We also have our moral agency in mortality. The Lord said to Adam and Eve, "Thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee" (Moses 3:17). To Enoch he said, "Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency" (Moses 7:32; italics added).

In our own dispensation the Lord decreed, "Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves" (D&C 58:27-28; italics added).

For agency to be operative, there must be alternatives and opportunities from which to choose. As Lehi said, "It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." Good and evil. Light and darkness. Right and wrong. Easy and hard. (See 2 Nephi 2:11.) In Elder Holland's words, mortality presents us with the "chance to become like our heavenly parents, to face suffering and overcome it, to endure sorrow and still live rejoicingly, to confront good and evil and be strong enough to choose the good" (Christ and the New Covenant, p. 204).

Modern scriptures affirm the necessity of opposition: "It must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves" (D&C 29:39).

Thus we live in a world full of very real choices. Some are small. Others loom very large. All have consequences, both for ourselves and for others.

There is also a difference—and it is an essential one—between agency (the power to choose) and freedom (the opportunity to exercise those choices):

Because free agency is a God-given precondition to the purpose of mortal life, no person or organization can take away our free agency in mortality . . . What can be taken away or reduced by the conditions of mortality is our freedom, the power to act upon our choices. Free agency is absolute, but in the circumstances of mortality freedom is always qualified.

Freedom may be qualified or taken away by (1) physical laws, including the physical limitations with which we are born, (2) by our own action, and (3) by the action of others, including governments . . . A loss of freedom reduces the extent to which we can act upon our choices, but it does not deprive us of our God-given free agency . . .

Many losses of freedom are imposed by others . . . Interferences with our freedom do not deprive us of our free agency. When Pharaoh put Joseph in prison, he restricted Joseph's freedom, but he did not take away his free agency.

—Dallin H. Oaks, "Free Agency and Freedom," address delivered at the Third Annual Book of Mormon Symposium, Brigham Young University, 11 October 1987

President Howard W. Hunter said: "God's chief way of acting is by persuasion and patience and long-suffering, not by coercion and stark confrontation. He acts by gentle solicitation and by sweet enticement. He always acts with unfailing respect for the freedom and independence that we possess" (Ensign, November 1989, p. 18; italics added).

Other than the divine gift of life itself, the power to direct that life is God's most precious gift to us, His children. One of my favorite hymns, "Know This, That Every Soul Is Free," states:

Know this, that ev'ry soul is free To choose his life and what he'll be; For this eternal truth is giv'n: That God will force no man to heav'n. He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love, and light, In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind. —Hymns, no. 240

Unlike agency, our freedom—the opportunity together with the ability to exercise our agency—can be compromised. It may be restricted by others. It may be limited by circumstance. Our freedom can also be curtailed or willingly surrendered by our own choices and actions. We may even pursue one incorrect path for so long or repeat wrong behaviors so often that we lose the desire, the will, to change.

But agency itself cannot be surrendered or taken away. Agency is preserved under the most severe conditions, the most extreme circumstances. Even the extraordinarily degrading, dehumanizing surroundings exemplified by Hitler's concentration camps could not deprive captives of this most precious gift:

The experiences of [concentration] camp life show that man does have a choice of action. . . . Man can preserve a vestige of spiritual freedom, of independence of mind, even in such terrible conditions of psychic and physical stress. . . .

Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own way.

There were always choices to make. Every day, every hour, offered the opportunity to make a decision, a decision which determined whether you would or would not submit to those powers which threatened to rob you of your very self, your inner freedom; which determined whether or not you would become the plaything of circumstance, renouncing freedom and dignity to become molded into the form of the typical inmate. . . . The last inner freedom cannot be lost.

—Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), pp. 74-75

It is this final internal liberty, our last inner stronghold, that cannot be usurped. Even in indescribably loathsome conditions, it remains to those of determined heart, undaunted will, and resolute spirit. We cannot always control our circumstances, but we can determine how we respond to them.

In LDS theology, "impaired agency" is thus an oxymoron. "Impaired will" is not.

Both external and internal threats to our freedom exist in abundance. There are numerous influences around us that will—if we allow them to do so—sap our spiritual strength, dissolve our determination, and erode our will to choose our own paths, to elect our own way.

We must never, ever willingly surrender or relinquish our freedom to direct our own lives. In so doing, we may figuratively sell the opportunity to exercise agency, our precious celestial birthright, for a mess of temporal pottage. To whatever extent possible, we should resist those circumstances that would restrict or limit our freedom to choose for ourselves. We should permit no one and no thing to usurp our freedom to make moral choices.

There are also, especially today, some substances and behavior patterns that can be frighteningly effective solvents of our will to resist evil. Those who surrender themselves to their pernicious influence may be plunged into a spiritual Twilight Zone from which escape can be very difficult . . .
