Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Pottage and Other Messes

The call came, as they so often do, at the end of a particularly long, hard day at the hospital. I had already packed my briefcase, put my coat on, and started toward the door of my office when the phone rang. One of my favorite colleagues, a local neurologist practicing in Salt Lake City, was waiting on the line.

"Annie," he said in a hopeful but anxious tone, "you going to be around for a while?"

I knew that innocent-sounding question really meant he had something serious on his mind. He needed to talk—now.

"As a matter of fact, I was planning to stay late and work on some stuff in my office," I said, mentally excusing the small white lie.

His relief was evident. "Good!" he exclaimed. "I've got a tough case I'd like to show you. I've got all the films here and I could run right up to your office. Be there in ten minutes!"

"I'll leave the door open," I replied, resigned to the delay.

He hurried in a few minutes later, slightly out of breath. I pulled out a chair for him and turned on a bank of x-ray viewboxes so we could look at the films together.

He wasted no time in getting to the point. "One of my patients, a young mother of two whom I've been seeing off and on for chronic headaches, was admitted to the hospital the day before yesterday with strokelike symptoms and elevated blood pressure. The initial CAT scan was negative so we did an MRI," he said, referring to another kind of medical imaging called magnetic resonance imaging.

Working while he talked, he placed the CAT scan on the viewbox. I glanced at it briefly and agreed that it looked normal. The neurologist took it down and put a half-dozen MRI films on the illuminated panels.

"This is what has us concerned," he remarked worriedly as he pointed to several abnormal areas on the brain scan. "We don't know what's going on here."

"Is she pregnant?" I asked.

"No."

"On birth control pills? Or any other medications?"

"No."

"Is there any history of recent infection? Possible trauma or other kind of injury?"

"No," he said again with obvious frustration.

"Hmpf," I grunted as I looked at the films in more detail. "These changes could represent emboli from the heart. Or perhaps some sort of abnormality in the distal blood vessels, a vasculitis of some kind. Maybe even lupus."

"That's what we thought," he agreed. "But her cardiac examination is normal. So far all the laboratory studies are negative, too. We were stumped, so I asked the neuroradiologists to do an angiogram."

"Sounds reasonable," I agreed. "Have they done it yet?"

"Just finished it this afternoon. I brought all those films, too."

I had suspected as much, judging from the bulky film jacket he had with him. I sighed inwardly, knowing that sorting through the lengthy study was going to take time and careful attention.

"Well, let's start putting `em up," I said, reaching for the heavy pile of films.

The very first images began to tell a fascinating but ominous story. I involuntarily sucked in my breath as striking abnormalities were apparent on one film after another.

"Wow!" I exclaimed, and it was an understatement. "I don't think I've ever personally seen anything quite like this!"

"Neither had we," he admitted. "We all hoped you'd know what was going on. We don't have a clue!"

"I do have some ideas," I mused as I searched through the remaining pile.

He looked hopeful.

"What about the sed rate? Is it elevated? Did you screen for anti-nuclear antibodies?" I asked, considering the possibility of diseases that involved malfunctions in the immune system. The body normally follows a sort of biological "behavioral code," leaving healthy cells alone while attacking cancers and harmful substances such as microbes and toxins. When autoimmune responses go awry, the body can figuratively "mutiny" and attack itself.

"Sed rate is within normal limits. But a lot of the other stuff is still cooking," he answered, referring to some still-pending blood studies.

"What about AIDS? It's comparatively rare in our neck of the woods but it can cause a vasculitis," I reminded him.

"Naw. We did test for HIV anyway. Negative."

Reluctantly, I raised another possibility. I hated to consider it, but I felt the issue had to be addressed. "What about drug abuse?"

He chuckled equably and answered, "No way. We're talking active members of the Church here. This is a tithe-paying, temple-going, model Latter-day Saint couple. They're both schoolteachers."

"Just thought I'd ask. Maybe you should too. As unlikely as it seems," I added hastily.

"They'd be insulted. If they got mad enough, they might even sue," he shuddered.

"I still think you should consider broaching the subject. Especially if all the other labs come back negative," I responded stubbornly.

"Easy for you to say," he muttered. "You don't have to talk to the patients."

I shrugged, out of ideas. We parted with a few pleasantries and a handshake.

A few weeks later, I saw my neurologist friend at a local medical conference.

"Hey," I called to him, "I haven't seen you for a few days."

We exchanged greetings.

"Oh, by the way," I asked casually, "whatever came of that case you showed me a couple of weeks ago? How did it turn out? I'd be interested to know what the final diagnosis was."

He looked a bit embarrassed.

"I took your advice," he said with a rueful grin. "I felt uneasy about that case all along. Something just didn't fit. After we finished at your office, it was really nagging at me. So I went back to the hospital. Both the husband and wife were there. I closed the door and said, `Sit down. We've got to talk.'"

He continued, "They both looked wary. I decided to take the bull by the horns and just asked bluntly, `Do you use drugs?' They were outraged, indignant that I'd even dare ask such a thing. They vehemently denied it. Threatened. The madder they got, the more certain I was that something was very wrong."

His shoulders slumped. "It took a long time, but I kept after them. Then it finally came out. Cocaine. And maybe some other stuff as well."

It fit. The whole puzzling case now made logical but tragic sense.

"You know what they said, when they finally admitted to using coke?" he asked. "I could hardly believe my ears. `We're not addicts,' they said. `We're not like others,' they said. `We don't do it very often,' they said. `Couple times a week, max.' Then the capper, the absolute top: `We're responsible users!'"

"Ridiculous. There is no such thing as a `responsible user' when you're talking about street drugs or abuse of prescription drugs," I stated flatly.

"Yeah," he concurred with a weary shrug, "and it happens even here. Right here in our own blessed valley."

I'm in control? I'm a "responsible user"? Rubbish! Rationalization and evasion are part of the addiction syndrome.

The road to addiction is a deceptive one. The beginning is not often clearly defined. There are no bold signposts that announce its inception, no well-demarcated boundaries that mark its stages. What is the difference between personal preferences, habits, and rituals on the one hand and frank dependence and addiction on the other? When does a habit become an addiction?

For that matter, how does curiosity become fascination, then grow into intense interest and preoccupation, perhaps eventually becoming fixation and even compulsion?

In society's version of diagnostic "bracket creep," such distinctions as these are often ignored, deliberately blurred, or even eliminated. Addiction has a nasty, judgmental sound, some might say. But I would argue in response that addiction is a truly nasty and uniquely destructive business.

There are many different types of addictions. Some are chemical; some are psychological; some are behavioral. Some represent a combination of several factors. Eating disorders. Alcohol abuse. Pornography. Sexual addiction. Drug abuse (involving both illicit "street" and prescription drugs).

Not all addictions are alike, but there are some common threads that they seem to share. Misery is one. Pleasure-seeking is sometimes another. There is often a strongly felt need to escape stress and relieve pain, whether physical, psychological, or a mixture of both.

The welcome relief or transient pleasure derived from using an addictive substance soon dissipates, leaving in its wake a desire, a hunger, even a craving for more. In a very real phenomenon medical doctors call "tachyphylaxis," the body and the brain develop a tolerance to certain substances. This results in the body's requiring ever-increasing amounts of the drug—painkillers, for example—to achieve the desired effect such as pleasure or relief from pain.

A similar kind of adaptation can take place with behavioral addictions. For example, addiction to pornography may demand ever more bizarre and explicit material to satisfy the need. Eventually, viewing the material—no matter how extreme—may not be enough.

Regarding the devil's goal of twisting, exaggerating, and perverting normal human pleasure to his own end, C. S. Lewis wrote, "An ever increasing craving for an ever diminishing pleasure is the formula . . . to get the man's soul and give him nothing in return" (The Screwtape Letters [New York: Bantam, 1995], p. 26).

I believe that addiction—of any kind, to any thing—is one of the greatest potential threats to our freedom. There are some potent substances such as cocaine, heroin, and certain "designer drugs" whose effect on the brain is so powerful that, at least in some people, they can be almost instantaneously addicting.

Jonathan Kellerman, a psychologist and author of numerous popular suspense novels, recently wrote about his own personal encounter with what he called a "chemically induced thrill system." In the first pain-wracked hours after cancer surgery, he was given a narcotic similar to morphine. He describes vividly how the drug transported him from total body pain and agony to euphoria and blessed relief, then—as it wore off—slammed him back into "post-op hell."

After dramatically describing the drug-crave curve, Dr. Kellerman concluded: "Any substance capable of transporting a psyche from agony to rapture that powerfully and quickly is beyond empathy and rationality. Morphiates stimulate a level of pleasure incomprehensible to those who haven't experienced it."

The mere thought of experimenting with such potent substances personally scares the daylights out of me. It terrified Dr. Kellerman too. As a counselor and psychologist, he knew firsthand the devastating ruins created by drug abuse. After his initial experience of flying high on medical heroin, he opted instead for a single dose of oral Percoset, then eventually downshifted to Tylenol for the remainder of his hospitalization. As he put it, "The pain wasn't nice but it ended" (USA Today, 9 June 1997, p. 19A).

This reminds me of a chilling discussion I had a few years ago with some medical colleagues. We were discussing the tragic death of Len Bias, a highly talented young athlete who had just been drafted into the NBA by the Boston Celtics. Instant fame, numerous lucrative product endorsements, and a multimillion-dollar contract surely awaited him.

The promising young man, who had no known history of drug abuse, tried cocaine. Apparently he used it just once. The drug, which can hit the brain and cardiovascular system like a sledgehammer, caused a fatal heart attack.

We asked ourselves why someone would throw away such a bright future. How could anybody be that naive? Did he feel invulnerable? Did he think nothing would happen to him? No one knew the answers. None of us understood the drug's allure and power.

As we were all shaking our heads, one of the young doctors asked me bluntly, "Annie, have you ever tried it?"

"What's `it'?" I asked.

"Coke."

"No."

"Marijuana?"

"Nope."

"Not even once? Maybe way back when you were in college, in the heyday of the counterculture movement? Maybe you tried it but just `didn't inhale'?"

"No, never."

"What's the matter, don't you trust yourself?" he challenged. "Afraid? Think you might not be strong-willed enough to keep it under control?"

"That's absolutely right," I answered emphatically. "The whole idea scares me. I simply don't want to take the risk—either of a drug reaction or of becoming addicted. The first use could be the last one, as it was for Len Bias. In fact, where drugs are concerned, I don't trust myself—or anyone else either. So, no, I'm not at all sure I'd be `strong enough,' at least the way you seem to be defining strength. I'd rather be strong enough never to try the doggoned stuff in the first place!"

There are wide variations in individual susceptibility to both illegal and legal drugs like alcohol and tobacco. I'd rather not test the limits of my own resistance to such substances. Better to stay as far away from the cliff's edge as possible and avoid looking curiously into the abyss beyond. Cliff walking is a hazardous occupation; vertigo and loss of balance are real risks when you get so close to the edge.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has pleaded with us, every one of us, to shun illegal drugs as we would avoid poison. I'll bet he's never tried them either—the very thought seems patently ridiculous, doesn't it?

The "if you haven't tried it, don't knock it" school of thought doesn't apply to using illegal drugs or abusing prescription drugs. This is clearly such a terribly dangerous path that we should never even put a foot on it. Not so much as a toenail!

When and how does a person cross the vanishingly thin line into dependence and addiction? It's not always clear. But one thing I know for certain is this: We have one definite, well-defined, absolutely crystal clear choice, and it is the very first one. For some people and certain substances, it may in fact be the only one.

That choice: Don't even try drugs! Avoid them like the very plague on our society that they are. They may well destroy you and all you hold dear. There is no such thing as a "responsible user."

Speaking of substance abuse, the director of Stanford University's Alcohol and Drug Treatment Center wrote, "The person in the grips of dependence does not have biological control." He emphasized further, "In classic withdrawal, the abuser loses control over his central nervous system response to the psychoactive substance" (in "Dependence Diagnosed," Stanford Medicine, Fall 1996, pp. 8-9).

President Hinckley recently instructed priesthood leaders, "Let us work with our children, teach our people, to not become shackled and enslaved by drugs which take possession until the individual no longer has power over himself and cannot control his own destiny" (Church News, 6 July 1996).

Other servants of the Lord have been no less emphatic. Elder Robert D. Hales has firmly stated, "The use of alcohol, tobacco, and drugs should turn on warning lights because, when we choose to use these substances, we become slaves; our agency is limited" (Conference Report, April 1990, p. 53; italics added). And Elder Dallin H. Oaks has counseled: "We should avoid any practices in which one person attempts to surrender even part of his will to another person or in which another person attempts to take it. Whether the means are chemical, behavioral, electronic, or others not yet dreamed of . . . we should avoid any behavior that is addictive. Whatever is addictive compromises our will" ("Free Agency and Freedom," italics added).

Although addiction may severely weaken an individual's will and its consequences greatly restrict his freedom, his agency remains intact. The divine gift still flickers in the darkness. Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "It is contrary to the order of heaven for any soul to be locked into compulsive, immoral behavior with no way out" (Ensign, November 1986, p. 18). Thus the person in the grips of dependence who has surrendered his or her will to addictive behavior still has one final remaining freedom, one last desperate choice: the choice to cry for help.

All is not yet lost. If recognized, addiction can be assessed and treated effectively. The road is, admittedly, very difficult. Treatment failures are common and relapses are discouragingly frequent. The good news is that recovery is possible; dependence can be conquered and addiction can be overcome.

If you are suffering with addiction, do not despair. There is hope for those who feel hopeless.

Loving, genuinely concerned Church leaders and experienced professional counselors are available to assist you in finding the path back. It is a difficult, thorny, and taxing road that lies ahead. In some cases it will require a lifetime of unrelentingly hard work and all the help you can get to escape from the iron grasp of dependency and addiction.

But, after all, an eternity hangs in the balance.

God can give us strength and power beyond our own to overcome all things. Addiction is no exception.
