Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

High Noon in the Garden of Good and Evil

The visual image is compelling, even arresting. It's a common story line, the stuff of oft-told modern tales as well as the basis for ancient legends. It's the classic theme of countless novels and a popular script for Western movies.

The sheriff walks slowly but with steady, measured gait down the dusty main street of a rough-and-tumble town on the American frontier. It is high noon in the Old West, time to face the Bad Guys. The hero is virtuous, with rugged good looks, firm jaw, and steely, determined eyes.

The odds against him are usually overwhelming. He almost always walks alone. Unafraid.

You know who the Bad Guys are; they wear the black hats.

In another movie theater halfway around the world, the same scene is played out by a samurai warrior with his long and short swords, the katana and tanto, tucked precisely into his wide obi sash. He dresses neatly, usually wearing an immaculate blue or gray kimono. He is clean-cut and handsome. The samurai typically walks alone, this time to face the rogues and bullies who have been terrorizing the poor village. He strides proudly, filled with a deep abiding sense of giri or obligation. To him, honor and loyalty are the supreme virtues.

A visual shorthand quickly tells the rapt audience who the Bad Guys are: they are homely, with messy, unkempt hair; they are clad in ugly black kimonos. Sometimes an eye patch is added to complete the sinister look.

Here at home, in the valleys and high mountains of Utah, at first glance the Good Guy appears much less imposing, perhaps even ordinary. He is slight in physical stature and much older than the prototype hero. He too has faced long odds, walking less-traveled roads in his tireless efforts to choose the right and entreat others to do the same. Because he loves people and wants to be among them, he is rarely alone.

He carries no guns, wears no swords. His armor is not the visible kind.

It is high noon. But he's been there before. Many times.

There are no Bad Guys, at least not the easily identifiable kind. Immorality doesn't always wear a black hat. Sleaze isn't necessarily dressed in a dirty kimono.

The Good Guy often functions with an additional handicap in the never-ending struggle with wrong. There are always curious onlookers and sometimes even a few hecklers who would distract his attention and try to spoil his uncompromising aim at evil. Instead of pistols and knives, those detractors use words. Cameras. Notepads and recorders. They know better than to try a frontal attack, for his ready wit, gentle good humor, infectious optimism, and legendary warmth will disarm even the most determined opponent. They will probe for any weakness, ready to move quickly and exploit any opening. They will be disappointed.

His demeanor is one of quiet confidence. He appears calm and assured, but there is not one iota of arrogance or egoism in the man. If anything, his deep-seated humility augments his widespread appeal.

He commands no troops, heads no warrior legions. Yet his power and authority are incalculable. His is a moral leadership, derived from personal righteousness, unimpeachable integrity, and his divinely constituted office. He has been tried in the fires of affliction and has not been found wanting.

He is Gordon Bitner Hinckley, fifteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His people, of whom I am one, revere him as a prophet, the latest in a long, distinguished line that includes Joseph Smith and Brigham Young in this modern dispensation and stretches back in time to Moses, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Yes, Amulek and Alma, along with Lehi and Nephi, are among those both honored and burdened with the prophetic calling.

President Hinckley never browbeats, never harangues. He inspires and quietly encourages his attentive listeners with simple, soft-spoken phrases. By nature a modest man, he characteristically includes himself in his admonitions. With a smile that brings him close to his audience he remarks, "We can all do a little better." He makes people want to be better. Feeling his trust in their basic goodness and decency, they believe they really can be better.

He exudes hope and an invigorating spirit of optimism. "What a great future there is for you if you will just walk the right way," he often says. "You are wonderful and you have within you the potential to do great and marvelous and good things. . . . Don't get sidetracked. Do what is right, let the consequence follow" (Church News, 6 May 1997). He has boundless confidence in us! When we hear such words of encouragement we feel a surge of energy and determination. We know we can do it.

President Hinckley also knows and often teaches that it is rarely the big choices in our lives that destroy us. He stresses that small, seemingly unimportant decisions can be pivotal: "The little decisions can be so crucial and so everlastingly important in their consequences" (Conference Report, October 1994, p. 65). It is these small and simple things, the daily little choices we make that largely determine our course.

Of such small choices are lives made. And unmade.
