Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

A Name and Face for Evil

He has many names and various guises. Some are as old as history itself; others are more modern inventions. His generic title in almost every language translates as "the devil." The ancient Hebrews first knew him as a member of the heavenly court who functioned as "the accuser," an agent of opposition and obstruction. He was later characterized as the great Other in a perpetual cosmic was between good and evil.

Common appellations for the devil have included Satan, Lucifer, Mephistopheles, and even "Old Scratch." He has been variously called the prince of darkness, the great imitator, the master deceiver, the father of lies. In the lyrics of a song by a popular hard rock group, the Rolling Stones, the devil was even misleadingly described as "a man of wealth and taste."

Terms such as evil, the devil, sin and repentance are becoming increasingly rare in modern conversation. They are deemed by many as dogmatic, much too judgmental, and far too harsh for proper discourse in polite circles. Many seem to think that unenlightened individuals who stubbornly persist in their antiquated belief in evil and the devil are to be pitied. Those who dare believe evil actually has a name and a face are dismissed as superstitious at best, even mentally somewhat off-kilter.

In his preface to The Screwtape Letters, C. S. Lewis wrote: "There are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils. One is to disbelieve in their existence. The other is to believe, and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them." As he also advised his readers to remember, "The safest road to Hell is the gradual one—the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts."

More than a century ago, the French poet Baudelaire cautioned, "Never forget . . . that the Devil's cleverest ploy is to persuade you that he doesn't exist." Could Baudelaire have borrowed an idea from the Book of Mormon? His statement sounds very much like Nephi's warning concerning the devil's activities in our own day and age:

For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good.

And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance.

—2 1 Ne. 28:20-22

As Nephi foresaw, today Satan gets the silent treatment from the media while evil is erased from our attention and expunged from our conversational vocabulary. Reporting on a recent Christian Booksellers Convention, a 1995 Newsweek article noted that under "S" the list of available publications included hundreds of titles for "success" and "seasonal" but almost none for "Satan" and "sin." One wonders what they would have found under "E" . . . probably not "evil."

In his novel The Witches of Eastwick, John Updike has one of the witches demur, "Evil is not a word we like to use. We prefer to say `unfortunate' or `lacking' or `misguided' or `disadvantaged.' We prefer to think of evil as the absence of good, a momentary relenting of its sunshine, a shadow, a weakening" (New York: Random House, 1984).

We are also watching the unnaming of Satan and the elimination of evil as objective reality in Western religious tradition. To many mainstream Christian theologians, evil itself is not only unfashionable, it is illusory. It doesn't really exist. Evil is, in classic Augustinian tradition, regarded only as the absence of good. Thus evil is literally nothing. As a mere "privation of the good," evil has only a "negative reality."

Let us not demean those who died in Bosnia or suffered from Stalin, Mao, Hitler, and Pol Pot with such nonsense.

To its victims, evil is real. Contrary to one historian's famous assertion about the "banality of evil," to its sufferers evil is never commonplace.

Evil as "negative reality"? Satan as mere metaphor? Nothing could be further from the truth.

Andrew Delbanco, chronicling the deconstruction of the devil in The Death of Satan: How Americans Have Lost the Sense of Evil, remarked with wonder, "The work of the devil is everywhere, but no one knows where to find him. We live in the most brutal century in human history, but instead of stepping forward to take the credit, he has rendered himself invisible" (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995, p. 9).

The devil has done a mighty slick disappearing act.

Evil is real. I firmly believe Satan exists. He is no abstraction, no mere absence of the good. Neither is he a nebulous manifestation like the "dark side of the Force" in the popular Star Wars trilogy.

Satan is by no means a far-off, remote figure. He is, by contrast, a familiar if not ubiquitous personage. President Spencer W. Kimball described him as "very much a personal, individual spirit being, but without a mortal body. . . . Yes, the devil is decidedly a person" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], p. 21).

At one time or another, many people have at least felt his influence and heard his whisperings of enticement. Calling Satan the master deceiver and reminding us that it is important to know and recognize his methods, President James E. Faust has asked: "Who has not heard and felt the enticings of the devil? His voice often sounds so reasonable and his message so easy to justify. It is an enticing, intriguing voice with dulcet tones. . . . The prince of darkness can be found everywhere . . . his influence is everywhere."

President Faust went on to state: "The First Presidency described Satan: `He is working under such perfect disguise that many do not recognize either him or his methods. There is no crime he would not commit, no debauchery he would not set up, no plague he would not send, no heart he would not break, no life he would not take, no soul he would not destroy. He comes as a thief in the night; he is a wolf in sheep's clothing' (James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols., Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-1975, 6:179)." (Ensign, November 1987, pp. 33-36).

I don't have any Satan stories to relate. I've never personally stared into the eyes of evil, nor have I taken Satan on in a head-to-head, toe-to-toe spiritual wrestling match. I hope I never do. No good can possibly come from getting too close to evil. We must avoid the devil's territory of temptation and deceit like the plague it is, has always been, and forever will be.

Still, it is essential to know our ancient enemy and understand his methods so that we will recognize his works for what they are. Brigham Young said it is important to "study evil, and its consequences" (Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1941], p. 257). However, I believe it is far safer to learn about evil indirectly and at as great a distance as possible. Instead of seeking our own personal encounters with Satan, we can easily—and certainly much more safely—learn about him and his methods through studying the scriptures.

The Savior Himself had a very revealing dialogue with the devil following his forty-day fast in the wilderness. Satan's bold presumption and arrogance with Him who created worlds without number—including our own—is nothing short of astonishing (see Matt. 4:1-11; Luke 4:1-13).

As a fourteen-year-old boy, Joseph Smith knelt in a secluded wood near his home, praying fervently to the Lord for truth and light. Almost immediately he found himself surrounded by thick darkness and sinking into deep despair. For a time it even seemed as if he were doomed to destruction. He later wrote that he was nearly overcome by "the power of some actual being from the unseen world," and described its influence as "such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being" (JS-H 1:15-16).

The Prophet explained that he then exerted all his powers to call upon God and deliver him from the enemy who had seized him. At the very moment when he was ready to sink into despair and abandon himself to destruction, God the Father and His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to the young boy and delivered him from the adversary's awful grasp. This glorious First Vision opened the dispensation of the fulness of times.

We can only surmise what actually happened, but we can assume that the adversary probably would have known the significance of what was about to transpire. He surely knew of Joseph's foreordination as the first prophet of the last, great dispensation. He would also have known that Joseph would prove a most effective disturber and annoyer of his kingdom. Had Satan succeeded in his efforts to prevent the First Vision from taking place, the course of history and the future of millions of souls would have been dramatically altered.

One of the many fundamental and important lessons of the First Vision is that Satan exists. His power is very real. However, as the Prophet learned and later taught, "All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. The devil has no power over us only as we permit him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], p. 181).

Joseph Smith experienced firsthand the reality and power of Satan.

I'll take his word for it.

President Marion G. Romney wrote, "Latter-day Saints know that there is a God. With like certainty, they know that Satan lives, that he is a powerful personage of spirit, the archenemy of God, of man, and of righteousness" (Ensign, June 1971, p. 35). Elder Neal A. Maxwell likewise said, "One cannot believe in the living God whom the living scriptures describe and who is spoken about by living prophets, and still not come to understand too that there is also a devil" (Things As They Really Are [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980], p. 40).

Even when they grudgingly grant the independent existence of evil, modern commentators caricature Satan and minimize the magnitude of his influence. One writer said, "Today, evil is experienced as random and ordinary, devoid of cosmic significance. `—— [expletive deleted] happens,' we say with a shrug."

As a college student from a traditional Protestant background, I struggled with the "problem" of evil. If, as I believed, God created everything from nothing (the classic ex nihilo concept of orthodox Christianity), where did evil come from? As the Creator, isn't God at least indirectly responsible for evil? If so, how could a good, loving God create evil?

In Mormon theology, the evil that men do and the suffering they cause in their own lives and the lives of others are the inevitable by-products of genuine moral agency. Given the power to choose, some will elect to choose evil.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has reminded us:

There is another war that has gone on since before the world was created and which is likely to continue for a long time yet to come. . . . That war has never ceased.

The war goes on. It is waged across the world over the issues of agency and compulsion. It is waged in our own lives, day in and day out, in our homes, in our work, in our school associations; it is waged over questions of love and respect, of loyalty and fidelity, of obedience and integrity. We are all involved in it . . . each one of us.

—Church News, 8 February 1997

This is no abstract and impersonal battle, no remote, imaginary conflict. Although it is a cosmic struggle, this ongoing war is fought well within our view, inside the boundaries of our own lives, indeed, very close to home. Sometimes it is actually in the home. At other times it is on our streets or within our workplaces.

Satan is an intimate enemy. We are all locked into the eternal universal struggle between the constructive, elevating, and positive forces of good and the destructive, debasing, and negative influence of evil.

There is indeed "a line drawn in the sand."

We will, by our actions—or even our failure to act—choose one side of that line or the other. Each of us makes choices between good and evil, between right and wrong, several times a day. With countless small but significant decisions, we determine our course. We must select our path firmly and courageously. We must be steadfast and unwavering in our determination to choose the right and resist the wrong. As one verse from the hymn "The Time Is Far Spent" puts it:

Be fixed in your purpose, for Satan will try you; The weight of your calling he perfectly knows. Your path may be thorny, but Jesus is nigh you; His arm is sufficient, tho demons oppose. —Hymns, no. 266

The opposition is often alluring, its audacity intimidating, its methods seductive. The sheer scale of modern evil is also shocking and appalling. In the words of Andrew Delbanco, "The repertoire of evil has never been richer." Yet President Gordon B. Hinckley's assessment of the ongoing battle is characteristically upbeat and optimistic: "We are winning, and the future never looked brighter."

We all have a moral mandate to name evil and oppose its influence. Anywhere. Everywhere. Anytime. All the time.

For every last one of us, today is indeed high noon in the garden of good and evil.
