Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Less-Traveled Roads

We never noticed the searing summer heat and suffocating humidity. Children rarely do. To us, the hot Indiana summers were a magical time of year.

We were fortunate, living relatively near a lake. Our property was not actually on the water, mind you; that prime real estate was occupied by an exclusive, private preparatory school and expensive weekend homes owned mostly by wealthy out-of-towners. The majority of us "locals" lived on adjacent farms or in the small town that bordered the less desirable part of the lake.

The swampy northwest corner was also home to the town park and its popular public beach and boat launch. A weedy section of the lakefront was reserved as an anchorage for the modest craft and fishing boats owned by a few of the luckier locals. Dad and my Uncle Bob shared a pier where the Osborn "fleet" was moored every year. It consisted of our grandfather's old aluminum rowboat, a small, sloop-rigged sailboat called a "Snipe," and—our pride and joy—a sturdy, clinker-built ski boat with a big Johnson outboard motor and twin five-gallon metal gas tanks.

Law and order on the lake was maintained mostly by common courtesy. There were relatively few misdemeanors; violent crime was almost unknown.

The only officer was a popular junior high school coach cum history teacher who was hired part-time for the summer by the Lake Association and deputized by the local two-man police force. He was fortyish, a ruggedly handsome man with a hook nose, flattop haircut, and piercing, gray-blue eyes. He took both his jobs—teacher and law officer—equally seriously.

Jim Cox—Mister Cox, if you please—could intimidate his students with a single stern glance.

The boaters were a different story.

As the lake traffic increased each summer and the speedboats became more powerful, it finally became apparent that the modest patrol boat the Lake Association had used for years would no longer suffice.

The Town Fathers and the Lake Association leaders bit the bullet, pooled their resources, and purchased a craft that would be by far the fastest boat on the lake. It was a top-of-the-line model, an inboard with a powerful engine designed for speed.

The boat was painted a brilliant white with "Lake Patrol" emblazoned in bold letters on its sharply raked bow. It was magnificent. When Mr. Cox opened the throttle wide, the boat went so fast it almost seemed to be hydroplaning. The sleek new craft was the talk of the lake.

There was only one minor problem. The neat but well-worn uniforms the Association provided hardly matched the dazzling boat's splendor.

So sorry, the Town Fathers and Lake Association officers replied to Mr. Cox's pleas for new uniforms. We spent the whole budget on the boat. They apologized with a vague promise. Perhaps next year . . .

Undeterred, Mr. Cox asked permission to buy his own uniforms. Despite their puzzlement at why anyone would want to spend his own hard-earned money unnecessarily, they reluctantly gave him the go-ahead.

The next weekend, Mr. Cox went on patrol decked out in his brand-new duds. He had made a special trip to South Bend, the nearest big city, and spent several hours in a uniform store, painstakingly selecting each item for maximum effect. The resulting outfit made him look something like a cross between an Indiana state trooper and a Canadian mountie.

He wore a crisp, short-sleeved khaki shirt tucked into precisely tailored pants that were pressed into knife-edge creases. A Sam Browne belt crossed his muscular chest under shoulder epaulets and attached to a wide matching tan leather belt. His sidearm, a .38 pistol, was carefully holstered on his hip along with the usual assortment of billy club and handcuffs (never used), army knife, and screwdriver and pliers (often used). The latter tools were employed for impromptu repairs on the stalled engines of hapless boaters who found themselves adrift, bobbing helplessly in the middle of the lake.

Mr. Cox's silver deputy's badge was polished to a fare-thee-well and glinted brightly in the summer sunshine. Opaque, aviator-style, wrap-around sunglasses added to the overall effect. Best of all, the whole outfit was topped off by a broad-brimmed, high-crowned, brown felt hat with chinstrap—the eye-catching kind that Smokey the Bear ("Help Prevent Forest Fires") wore on television.

Mr. Cox cut a splendid figure and he knew it.

He proudly drove the Lake Patrol boat up and down the entire three-mile length of the lake, cheerily waving at bathers and wary boaters.

We were often on the lake, as waterskiing was one of our family's favorite activities. We would slalom for hours, cutting sharply and jumping back and forth across the waves, competing with other boats to see whose skiiers could throw up the biggest rooster tails of water. Extra points were awarded informally for taking an especially spectacular spill or touching a shoulder to the water without falling.

The only problem with a day of sun and skiing (skin cancer wouldn't become an issue until years in the future) was that the tanks in our boat didn't hold very much gas. Once or twice a day, we would have to motor to the lake's only marina and fill `em up.

We loved Campbell's marina. It occupied a small, stagnant lagoon on the south end of the lake and was ringed by boat houses, commercial docks, and warehouses adjoined by a large boatyard. The place smelled of oil, suntan lotion, engine exhaust and rotting vegetation. It was the scent of summer.

Late one memorable holiday weekend we detoured into the marina to fill up and grab a quick bite to eat. We chatted on the dock as one of the local boys who worked at the marina topped off the tanks for us.

As we stood there, the Lake Patrol boat hove into view, smartly rounding the corner into the lagoon. Mr. Cox, hat cocked at a rakish angle, expertly maneuvered it into a miniscule slot adjacent to the gas pumps. He tossed the bowline to a waiting attendant and gestured for a fill-up.

Then the unthinkable happened. When Mr. Cox stepped onto the gunwale of the boat and put his other foot on the dock, he failed to transfer his weight properly. His legs spread-eagled as the boat began to push away from the dock.

Oddly, no one moved. The suddenly hushed crowd on the dock stood in a frozen tableau, mouths agape, as the inevitable result soon became apparent.

"Aw, hell!" he exclaimed in disgust just before he at last lost his balance and fell into the oily water with a resounding ker-plunk.

For a moment, all that the onlookers could see was his Smokey-the-Bear hat slowly floating away toward the center of the lagoon.

Then he surfaced, coughing and spluttering indignantly.

The spell broke as the crowd erupted into laughter. One of the boys dived into the water and retrieved the beloved hat as others reached down and hoisted the sopping wet policeman onto the dock.

"It's not funny!" he shouted, removing his gun and pouring scummy water out of the dripping holster. Then, realizing how ridiculous he must look, he began chuckling along with everyone else.

The boy carefully brushed water and seaweed off the hat and solemnly handed it back to Mr. Cox.

With a broad grin he clapped it onto his head, readjusted the brim to its customary jaunty angle, and drove off toward the setting sun. There were other boats to be hailed and—hopefully—a few more tickets yet to be written before night fell.

Years later, I can still visualize poor Mr. Cox struggling to maintain his balance with one foot on the boat's gunwale and the other on the dock.

How often do we, in indecision, try to straddle between the world and the Lord's kingdom? It's a dangerous balancing act, one in which nonchoice becomes a choice. The result may be a spiritual fall into murky water.

Joshua warned the Israelites, "Choose you this day whom ye will serve," and concluded with his own decision, "As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Josh. 24:15).

The Prophet Elijah pleaded, "How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word" (1 Kgs. 18:21). Failure to commit is a decision.

We live in a world filled with confounding choices and everincreasing demands on our time and attention. One of life's inevitable frustrations is that we often have more positive options than we can possibly pursue. Sometimes the most difficult decisions are not those that involve right and wrong or good and evil. They may not even be between the "lesser of two evils" or the "greater of two goods." The really tough ones are those that require us to select between two attractive "rights" that may be equally worthy but mutually exclusive alternatives. After all, most people don't have to choose between holding family home evening and robbing the nearest bank! But they often must decide whether to stay home with the family or visit elderly neighbors, whether to go to the temple or work on their family history.

When choosing one activity means abandoning other equally worthwhile ones, we learn the invaluable lesson of committing ourselves to certain goals. We learn to live with the regret we inevitably feel when we can't "do it all." An hour spent pursuing one goal is an hour that can't be used in another, perhaps equally praiseworthy activity. We gain valuable experience as we learn to prioritize our objectives and make commitments.

The Lord's ancient promise, set forth in Deuteronomy, reminds us of our God-given right—and the moral necessity—to choose our own path. We must choose; our loving Father in Heaven will not relieve us of that opportunity and responsibility. He has indeed set before us life and good, and death and evil, urging us to "choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and . . . obey his voice" (Deut. 30:19-20).

Yogi Berra, the baseball Hall-of-Fame catcher, supposedly said, "If you come to a fork in the road, take it!" Crossroads and forks in life's pathways are unavoidable. When we choose the beginning of a road, we are also selecting a destination.

Robert Frost's famous poem, "The Road Not Taken," is a nearly universal favorite that addresses the issue of choosing:

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both And be one traveler, long I stood And looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth; Then took the other, as just as fair, And having perhaps the better claim, Because it was grassy and wanted wear; Though as for that the passing there Had worn them really about the same, And both that morning equally lay In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh, I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence: Two roads diverged in a wood, and I— I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference. —In Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People, J. M. Lyon, L. R. Gundry, J. A. Parry, D. Jensen, eds. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), p. 29

Did you ever wonder where the other path, the "more-traveled road," led? Who hasn't looked backwards on his or her life with the always-powerful benefit of hindsight and wondered: What Might Have Been? What If? Or, perhaps sadly, If Only . . .

If we fail to discern the critical decision points, we can—simply by default—drift onto side roads. We may bypass the right path, which is frequently the lonelier, less-traveled road. Yet it is so often the harder, more obscure path that will lead us to happiness and eternal life, even God's life.

Addressing a group of Latter-day Saints during the September 14, 1996, Taylorsville North Stake Conference, President Boyd K. Packer stated, "I don't believe a member of this Church can make a serious mistake that would alter his destiny without having received a warning and overruled that warning." In writing about what he called "the decision of life," President Packer has also said, "If we can be shown where the deciding pivotal choices are, we can succeed."

Amulek did. We can too.

My own experience would suggest that President Packer's statements may apply to nonmembers as well, if—and that's of course a big "if"—they will listen for and then heed those inner, spiritual promptings. Although I often didn't recognize it at the time, the guiding influence of the Holy Spirit has been present at most of the critical decision points in my life. Viewing those moments of choice through my own personal "retrospectoscope," I have overwhelming feelings of gratitude and relief. Gratitude that I switched career tracks, finally choosing medicine. Relief that I didn't walk away from the LDS Church the first unsettling time I stumbled onto a Sunday School meeting. Gratitude for Ron; relief that I didn't marry someone else.

President Thomas S. Monson often quotes one of his favorite poems:

He stood at the crossroads all alone, The sunlight in his face. He had no thought for the world unknown— He was set for a manly race. But the roads stretched east and the roads stretched west, And the lad knew not which road was best, So he chose the road that led him down, And he lost the race and victor's crown. He was caught at last in an angry snare Because no one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better road. Another day at the self-same place, A boy with high hopes stood. He, too, was set for a manly race; He, too, was seeking the things that were good; But one was there who the roads did know, And that one showed him which way to go. So he turned from the road that would lead him down, And he won the race and the victor's crown. He walks today the highway fair Because one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better way. —Author unknown, in Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People, p. 313

None of us has the supernatural vision to see around corners and past the twisting bends that often mark less-traveled roads. We frequently lack both the wisdom and experience even to imagine the full consequences of taking one path versus the other.

If only we could peek! Just catch a quick glance at what lies beyond the bend in the path . . . climb a handy tree or something. Even a map would help. Failing that, what if we could find someone who had either foreseen or actually walked down that road, and ask for directions?

There is help. We can receive assistance in recognizing the deciding, pivotal choices in our lives. We can know which path to follow.

Most of us realize that our need for divine guidance in our lives is greater today than ever before. President James E. Faust has testified that "by the power and gift of the Holy Ghost, we can know what to do and what not to do to bring happiness and peace to our lives" (Ensign, April 1996, p. 2).
