Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Currents to Disaster

The devastating Utah floods of 1983 were a long-distant memory. They had been followed in quick succession by several unusually dry years that in some scattered regions bordered on severe drought. Faces creased with worry, water masters and other civic authorities throughout the Intermountain West scanned the skies hopefully and anxiously pored over long-term forecasts. Reservoirs sank to dangerously low depths and ground-water levels dropped precipitously. Some areas instituted strict water rationing.

Then the long, wet winter of `95 arrived. Skiers and resort owners rejoiced. Farmers everywhere grinned in relief, then—as farmers often do—found something concerning the weather to gripe and grumble about, namely the delay in planting their spring crops. With the plentiful water, golf courses and backyards across the state sported a rare, deep emerald color.

The unusually dense snowpack, combined with heavy, late spring rains and gradually warming temperatures, would soon result in a near-record spring runoff throughout the entire Colorado River system. To kayak buffs and other assorted "river rats," the predicted high stream flows meant one thing: fabulous, world-class whitewater with wondrously giant waves (called "big hydraulics" in river slang).

Ron and I had been eager participants in many river trips. We relished the opportunity to be outdoors with no distractions or interruptions. Fun but relatively safe rapids with scary names like Skull, Upper and Lower Disaster Falls, and the deliciously ominous Room of Doom always provided excitement and adventure.

But in all our years of river running, we had never done the Big One: the mighty Colorado with its legendary Cataract Canyon. Big Drop. One of the largest rapids in North America.

"Maybe this is the year," I said to Ron. "Everyone says it will never get any better than this."

"Let's do it," he agreed.

A phone call to Holiday River Expeditions confirmed the encouraging rumors. The huge, slowly melting snowpack was indeed sending massive amounts of water into the whole Colorado River basin, making this year's runoff one of the biggest ever—perhaps the biggest and longest-lasting on record.

We reserved space on one of the earliest available trips.

When we arrived at Green River, the town was full of boaters eagerly awaiting the once-in-a-lifetime whitewater adventure. The patio at Ray's, a local favorite famous for its burgers, was jammed. As we patiently waited for a table, a group of Holiday River guides recognized Ron and me and promptly invited our family to join them.

The guides, mostly in their twenties and thirties, were always full of youthful enthusiasm. This year the promise of recordsetting water levels had them especially excited. They were really "stoked," as they put it. Rumor had it that maybe even the Old Man, Dee Holladay himself, would join us midway through the trip in time to run Cataract Canyon and the Big Drops with our group.

We all awoke early the next morning, donning caps and T-shirts emblazoned with Holiday River Expedition's motto, "Go with the Flow." With the skill born of long practice, our designated guides—each one an experienced trip leader in his own right—went about their meticulous preparations efficiently. The six huge, silvery, inflated rafts that would be our home away from home for the next five days were loaded onto trailers, piled high with gear and spare oars, and tied securely into place.

The guides explained that the rafts wouldn't float down the Colorado in the customary single-file configuration. Instead, once we reached the river, the rafts would be lashed together side-by-side. There would be two groups of three boats each. This so-called "triple-rigging" greatly increased the rafts' safety and stability in the unusually big whitewater our guides clearly expected we would encounter. At least that's the theory, I thought.

They also told us that instead of the usual complement of one guide per raft, there would be a total of two guides for each of the two "triple-rigs." One would man the long oar on the front or downstream tube of the leading raft while the other was stationed in the trailing, upstream boat with the second oar. The linked rafts thus would actually float sideways as they angled down the river, with the downstream side of the first raft serving as the bow or front of the rig.

Explanations over, we at last squeezed into the big vans that would pull the heavy trailers to the embarkation point. Off we went, chattering excitedly about the much-anticipated adventure. Would it really be as big, as huge, as we expected?

The first three days, unusually warm and sunny for early spring, were relaxing and comparatively uneventful. The muddy Colorado itself, swollen and silt-laden from the heavy runoff, carried us swiftly through the towering cliffs and eroded red-rock canyons of the river basin. Breathtaking scenery slid by, each view more spectacular than the last.

On the third day, the swift current brought us to our assigned camping spot by early afternoon. We unloaded the rafts and pitched our tents on a solitary plain overlooking the river. After everyone quickly slipped on hiking clothes over bathing suits, some of the guides led the group on a spectacular trail that wound through the grassy plain, up the steep mountainside, and across a high mesa filled with house-sized boulders and naturally sculpted rock columns.

Suddenly, without warning, the blue sky seemed to fill with clouds. In one of those quirky weather changes for which the high desert and western mountains are notorious, a brisk wind swept in from nowhere and the temperature abruptly plummeted. Thunder rumbled menacingly on the horizon. In the far distance we could see lightning bolts crack and arc toward the ground.

"Uh-oh," one of the guides exclaimed worriedly. "Time to get out of here!"

Dangerously exposed on the high plateau, the group raced across the mesa toward the cliff's edge. Far below, a rain squall temporarily obscured our campsite. The gathering storm soon engulfed us, drenching us in cold, stinging water. There was a noticeable increase in the distant river's roar.

Then we heard a muffled whump. The riverbank adjacent to our campsite abruptly gave way, and a huge chunk of land simply disappeared into the raging Colorado, swallowed instantly and completely by its wind-whipped waves. Some of the tents, now occupying prime beachside property, collapsed and teetered precariously over the water. One of the rafts tore free from all but one of its moorings. Swinging and pirouetting madly, it strained furiously against the tautened rope.

The guides ran ahead to secure the rafts, leaving us to pick our way down the trail to camp. Hypothermia, far from our thoughts on a warm June day, was now a real threat. We agreed to alternate walking and running fifty paces, and the group's spirits rose as everyone warmed up with the exertion. A few brave souls even started to sing lustily as we trooped into our makeshift camp. Rummaging around inside their gear bags, everyone changed into wrinkled but blessedly dry clothes.

The efficient guides had already reanchored the rafts securely, repositioned the tents and gear, and brewed up a big pot of hot chocolate. We gratefully wrapped frozen fingers around steaming mugs and sipped the delicious stuff slowly, savoring every swallow.

The rain cleared momentarily, then settled into a persistent, chill drizzle. It didn't bode well for the next day's challenging run through Cataract Canyon. As the afternoon faded into evening, the easygoing, usually lighthearted guides grew progressively more quiet. Their expressions seemed to mirror the weather: gray and somber. They definitely had on their "game faces."

Periodically, when they thought no one was watching, the guides would silently slip away from the cheery campfire to check and recheck the heavy ropes and meticulously tied knots that lashed the big rafts together. Their unusual demeanor reminded us that the monster rapids we would encounter the next morning were no joking matter.

Just before dark, the unmistakable putt-putt sound of an undersized outboard motor broke the evening stillness. The guides let out a whoop of welcome as a small, inflatable dinghy came chugging around the bend.

"Dee's here!" they shouted.

The Old Man of the river had arrived.

Dee unfolded his spare, wiry frame from its cramped position and with a grateful sigh waded onto the beach. He hungrily devoured a plate of warmed-over dinner as he regaled everyone with the latest river gossip.

"She's runnin' right at sixty thousand," Dee grinned as he quoted the latest stream-flow estimates. He meant that each and every second, sixty thousand cubic feet of water were pouring down the Colorado. That, he explained, was about four or five times the normal maximum spring runoff.

"Yes!" one of the guides exclaimed, excitedly pumping his clenched fist into the air for emphasis.

"It'll be a great run," Dee agreed. "Not easy, though. The Park Rangers have been sitting in their boats right below the Big Drops to pick up all the stuff when rafts flip in the rapids. Not if," he added with a wry smile.

That sobered the group.

Dee continued, "Yesterday all five of the five single rafts that ran Cataract Canyon flipped. Every one of `em. A whole lot of folks went for a long, cold swim. So it's a good thing you're triple-rigged."

"Can a triple flip?" one of the guests asked worriedly.

"Hasn't yet, although in theory I suppose it could," Dee answered reassuringly. "However, it can `taco.' That's what we call it when one raft folds back over or under the other. But a triplerig really shouldn't flip."

I didn't say anything, but I certainly didn't relish the thought of being the "filling" in a taco sandwich.

We slept fitfully that night, the river dancing in our dreams. Its constant murmur, usually a rather comforting sound, seemed vaguely menacing. Fat raindrops splatted on the nylon tents while thunder muttered intermittently in the distance.

The Big Day dawned, still cold and dreary. Dull, gunmetal gray clouds stretched in an unbroken line from one horizon to the other. Breakfast was a miserable affair. The somber group shivered and huddled under rubber ponchos, water dripping from every surface. Our pitifully small campfire, built more for effect than real warmth, hissed and spluttered in the constant rain.

With dishes washed, fire doused, and ashes and unburned wood packed away in the raft's trash bags for removal and later disposal, our trip leader gathered the group together for final instructions.

"Well," he exclaimed with forced cheerfulness, "Today's the Big Day!"

No one cheered.

"I've got some good news," he added enthusiastically as he pulled out some large bags. "We have wet suits for everyone in the group!"

"We coulda used those last night," someone groused, clearly unappeased.

The guides began handing the wet suits out, helping everyone struggle into one that fit, at least approximately. As retained body heat collected under the tight black neoprene suits, surprised looks crossed several faces. For the first time since we had reluctantly crawled out of our sleeping bags and snug tents into the damp morning, we felt warm. A few tentative smiles broke out. Maybe this wouldn't be so bad after all!

The relief was short-lived.

"The wet suits are just in case anyone happens to `go for a swim' today," the trip leader reminded the group. "These rapids are big, really big this year. Even triple-rigged, the rafts are going to buck and rear like a wild bronco. If you get tossed out, it could be a while before you get picked up below, where the rapids end. The water is also unusually cold for this time of year. Without the wet suits, you'd almost certainly suffer from hypothermia.

"The waves are going to be huge, bigger than anything we've seen for years—maybe even decades. A triple-rig shouldn't flip, but remember it can `taco.' That's when the force of the waves literally folds one of the rafts back over the other," he gestured, illustrating an accordion effect with his large hands.

I wasn't the only one who shuddered involuntarily at the idea.

The guide continued, "If it looks as though the rafts are going to `taco,' the boatman will yell `floor!' That means you hit the deck. Immediately. Lie down on the bottom of the raft and just hold on. The water coolers and other gear lashed to the side tubes will keep the rafts apart and protect you. As long as you're lying down flat on the frame in the center depression between the tubes, you should be okay."

Swell.

We positioned ourselves in the rafts as the guides maneuvered the rigs into the current. They drifted downstream for a mile or two, then pulled into the eddy and beached the rafts just above the Big Drop. Everyone hopped out and followed the head guide down the trail to "scout" the rapids.

We could hear their roar long before we could see the rapids themselves. Climbing over boulders, we scrambled up the cliffside to the lookout point.

The first glimpse was daunting. I sucked in my breath sharply at the sight of the roiling, turbulent water. I heard a few gasps of dismay from some of the other guests.

Dee began pointing out the best route through the rapids to the attentive guides. They listened intently, hanging on every word. They all knew Dee had run the Colorado innumerable times, under just about every conceivable condition.

"Precise boat placement before you get into the rapids is essential," Dee said. "Setting up a correct entrance is key, as it always is, but especially in Cataract Canyon. Look over there to the right."

All eyes followed Dee's pointing finger.

"That's Little Niagara."

It was aptly named, a sheer waterfall that dropped at least twenty feet into a huge whirlpool of churning water.

"You don't want to end up there," Dee commented unnecessarily. "But, it's important to be as far right as you can without actually getting into Little Niagara itself. The big reason lies farther down on the left."

Heads swiveled in unison as we peered downstream.

"A few hundred yards past Little Niagara, way over there on the left, is Satan's Gut. Satan's Gut is even more dangerous than Little Niagara."

We could barely see the top of what appeared to be a huge, spitting hellhole of water.

"You get in there, you might not come out for a while. The backwash is so strong it'd hold you in for a good bit."

One of the guides swallowed hard at the thought.

"The biggest, best waves are smack in the middle, in between Little Niagara up here on the right and Satan's Gut down there on the left." Dee knelt down and drew a diagram in the sand with his finger to illustrate.

"The current will pull you strongly to the left, straight toward Satan's Gut. That's why you must set up to run to the right, just skirting Little Niagara as you start angling the rafts downstream. Then you'll be perfectly positioned for the ride of a lifetime. Remember, the current wants to take you too far left. Resist the current or you'll be in trouble. Big trouble," he warned.

With a last look at the thundering Colorado, we hiked back to the rafts, lost in thought. Was this supposed to be fun? I zipped up my wet suit and tugged at the straps of my life jacket, tightening it to the maximum. Just as the first triple-rig made ready to push off, the sun broke through the clouds and flooded the landscape in warmth. I fervently hoped it was a good omen.

We watched from the safety of the eddy current, yelling and shouting encouragement as the first group disappeared around the bend.

As our two guides pulled us into the river's main current, we could see the first group shooting through the Big Drops. The enormous waves tossed their rafts around in a gigantic rollercoaster ride. We could hear their whoops of excitement.

Then it was our turn. I could feel my heart thumping and beating rapidly in my chest. For just a moment I wondered what the guides felt like.

Then I almost stopped breathing.

Something was wrong. Very wrong.

I saw Dee suddenly stand up in the middle raft, a look of alarm on his weather-beaten face.

"Right! Pull right!" he shouted urgently to the guides.

They pulled furiously on the long oars, but it was already too late. The immensely powerful current snatched the rig and sucked it strongly to the left, toward the biggest, most monstrous waves I'd ever seen. Right toward Satan's Gut.

"Floor!!" the head guide screamed, his voice nearly lost in the deafening roar of the rapids. I dived instinctively for the bottom of the boat. As I lay spread-eagled on my back, I saw the front two rafts suspended almost directly above me as they were propelled forcefully up a sheer, nearly vertical wall of water. Curving still another eight or ten feet above the front raft was a towering crest of angry brown river.

I closed my eyes as the wave broke and crashed over the rafts. We were buried in tons of churning, foaming water for what seemed like an eternity.

Choking and gagging for breath, I finally opened my eyes and took a quick inventory. I was, miraculously, still alive. All body parts were present and accounted for. Ron was okay. Then, to our horror, we all simultaneously realized that the guide manning the front oar was gone. He had quite literally disappeared. His empty oar hung by its safety strap, clattering uselessly against the metal oarlock. The rafts, now completely out of control, swung wildly back and forth across the raging current. The remaining guide, positioned in the trailing boat, was powerless with his single oar. His desperate, frantic pulling was to no avail.

We were headed straight for Satan's Gut.

"Dee! Dee!" six terrified people screamed together. "Front oar! FRONT OAR!"

Dee was already standing up, steadying himself expertly on the bucking, pitching raft as his eyes rapidly scanned back upstream for signs of the ejected guide. As soon as he saw the guide's head break the surface, Dee jumped from the middle into the front raft. In one fluid motion he grabbed the flailing oar, jammed it into the oarlock, and began to pull with all his might.

Every sinew in Dee's neck and back stood out as he strained against the powerful current that was sweeping us inexorably toward Satan's Gut. Water was pouring into its gigantic, thundering hole, carrying the linked rafts closer and closer to disaster.

As the guide on the trailing raft shouted instructions from his better vantage point, at the last possible moment Dee somehow managed to pivot the leading boat away from the roaring hole. The trailing raft, with me and the guide now hanging on for dear life, swung into the edge of the maelstrom, quivered precariously for a heart-stopping moment, and at last popped free.

I exhaled in sweet relief.

Safe but dazed and emotionally spent, we drifted below the rapids as Dee slumped over his oar, exhausted by the monumental effort. One of the other guests took his oar, pulled us into the quiet eddy current, and helped beach the rafts.

Everyone broke into a loud cheer, pounding Dee on the back. He grinned back, eyes sparkling and teeth flashing white in his deeply tanned face. "It just felt good to have an oar in my hands again," he replied modestly to compliments from the admiring guides. They knew that without his quick action and wealth of experience, the outcome might well have been catastrophic.

"That current really wants to pull you to the left. Straight toward Satan's Gut," remarked the guide who had been pitched out of the boat.

"Yeah," Dee concurred. "Sometimes you just gotta know when to go against the flow!"

Mortality is much like a river, replete with rapids, currents, shoals, and whirlpools. Mercifully, the rough parts are usually interspersed with occasional flat stretches of water where we can drift for a moment and catch our breath. But we need to stay alert. A wise "rule of the river" is to never take off your life jacket—even in what appears to be "flat water." No matter how benign and inviting the water appears, there are often hazards that lurk just below the deceptively calm surface. And a warm, clear day can cloud up in a hurry, bringing unanticipated chills and challenges.

Going with the flow—of a river or life itself—is usually the simplest alternative. We can easily float along and drift wherever the current takes us. Or, as Amulek had done so successfully prior to his life-changing vision, we can even paddle hard to keep ahead of the current while still following its general direction.

But when currents are swift and strong and rushing toward deep holes, there is no time to rest or drift. There are powerful currents that can, if we go with the flow and offer no resistance, sweep us toward disaster. Like the river guides, we must dig in deep and pull on the oars with all our might to propel ourselves away from trouble.

Scouting the rapids ahead of time with someone whose wisdom and experience exceeds our own is a very wise precaution. Knowing and properly setting our course before we enter the rapids themselves can prevent downstream disasters.

And when all else fails, yell for help.

Someone is listening.
