Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

The Blame Game

We called it the Never-Ending Winter. It came unseasonably early that year, blanketing Culver, Indiana, with heavy, wet snow in mid-October. Trees still laden with autumn leaves groaned and then snapped under their unaccustomed burdens. Rimed with ice, power lines tumbled down, ensnaring the country roads in their lethal black tangles.

It would get worse. Much worse.

That year, winter held the whole Midwest in a tenacious, unyielding grip that went on month after dreary month. Heedless of the cold, at first we children enjoyed the season that the adults always dreaded. We built snow forts and Fox-and-Geese circles, sledded, and made snow "ice cream," a soupy concoction of fresh snow mixed with milk, sugar, and a dash of vanilla.

It was fun. At least for a while. But then the inevitable round of colds and flu robbed us of our boundless energy, leaving us tired and listless. The nearby lake, usually a source of diversion, froze in irregular ruts and wind-scoured ridges that discouraged our makeshift hockey games. Even the local ice fishermen, a hardy bunch who eschewed such newfangled inventions as ice augers, depth gauges, and electronic fish-finders, gave up in frustration.

Christmas passed far too quickly, a mere red-and-green blur on the calendar. With the daunting combination of short days, long, dark nights, and dangerous cold, we were trapped indoors. The welcome novelty of our new Christmas toys and games soon wore annoyingly thin. Perhaps symbolically, the old calendar was soon discarded in favor of a new one from Easterday's Funeral Parlor.

January was a nowhere month that always seemed suspended forlornly between Christmas and spring. February wouldn't be much better. March was a loss, as usual.

April should have been nice. It wasn't. The trees were still barren. The high, thin sunlight seemed insubstantial, too weak to coax buds from the empty branches. Crocuses and hyacinths remained huddled underground in their bulbs, as if reluctant to brave the punishing cold. Ice still covered the lake. In some spots it remained three feet thick.

Easter Sunday didn't bring the hoped-for spring, either. We shivered in delicate, frilly dresses and beribboned straw hats that seemed ridiculous in the chill winds. The traditional shiny black patent-leather shoes quickly lost their gleam in the slushy, saltsoaked grime that covered the sidewalks.

May came and it was still unseasonably cold. I could hardly believe it. School would be out in less than two weeks and we were still stuck inside, restlessly housebound.

Then, in one of those remarkable transitions for which Midwestern weather is infamous, we abruptly went from winter to summer. The ice on the lake softened and rotted. With earsplitting booms and cracks, huge fissures opened and cleaved it into big floes. In a rare, majestic display, the ice itself began to move. Like miniature tectonic plates, the frozen slabs ground against each other noisily. Then slowly but relentlessly the whole ice pack was pushed shoreward by the warm southern winds that blew strongly across the lake.

The whole town watched the spectacle in wonder. Ice rumbled and pushed onto the beach, bulldozing sand and earth in front of it. Huge chunks piled up in towering, blue-white dams. A few wooden piers and boats, trapped in the ice by the unexpectedly early winter, were crushed like matchsticks and tumbled onto the shore. Fractured boat keels and splintered pilings joined gigantic ice chunks and sand in an untidy, spectacular jumble.

The majestic ice movement lasted several hours. Then, almost as suddenly and dramatically as it had begun, the ice floe stopped its relentless assault on the shore. Open water lay just beyond the jagged piles of ice and flotsam that had accumulated on the beach. The only remaining sound was the sibilant whisper of wind-driven waves washing onto the beach.

Summer had officially arrived.

Several days later, in an expansive and unusually generous mood, I offered to take my younger brother Greg to the town park so we could celebrate our long-awaited release from winter's captivity. He eagerly accepted, scarcely believing his rare good fortune at being included in an older sister's adventure.

We set out, skipping merrily and whistling. I carefully took his hand and led him across the several busy streets that lay between our house and the lake. The warm breeze ruffled our hair and tugged at our clothes as we laughed and ran along the uneven, cracked sidewalks that bordered the park.

Greg found an old can, rusted and smashed flat.

"Annie, can we play `Kick the Can'?" he entreated.

Still in a happy mood, I assented.

"I'll go first!" he cried, giving the can a vigorous kick.

"Good kick!" I shouted as I took my turn, sending the can spinning and slithering along the sidewalk until it stopped against a piece of broken cement.

"No cheating," I admonished. "You can't use your hands!" Rules for "Kick the Can" were always on a make-it-up-as-you-go basis.

Greg took a mighty kick, but the can, stuck in the crack, didn't budge. He grunted in disappointment.

I took a slower, more deliberate swing, hooking its edge with my toe and flipping it over the obstacle. It scraped and clattered along for a few feet.

"It's all in the technique," I told him with sisterly superiority.

And so it went, each of us kicking and chasing the can as fast as we could go. We laughed and shouted with delight, reveling in the warm day and our newfound freedom.

As we headed down the hill toward the lake, Greg stopped suddenly.

"Annie, look!" he cried. "The pier's been put in!"

Sure enough, the town's public swimming pier stood there in all its rickety glory, arching outward over the sparkling water.

We broke into a run and scampered happily onto the pier, feet drumming an excited tattoo on its gray, weathered planks. At the far end, overlooking the deep water, stood the best part of all: an ancient high-diving tower with an old, thick wooden plank wrapped with burlap feed bags that served as a diving board. It wasn't fancy, but all the kids in town loved it.

Greg suddenly turned to me, grabbing my arm. "Annie," he said mischievously, "I dare you to climb up the tower and dive off with all your clothes on!"

"Are you nuts?" I asked incredulously. "The water's freezing cold!"

"I double dare you."

"Nope."

"Quadruple dare you!"

"Don't be silly. I'm not that dumb. You can millionty or billionty dare me, but I won't do it. I'd die before I could swim to the pier. I'd freeze into a solid chunk of ice in a second!" I declared dramatically.

"Aw," he scoffed, "it's not that cold. You're just a great big chicken."

I shivered at the thought of the cold water, then put up the final argument, the best of all reasons why I shouldn't do what I knew was both wrong and—perhaps even worse—stupid.

"You know Mom has told us we should absolutely positively never ever swim here unless she's with us. She made us promise. Besides," I added with sudden insight, "if I did dive off the tower with all my clothes on and went home dripping wet, she'd for sure give me a really good lickin'. And you'd probably enjoy that, wouldn't you?"

Greg smiled craftily.

I turned and started walking back along the pier toward the shore.

Greg called to my retreating back: "Fifty cents?"

All the money in the world. More than a whole month's allowance. A veritable king's ransom.

I turned. Hesitated.

Decided.

"Done!" I yelled triumphantly. I dashed out to the end of the pier and scrambled up the creaky wooden ladder to the high dive's top platform.

It looked farther down to the water than I remembered from the previous summer. A lot farther down.

The crystal clear water was far too cold for the usual bloom of summer algae. The lake was still uncontaminated by the rainbowhued film of outboard motor oil and exhaust fumes that would slick its surface later in the waterskiing season.

I could see all the way down to the distant bottom and noticed for the first time that it was covered with icky-looking moss and seaweed. A few worn-out tires and lots of broken long-necked beer bottles littered the slimy depths. An old leather workboot had been abandoned in the watery junkyard; its laces waved aimlessly back and forth and its wrinkled tongue hung out in a dark, lopsided grin.

"Shoes and socks too!" Greg shouted up, suddenly concerned that I might actually, inexplicably, really do it.

It was Do or Die. Or maybe Do and Die. I wasn't sure.

With a blood-curdling yell to give myself needed courage I ran down the diving board, gave it a mighty bounce, and hurled myself off the end in an awkward swan dive.

I hollered all the way down.

Splash.

The water was colder than I could have possibly imagined. So cold it hurt. So intensely cold it stole my breath. I exhaled sharply in pain at the shock and sank helplessly to the bottom, paralyzed and disoriented. The seaweed, undulating gently with unseen currents, tangled my legs. Time slowed down. Then the excruciating agony seemed to melt away and I felt warm at last. Happy. Peaceful.

Kick! Kick! Something deep inside my mind commanded. It was disturbing my peace. Go away, I thought drowsily, annoyed at the unwanted intrusion.

Kick! KICK!! It ordered insistently.

Suddenly, I realized I was drowning. I started kicking, frantically struggling to free my legs and push toward life-giving air. The lake's shiny undersurface mirrored the bottom in a crazy, upsidedown kaleidescope. I could see it above me, impossibly far away. My shoes and clothes were a dead weight, anchoring me in the frigid depths. I knew I would never make it. Then, with a final last surge of energy, I kicked upwards and broke through the surface, coughing and gasping for air in panicked gulps.

"Help!" I croaked, then managed to will numbed muscles into action. I swam all the way to shore, knowing I was too weak to climb the ladder up to the dock.

I crawled onto the beach, dripping and exhausted. For a few moments I just sat there, panting and shivering uncontrollably.

Greg ran up.

"Annie! Are you all right?" he asked, worry etched on his face.

"Yeah," I answered, wiping water from my eyes. Then I remembered. "Fifty cents?" I laughed weakly.

We walked home, I in my cold, wet clothes and ruined shoes, Greg looking comfortably dry and a bit smug.

Mom's reaction was predictable.

"Anne Gregory Osborn!" She looked at me severely. The more displeased she was, the more formal she became and the more names she used. She was definitely not pleased.

"Anne Gregory Osborn," she repeated. "What in the world happened to you?"

"I dived off the high dive," I confessed. Then, stating the obvious, I added, "With all my clothes on."

"Well, I can see that. You know very well you're never supposed to go swimming unless a responsible adult is with you. You disobeyed. You broke the rules."

Vainly hoping to deflect at least a fraction of the blame, I pointed accusingly at Greg, who was grinning behind me. "He made me do it!" I protested.

Mother was incredulous. "That's absolutely ridiculous," she said. "How in the world can a four-year-old boy make a nine-year-old girl do anything she doesn't really want to?"

"Five-year-old boy," Greg said stoutly.

Mother silenced him with a glare.

"Well, almost five," he muttered to no one in particular.

Mother turned to me, waiting expectantly.

"He dared me," I stated part of the truth, hoping she'd let it go and get on with the expected punishment.

"So?" she persisted, undeterred.

"Well," I continued reluctantly, "I first said `no.' He double-and quadruple-dared me and I still wouldn't do it."

I paused. "Then he bet me fifty cents," I said a bit sheepishly.

"So you did it," Mother concluded, stifling a smile and trying to look stern.

"Yep," I confessed, a faint hope dawning that I might actually escape impending doom.

"Yes," she corrected me.

"Yes, ma'am," I added, overdoing it a bit.

"Go take a hot bath and get into some dry clothes," she ordered. "Greg," she said, turning to him, "go get Annie her fifty cents."

I smirked.

Mother whirled, catching my look. "Then when you're dressed," she said firmly, "you come right back here for a spanking."

"I'm too old to spank!" I protested vehemently.

That did it. She had me turn around right then and there and gave me two swift swats on the backside. Not too hard, mind you—just enough to sear the indignity into my memory forever.

It was my first—and, fortunately for my eternal progression, unsuccessful—real attempt at playing the Blame Game.

That small, seemingly insignificant episode has become part of Osborn family lore. Greg's children never seem to tire of hearing about it. "Aunt Annie," they plead, "Tell us about the time when Dad bet you fifty cents and you dived off the high dive with all your clothes on!"

"Well," I invariably answer, "of course you've just heard his side of the story. Now, if you want, I'll tell you what really happened!"

Then they snuggle up to me in delicious anticipation and I regale them with the infamous episode as well as other much-beloved, oft-told stories about when we were all growing up.

What I never told them—or, for that matter, anyone else—until I wrote this book is what really happened. What really happened is that I did an incredibly dumb thing. A small, seemingly insignificant act of childhood disobedience mixed with a bit of greed could so easily have had disastrous consequences.

Small choices. Big consequences.

The fifty cents is, of course, long gone. I spent my newfound riches for some bauble I don't even remember. However, the priceless lesson I learned from that early exercise of agency has remained with me forever. I'm grateful to my mother that she didn't let nine-year-old Annie weasel out of the responsibility for making a poor choice.
