Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

"The Dog Ate the Homework" and Other Not-So-Cool Excuses

Their T-shirts boldly exclaim, "No Fear!"

It would be better—a lot better, in my opinion—if their voices instead declared firmly, "No Excuses!"

We are in serious danger of becoming a society of whining, finger-pointing, blame-shifting, excuse-making victims. In the headlong rush to eliminate all politically incorrect terminology from social discourse, some segments of society have adopted the kind of squishy thinking and lax language that disclaims personal responsibility and excuses errant behavior as an acceptable variation within the broad spectrum of normality.

A "Calvin and Hobbes" comic strip that appeared in the 21-22 January 1993 Deseret News caricatured the so-called "culture of victimhood." In four brief frames, cartoonist Bill Watterson cleverly managed to incorporate nearly every cliché of the popular victimology movement. The dialogue between Calvin, a precocious young boy, and Hobbes, his imaginary, tigerlike companion, goes like this:

Calvin first complains, "Nothing I do is my fault." Spreading his arms wide, he exclaims to a puzzled-looking Hobbes, "My family is dysfunctional and my parents won't empower me! Consequently, I'm not self-actualized!

"My behavior is addictive functioning in a disease process of toxic codependency!" he continues. "I need holistic healing and wellness before I'll accept any responsibility for my actions!"

Hobbes replies, "One of us needs to stick his head in a bucket of ice water."

The strip ends as Calvin concludes with evident satisfaction, "I love the culture of victimhood."

Many politicians seem to make a habit of displacing responsibility and accountability somewhere into the ether of the passive verb tense. Such comments as "Mistakes were made" and "the System got a little lax" are as close as they come to expressing regret for violations of ethical standards. Commenting on what he calls a "traditional Washington non-apology," columnist John Leo wryly writes, "Abstract villains like `the system' and `society' are always available to take the fall" ("Opinions Were Expressed," U.S. News & World Report, 17 February 1997, p. 23).

In a continuing legal evolution, increasingly inventive lawyers offer an endless stream of creative exculpations for their clients. Everything, even the most heinous deed, can be slickly explained—and thus dismissed—on the basis of one blameshifting excuse or another. One writer, commenting recently about a particularly vile crime and the defense attorney's strategies, wrote, "Criminal defendants naturally seek to blame someone or something else. They've pointed the finger at everyone from mothers to society, and everything from chromosomes to what they ate for breakfast" (Rick Hampton, USA Today, 9 June 1997).

It was no different in Amulek's day. The people in the land of Ammonihah were "a hard-hearted and a stiffnecked people" who "did not believe in the repentance of their sins" (Alma 15:15). They counted on their lawyers, who "were learned in all the arts and cunning of the people," to catch Alma and Amulek in their words (see Alma 10:13, 15).

President James E. Faust wrote:

When I was a young lawyer . . . I learned that some individuals did not think they were responsible or guilty in any way even though they had violated a law. They felt they were not to be blamed. They had abdicated their consciences. They may have committed the wrongful act, but they felt it was really their parents' fault because they were not properly taught, or it was society's fault because they were never given a chance in life. So often they had some reason or excuse for blaming their actions on someone or something else rather than accepting the responsibility for their own actions. They did not act for themselves but were acted upon.

—Finding Light in a Dark World (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1995), p. 61

Commenting on social scientist James Wilson's recent book, Moral Judgment: Does the Abuse Excuse Threaten Our Legal System, columnist George Will agreed with the book's central theme, that the proliferation and acceptance of these so-called "abuse excuses" is threatening not only the legal system but society's moral equilibrium and tranquillity. Why, he asks? Because such reasoning both undermines the concept of personal responsibility and diminishes the law's power to strengthen the individual's "often attenuated" self-control.

Mr. Will further notes that in the past, the law assumed that culpability was intensified, not diminished, when an individual committed a crime while intoxicated or caught up in mob hysteria. The law taught a duty to avoid such loss of control. Now, he muses, these circumstances are often thought to mitigate guilt and lessen personal responsibility for crime.

Mr. Will concludes by quoting from Mr. Wilson's book and remarking, "This [abuse excuse] begets a tendency `to deny guilt, to expect rewards without efforts, to blame society for individual failings, and to exploit legal technicalities to avoid moral culpability.' Thus does doubt about the capacity of individuals to govern themselves erode society's capacity for self-government" (George F. Will, "Abuse excuse threatens society's moral equilibrium," Deseret News, 6 April 1997).

Numerous articles on the so-called "culture of victimhood" have appeared recently in the popular press. A sampling of titles includes "Feel Abused? Get in Line"; "Sufferers All"; and "No More Victims, Please." Most of the writers conclude that victimhood has become, at its very least, an excuse for irresponsibility, and, at worst, a rationalization for patently criminal acts.

The transformation of criminal behavior into mere reflex reaction of a victim to some sort of abuse or oppression—real or imagined—makes a mockery of moral agency and personal accountability.

An even more recent blame-shifting tactic derives from scientific advances in genetic research. In an ironic twist on the longstanding "nature versus nurture" debate, a broad spectrum of pundits and politicians are "biologizing" our culture. They have eagerly embraced the concept of genetic programming as yet another way to destigmatize and excuse behaviors ranging from mental illness and alcoholism to violence and sexual orientation.

A recent U.S. News and World Report (21 April 1997) cover depicted an infant clothed in prison stripes with the eye-catching question, "Born Bad?" The inside article stated, "Everything from criminality to addictive disorders to sexual orientation is seen today less as a matter of choice than of genetic destiny . . . . A belief in the power of genes necessarily diminishes the potency of such personal qualities as will, capacity to choose, and sense of responsibility for choices . . . . It allows the alcoholic, for example, to treat himself as a helpless victim of his biology rather than as a willful agent with control of his own behavior."

What a terrific tactic! A marvelous new excuse! If it's in my genes, I'm not responsible.

Some authors cite research on twins separated at birth to bolster their strict biological models of behavior. Although some kinds of mental illness may have indeed some roots in heredity, the issue is clearly a lot more complicated than simple genetic programming.

What is becoming increasingly clear from genetic research is that there are many complex, interacting factors that influence whether or not a particular gene gets "expressed." For example, to me the most striking finding on the genetics of schizophrenia is not that half the identical twins of schizophrenics develop the disorder but that half (who have exactly the same genes) don't. It is, to paraphrase Sherlock Holmes, the "dog that didn't bark" that is perhaps the most significant clue here.

A person isn't merely the passive result of some preprogrammed genetic code. Genetic instructions can be—and often are—overridden, interrupted, disrupted, and even superceded by a broad spectrum of internal and external factors. Biology clearly affects behavior, but behavior also affects biology. There is substantial evidence that behavior can sometimes actually "rewire" the brain, modifying its chemistry and rerouting its own neural circuitry.

Speaking of accountability and responsibility, Elder J. Richard Clarke once mused: "What about temptation, choice, appetite, habit? Are we accountable? As one eminent authority reported, `Temptation—resisted or indulged—has been supplanted by drives, instincts and impulses—satisfied or frustrated. Virtue and vice have been transformed into health and sickness.' This condition leads us to echo the question of the famous psychiatrist, Karl Menninger: `Whatever became of sin?'" ("Choice—The Crucible of Character," BYU 1988-89 Devotional and Fireside Speeches [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1989], p. 99).

The concept that we must submit helplessly to our genetic instructions, somehow surrendering our will to our cells, seems repugnant in the extreme. Come to think of it, such ideas are not just repugnant, I think they are theologically hideous. They are also quite plainly and simply mistaken. If God Himself would not usurp our divine gift of agency, He certainly wouldn't cede it to a bunch of molecules!

Viewing everything as genetic destiny rather than a matter of personal choice represents just one swing of the intellectual pendulum. It too will pass and be superceded by still other temporary fads and fleeting fashions that pass for faith in our secularized society.

Squishy thinking. Evasive language. No-fault terminology. Biological and neurogenetic determinism. These and other popular contemporary equivalents of "the dog ate the homework" displace responsibility for our actions elsewhere and consequently limit our spiritual maturation.

The subtle seduction of the Blame Game can so easily lure us off the straight and narrow pathway to eternal life and exaltation. Moral agency is inextricably linked with personal responsibility and accountability. Our choices often beget consequences that reverberate far beyond the borders of our own lives. Decisions that we think are purely personal almost invariably affect the lives of others as well.

When we disclaim responsibility for what we have done, seeking to excuse ourselves and shift the blame for adverse outcomes elsewhere, we not only fail to learn from our experiences, we may also repeat our mistakes.

The Book of Mormon unequivocally condemns ethical evasion. We are told, "Men are instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil" (2 Ne. 2:5). Jacob severely castigated the Nephites who sought to justify their whoredoms by claiming that scriptural precedents had been set by David and Solomon.

The prophet Alma sorrowed over the immoral behavior of his son Corianton with the harlot Isabel. Corianton had evidently sought to excuse himself with the argument that many others had done precisely the same thing. Alma would have none of this blame-shifting. His plain and direct response: "This was no excuse for thee, my son" (Alma 39:4).

Alma then proceeded to instruct Corianton about the great plan of happiness. He explained temporal and spiritual death, justice and mercy, and the essential role of the Atonement in the restoration of man to God's presence. Alma taught Corianton that mortality is a probationary time, a time for repentance so that the great plan of mercy might have effect. He finally pleaded with his son, "Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point" (Alma 42:30).

Amulek himself also left no ethical wiggle room. The skilled lawyer Zeezrom first attempted to trick him into denying God. When that approach failed, Zeezrom resorted to outright bribery. Amulek rebuked him, saying, "the righteous yieldeth to no such temptations" (Alma 11:23). No ifs, ands, or buts.

In our time, the Lord has again made it abundantly clear that responsibility and accountability are essential to the attainment of our eternal destiny: "That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment" (D&C 101:78).

In mortality, the process of learning responsibility and becoming accountable is mercifully slow. As newborn infants we are neither responsible nor accountable. Loving parents, teachers, and neighbors can teach correct principles and then give young children precious opportunities to develop a sense of accountability through small tasks such as picking up toys and helping with simple household chores.

Permitting children to exercise agency and experience the consequences of their choices is a delicate process. With appropriate and loving discipline, children will gradually learn through practical experience that they are responsible for their actions. They grow and mature as they learn to "do what is right; let the consequence follow!" (Hymns, no. 237).

I am eternally grateful to my parents that they taught me—at a very young age—to accept responsibility for my mistakes and poor judgment. To excuse oneself and displace responsibility for misconduct by blaming others is a potentially eternal "fatal flaw."

We may not have chosen our genes or selected our own personal struggles. But agency dictates that how we respond to them is our own responsibility. The following poem by Portia Nelson eloquently summarizes the issue:

Autobiography in Five Short Chapters 1. I walk down the street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I fall in. I am lost . . . I am hopeless. It isn't my fault. It takes forever to find a way out. 2. I walk down the same street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I pretend I don't see it. I fall in again. I can't believe I am in the same place. But . . . it isn't my fault. 3. I walk down the same street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I see it is there. I still fall in . . . it's a habit. My eyes are open. I know where I am. It is my fault. I get out immediately. 4. I walk down the same street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I walk around it. 5. I walk down another street. —Â© 1993 Portia Nelson From There's a Hole in My Sidewalk Beyond Words Publishing, Inc. 1-800-284-9673 Used by permission
