Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Getting Off and Back On the Road

Silly shortcuts and dumb detours are frustrating. What happens if we get sidetracked, if we find ourselves wandering away from the right path? What can we do when we discover we are stuck on a circuitous route or perhaps even a dead end? What if we really are following a Road to Nowhere?

I'm really only half-joking when I tell colleagues I'm quite confident that my husband's only other "Significant Other" is a tall, gangly Appaloosa horse named Chief Joseph. On the high, steep mountain trails above Santa Fe, New Mexico, Ron and "The Chief" have forged a mutual relationship of complete trust and confidence. Relaxed and very much at ease together, horse and rider somehow seem meant for each other.

One year we managed to book an off-season visit to Rancho de los Caballeros, Chief Joseph's winter home in the Sonoran desert of Arizona. After a couple of sessions under the head wrangler's critical eye, we qualified to try out some of the more adventuresome trails that were traditionally reserved for intermediate to advanced horseback riders.

Our last day at the Ranch, we set off with one other couple and a guide for an extended ride into the mountains. Our return flight from Phoenix to Salt Lake City didn't leave until the evening. We had plenty of time for the ride before we would need to drive to the airport. Or so we thought.

The wrangler who served as our guide talked nonstop about everything and nothing. He seemed in love with the sound of his own voice. Or perhaps he was lonely and was taking advantage of the chance to have a captive audience. Whatever the reason, he talked so much that his monotone and the rhythmic swaying of the horses lulled us into a semihypnotic state.

We completely lost track of time as we rode farther away from the ranch, traveling deeper into the mountains.

I don't wear a watch. I was startled when my stomach suddenly growled, reminding me that it must be lunchtime. A check with the others revealed that it was far past that.

"What time did you folks say you need to be back by?" the guide queried lazily.

"Two, three o'clock at the latest," Ron responded quickly. "The plane leaves about six. We're all packed, but we need a quick shower before we check out."

"Goll-ee," the guide exclaimed, taking his hat off and scratching his head. "The ranch is back that-away. T'other side of those mountains." He pointed straight over some very steep, rocky hills.

"We'll never make it," I said, worried about getting home in time for my duties at the hospital the following day. "I think the evening flight is the last one to Salt Lake City."

"Well, in that case, I guess we'll just have to take a shortcut," the guide grinned wickedly. He swung his horse around and dug his boots into the animal's flanks. The big palomino reluctantly turned off the main trail and headed up a little-used, barely discernible path that angled toward the mountainside.

Our own horses obediently followed his lead. Here we go again, I thought, recalling a similar experience in Santa Fe. I just hoped we wouldn't get lost this time.

We didn't.

However, it wasn't long before I would have happily settled for merely being lost. The trail, already strewn with innumerable small stones that formed a loose, unstable scree, became progressively rockier as we climbed higher and higher. The small stones were soon replaced by fist-sized rocks that rattled and clattered down the mountainside as they were dislodged by the passing horses. Then the rocks turned bigger. We were soon winding between large boulders that were higher than The Chief's withers—and The Chief was a tall horse.

Following Ron and his mount along the twisting, steep trail, I simply hoped to stay in the saddle. I prayed silently that our usually surefooted horses could manage the treacherous path.

The horses' hooves clanged as they carefully picked their way through the rocks. Suddenly, The Chief slipped. I saw his eyes dilate with fear as he struggled to keep his footing. Hindquarters scrabbling and straining, he snorted with effort as Ron fought to stay balanced in the saddle. Fortunately, neither horse nor rider panicked, and the horse eventually regained his footing and then simply stopped on the trail for a moment, flanks heaving.

I wondered what he must be thinking. Maybe how dumb these humans can be sometimes . . .

"Maybe we should get off and walk the horses," Ron offered.

"Absolutely not," the wrangler answered promptly. "They're more surefooted than you are. You'd break a leg or an ankle in a moment."

So much for that idea.

A few minutes later, the guide stopped. I heard a muttered expletive. Soon I could see the reason for his concern: The narrow trail headed straight down and then back up a steep ravine. We couldn't turn around, either; there was simply no room to maneuver.

With a shrug and a yell, the guide urged his horse over the edge. They slid and scrambled all the way down, letting their momentum carry them back up the other side. With a final thrust from his powerful haunches, the palomino jumped up and over the top of the ravine.

"Hey," the guide shouted back in encouragement. "Trail's a lot better on this side! C'mon over!"

Ron looked dubious, but our options were limited. Zero, in fact. Looking like The Man from Snowy River, he urged The Chief forward and lay back in the saddle as the appaloosa slipped and slid all the way down the steep incline. When they reached the bottom, Ron quickly shifted his weight forward to help the horse scramble up the far side.

One by one, we somehow managed to cross the deep ravine. Horses as well as riders were all sweating and panting by the time we reached the top of the trail. With a gesture of triumph and evident relief, the guide pointed across the valley below.

Nestled in a swath of greenery was the ranch.

Safely back in the corral less than an hour later, I whispered to the guide as he was unsaddling the horses, "Tell me honestly. Have you ever been on that trail before?"

He shot me an incredulous look. "Heck, no!" he exclaimed indignantly. "I ain't stupid!"

Maybe he wasn't. But we certainly were!

On that particular occasion we were lucky. Very lucky, in fact. Nobody—people or horses—broke anything, but we easily could have. Although we did barely make our flight to Salt Lake City, it wasn't worth the risk, especially in retrospect. Sticking to the main trail, the longer but safer path, would have been—and often is—the wisest choice.

Shortcuts and detours typically don't look silly or dumb at the outset. They often seem quite attractive, appearing as though they would save us time and reduce effort. Sometimes they actually do work out. But they frequently don't. I'd rather not depend on luck.

In mortality we shouldn't allow ourselves to get off the track, lured onto dangerous detours. Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin has likened life to the experience of driving at night on a dangerously narrow, twisting mountain road in a blinding rainstorm:

I could barely see the road, either in front of us or to the right and the left. I watched the white lines on that road more intently than ever before. Staying within the lines kept us from going onto the shoulder and into the deep canyon on one side and helped us avoid a head-on collision on the other. To wander over either line could have been very dangerous. Then I thought, "Would a right-thinking person deviate to the left or the right of a traffic lane if he knew the result would be fatal? If he valued his mortal life, certainly he would stay between these lines." . . .

If we stay within the lines that God has marked, he will protect us, and we can arrive safely at our destination. . . .

Even though the teachings of the Savior are plain and direct, we are still at risk of getting sidetracked. . . . We get sidetracked by submitting to temptations that divert us past the bounds of safety. Satan knows our weaknesses. He puts attractive snares on our paths at just those moments when we are most vulnerable. His intent is to lead us from the way that returns us to our Heavenly Father. Sin may result from activities that begin innocently or that are perfectly legitimate in moderation, but in excess they can cause us to veer from the straight and narrow path to our destruction.

—Conference Report, October 1990, pp. 80-81

Most people do the right thing most of the time. But no one, as the Apostle Paul reminds us, does the right thing all the time (see Rom. 3:10). Given our moral agency and the precious freedom to choose, we inevitably make mistakes. Some are small and relatively inconsequential, the result of unwise or foolish decisions. Others are larger and potentially much more serious.

So if all of us do the wrong thing at least some of the time, what then? Paul tells us that "by the righteousness of one [that is, the Savior] the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life . . . by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous" (Rom. 5:18-19).

To redeem us from death as well as the eternal consequences of our more serious mistakes, God's plan—the "great plan of happiness"—mercifully provided us a Savior who has atoned for all mankind.

Amulek himself explained the essential role of the Atonement: "According to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish . . . there should be a great and last sacrifice; . . . but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice" (Alma 34:9-10). He then identified that last, great sacrifice as the Son of God. Said Amulek, "Thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name . . . thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice" (Alma 34:15-16).

Without Jesus Christ's mediating atonement, agency would be—as President Boyd K. Packer has recently put it—a fatal gift:

I would find no peace, neither happiness nor safety, in a world without repentance. I do not know what I should do if there were no way for me to erase my mistakes. The agony would be more than I could bear. . . .

An atonement was made. Ever and always it offers amnesty from transgression and from death if we will but repent. Repentance is the escape clause in it all. Repentance is the key with which we can unlock the prison from inside. We hold that key within our hands, and agency is ours to use it.

How supernally precious freedom is; how consummately valuable is the agency of man.

—Conference Report, April 1988, p. 83

It is always difficult to come back, to retrace our steps to a crucial crossroads. But a way back is provided. The path is clearly marked and always open. Through our mortal tears we can look to the Son of God and live.

President Gordon B. Hinckley is both frank and gentle when he speaks about forgiveness of sin: "If you've done something grievous, talk to your bishop." Then he adds, "But you can't carry it in your heart all the time. There is forgiveness for you out there. Our Father in Heaven loves you . . . He has great concern for you. Put it behind you. If you do what is right, things will work out for you" (Church News, 15 February 1997).

Remorse in right measure is healthy, an essential part of repentance. It motivates us to make restitution and helps us resolve not to repeat our mistakes. But continuing to let regret haunt our lives can paralyze us, crippling our spiritual growth and hindering our eternal progression.

President Hinckley has also said: "When we drop the ball, when we make a mistake, there is held out to us the word of the Lord that he will forgive our sins and remember them no more against us. But somehow we are prone to remember them against ourselves" (Conference Report, October 1994, pp. 64-65).

We do need to forgive ourselves. At some point or another we must stop singing the "woulda-coulda-shoulda" blues! A positive substitute is the sixth verse of the much-loved hymn "How Great the Wisdom and the Love":

How great, how glorious, how complete, Redemption's grand design, Where justice, love, and mercy meet In harmony divine! —Hymns, no. 195

We also need to forgive others. President Spencer W. Kimball wrote, "We must forgive, and we must do so without regard to whether or not our antagonist repents, or how sincere is his transformation, or whether or not he asks our forgiveness" (The Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 283).

Forgiving one another is a commandment. "Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you" (Eph. 4:32). And "Ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:9-10).

If we don't forgive others their trespasses against us, we ourselves have the greater sin? Must we really forgive one another? On first thought that hardly seems "fair." Requiring the victim to forgive the perpetrator is indeed "hard doctrine." During an intense Sunday School discussion of these same verses, a class member wryly remarked, "I've pondered that one so much it makes my `ponderer' sore!"

Why is harboring anger and resentment toward those who have harmed us so soul-crushing that the Savior himself warned, "If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses" (Matt. 6:15)?

The answer is simple. Those who repent of their mistakes can be made whole again, clean and spotless. The great miracle of forgiveness is that through the atoning sacrifice of the Savior they can be sanctified and justified before the Lord. Of their sins the Lord also promises, "I remember [them] no more" (Heb. 8:12).

On the other hand, those who refuse to forgive and forget are burdened by bitterness. Bitterness starves our souls and stunts our own spiritual growth as surely as drought withers plants. How others handle their mistakes is their problem; it is between them and the Lord. But how we respond to their transgressions is our own responsibility.

Forgiving (ourselves as well as others), forgetting, and then getting on with life is essential for our spiritual health. Along with urging his listeners to get their own lives straightened out, President Hinckley has strongly encouraged us to move forward:

Now, if there are any of you here who may have stepped over the line and transgressed and think that all is lost, let me say to you that all is not lost. The principle of repentance is the first principle of the gospel after faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. You can repent and you can put the past behind you and, as it were, clean the slate, rub those marks off the chalkboard and go forward with your lives . . . move forward with cleanliness.

—Church News, 6 July 1996

We can't move forward if we're looking backward. Another scriptural name for the great plan of happiness is the plan of redemption.

There is hope. Dead ends don't need to be the end.
