Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Happy Endings, Blessed Beginnings

Laurel covered her face in her hands, shaking in silent grief. "My life is in the tank," she sobbed, and I didn't think she was referring to the gas tank.

Ron put his arms around her and just held her while she wept, head buried against his shoulder. "Things seem so hopeless," she despaired. "There's no light at the end of the tunnel. None."

What could we say that could possibly help her? The usual expressions of comfort seemed so trite. Things did indeed look bleak. Her husband's problems had multiplied.

Laurel finally became convinced that both she and the children were potentially at risk, and she decided to file for divorce. That autumn her husband began serving a plea-bargained sentence in the federal penitentiary for what was technically termed "illegal distribution of a controlled substance."

Laurel had three small children to raise alone. The good news was that she did have a college degree. The bad news was that she had no readily marketable skills. Without further schooling, her bachelor's degree in social work would be of little help in a competitive job market.

Other than that, Laurel was okay. I'm not being facetious, either. She had the psychological support and financial help of a loyal, loving family. Her children were bright, beautiful, and talented (in my unbiased opinion). They were doing remarkably well despite the emotional turmoil.

Even in her darkest hours, Laurel retained a firm, unwavering testimony of the gospel. She continued to study the scriptures, pray, and attend church. She never became bitter or disillusioned, shaking her fists at the heavens in anger and complaining "Why me?" She often told us she felt close to the Lord. "I know that Heavenly Father loves me and knows who I am," she would say with conviction.

Her situation wasn't ideal. Far from it. But it wasn't hopeless, either. One of the first lessons medical students learn in dealing with seriously ill patients is the crucial importance of hope. Hope is essential to life. Without it, people can literally shrivel up and die. With hope, they struggle valiantly in the face of long odds.

To have hope is to live.

Laurel desperately needed to feel hopeful.

When she finally stopped sobbing, I said, "You know, Laurel, I don't feel sorry for you."

She looked up, startled.

"No, not sorry for you," I repeated, emphasizing the "you."

I continued, "Of course I regret the pain and difficulties you're going through. It breaks our hearts to see you and the children suffer. But you're going to be okay. The person I really do feel sorry for is your husband. He had so much going for him and he threw it all away. Maybe he'll turn his life around somehow—people can, you know. Maybe he will. Maybe he won't. But you? You're all right."

Laurel looked at me dubiously. "I'm barely hanging on," she replied. "I wonder sometimes if I'm going to make it."

"You will," Ron answered with confidence. "Annie's right. You're going to be okay.

"I remember something my Scottish grandmother once told me," he mused. "She said, in that wonderfully soft brogue of hers, `Laddie, in this life there's just a little while of everything.' She's right, you know—and that goes for the bad patches as well as the good times. Just now it may seem as though there really isn't light at the end of the tunnel. But there always is. Just keep doing what's right. Things have a way of working out."

Laurel seemed to straighten up a bit. Then her face clouded. "Daddy, did I make a terrible mistake?" she asked pleadingly. We knew she was referring to her troubled marriage.

"Laurel, begin with where you are," he replied. "Don't dwell on the `if only.' You have three beautiful, intelligent, talented children who wouldn't be here otherwise. I don't know all the answers. But this much I do know: You are a much stronger and better person because of your faith. You've responded to your struggles with courage and determination. Suffering adversity isn't the tragedy. The real tragedy would be to suffer, then fail to learn and become the better for it."

I put in, "Laurel, I'm thinking about your patriarchal blessing. You were probably about eighteen years old when you received it. It contained some wonderful but rather daunting promises. If I remember correctly, you said to your father at the time, `Daddy, when I read that blessing and think about what I might have to go through to become the kind of person it's talking about, it really scares me."'

Ron nodded in agreement. "I thought that was a very perceptive insight for someone so young."

Laurel smiled at the compliment, then sighed, "Maybe it's a good thing I didn't know what was ahead of me. I might not have been quite so courageous!"

"Look at the strong, wonderful person you've become. I very much like and admire the Laurel I see now," I added.

"So do I," Ron agreed.

"Even with red eyes and a runny nose?" she asked with a slight smile as she stood to leave.

"Even with red eyes and a runny nose," he reassurred her with a squeeze of affection.

The next few weeks were really rough. When the situation seemed so bad it couldn't possibly get worse, it did. But Laurel doggedly hung in there, trying to endure. She learned to survive one day at a time. At the absolute nadir she said with bleak determination, "You know, if I could somehow magically erase all this pain, trouble, and suffering but it would be at the cost of forgetting what I've learned, I wouldn't do it."

Then one day I sensed something had changed. Laurel had an entirely different demeanor.

"Annie, do you remember when I lived with you for a time before you and Dad got married?" she asked one day as just the two of us were visiting together.

"I'll never forget it!" I laughed. "It was my one brief experience with ersatz motherhood. I loved it. The only hard part was your social life. Three dates in one night! I don't think I ever had three dates in a whole week."

Laurel smiled. "We had such a good time together I was almost sorry when it came time for you and Dad to get married." Then she added, seemingly as an afterthought, "Annie, do you remember one of the guys I dated way back then? A fellow by the name of Lawrence Featherstone?"

"Stocky, blond guy with blue eyes and a really infectious smile?"

"That's the one," Laurel confirmed.

"Nice young man. I liked him." I chuckled, "Then again, I think I liked all the guys you dated. Seems to me you and Lawrence went out a few times but nothing ever came of it."

Laurel nodded. "In all these years I saw him only once, at Kelly Sheffield's wedding. That was several years ago. Then, just a few weeks ago, Lawrence called and left a message on my recorder. Kelly had just told him I was going through some tough times and was getting a divorce. Lawrence wanted me to know he was thinking about me. It came right out of the blue," she replied casually. Perhaps a bit too casually?

Laurel continued, "We've talked on the phone a few times since then."

"And?" I queried.

"And nothing. But just talking on the phone together has been a real comfort to me," she finished.

Hmm, I thought.

Ron came home from a stake conference later that evening. After we'd talked about his trip, he asked me how the weekend had gone.

"I had a really interesting conversation with Laurel earlier today. She's going to marry Lawrence Featherstone," I announced.

"What!" he exclaimed, startled.

"Oh, not right away, of course," I added hastily.

Ron looked at me. "You mean Vaughn and Merlene Featherstone's son? The one Laurel dated for a while when she was living with you before we got married?"

"The same guy. They hadn't seen each other for years. Lawrence learned from Kelly that Laurel was getting divorced. He called her and they've been talking on the phone periodically. And she will end up marrying him this time," I concluded.

Ron tried not to smile. "And what exactly makes you think they'll get married?"

"I just know these things," I replied a bit smugly.

Call it whatever you wish—personal prophecy, prognostication, or perhaps just wishful thinking on my part. But as the weeks passed, it became apparent that Laurel and Lawrence's friendship was deepening. As friendship grew into interest, they both consulted with their own fathers as well as their bishops. The counsel they received was the same from all sources: Limit the relationship to talking on the phone until the final divorce decree is issued.

They did, and a few months later Elder Jeffrey R. Holland—a longtime friend who had known both Laurel and Lawrence at BYU—sealed them together for time and all eternity in the Salt Lake Temple. It was a happy ending and a blessed beginning to a road that, years earlier, neither Laurel nor Lawrence would have ever imagined.

Things do have a way of working out.

It isn't always easy. Although much of the pain we experience in mortality is self-induced, a by-product of our own poor choices, sometimes we suffer adversity as a consequence of someone else's exercise of agency. That which we can't control, we must often endure. However, what we can control is our response to that adversity. Will we feel anger and bitterness, or grow in grace, forbearance, and patience? That's the part that is up to us.

When we beseech the Lord for relief from suffering or adversity, He may remove our burdens. Then again, sometimes He doesn't. At times His response to our earnest prayers may be to make our burdens more bearable rather than remove them from our tired shoulders.

The Book of Mormon relates a most instructive, tender example. When Alma and his people were suffering in slavery to the Lamanites, their afflictions were so grievous that they begged God for relief. Forbidden to pray aloud, they poured out their hearts in mighty silent prayer unto the Lord. After He said to them, "lift up your heads and be of good comfort," the Lord reminded them of their covenant and promised that He would deliver them from bondage.

But evidently that promise wasn't to be fulfilled immediately. Instead, the Lord said, "I will also ease the burdens which are put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs." The scriptures record that "the burdens which were laid upon Alma and his brethren were made light; yea, the Lord did strengthen them that they could bear up their burdens with ease, and they did submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the Lord" (Mosiah 24:14-15; italics added).

Succeeding in the face of adversity requires patience, persistence, faith, and a firm commitment to be obedient and trust in the Lord. That includes a willingness to be satisfied with the Lord's timetable instead of stubbornly insisting on our own. The Lord will indeed pour out His blessings upon us, as He has promised. But those blessings will be given in His own way and in His own time.

President Gordon B. Hinckley often quotes from a favorite newspaper article he saved years ago:

Most putts don't drop. Most beef is tough. Most children grow up to be just people. Most successful marriages require a high degree of mutual toleration. Most jobs are more often dull than otherwise. Life is like an old-time rail journey—delays, sidetracks, smoke, dust, cinders, and jolts, interspersed only occasionally by beautiful vistas and thrilling bursts of speed. The trick is to thank the Lord for letting you have the ride.

—Jenkins Lloyd Jones, Deseret News, 12 June 1973; as quoted in Go Forward with Faith, The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), p. 448

President Hinckley has great empathy for those who have experienced adversity and suffered personal hardship. According to his biographer, his feelings and attitude toward facing adversity have been developed partly in the crucible of his own experience. In his characteristically optimistic way, President Hinckley frequently says, "Things will work out. If you keep trying and praying and working, things will work out. They always do" (Go Forward with Faith, pp. 422-23).

I believe him. So does Laurel. Trudging along a correct but long and sometimes dreary path that seems as though it will never end is tough going, for sure. But hang in there! There is light at the end. And a happy ending to one road may well become the blessed beginning to another.
