Anne Osborn Poelman, Amulek Alternative: Exercising Agency in a World of Choice ( 1997)

Amulek's Alternative

It was a thought-provoking question our host posed to a gathering of Ron's colleagues and their wives. With a twinkle in his eye, he asked, "If you could have a one-hour, face-to-face interview with anyone in the scriptures—excluding the Savior and the Prophet Joseph Smith—whom would you choose?"

The unexpected question provoked a spectrum of answers, from Moses to John the Beloved to Ruth. I chose Esther, whose courage I had admired since I was a child. Then our host turned to Ron. "Well, Ron, what would be your choice?"

"Amulek," Ron answered.

At the time I wondered about his unconventional choice. The prophet Alma was a prominent figure in the Book of Mormon. Amulek, his longtime missionary companion, was mentioned only briefly. Why did Ron choose Amulek? Why not Alma?

"Amulek? Why Amulek?" someone asked, voicing the puzzlement we all felt.

Ron's response was thoughtful. "I can really relate personally to Amulek. All of us are faced with choosing between worldly and spiritual values.

"Think about it for a moment," he mused. "Here's a man who was very successful, at least in temporal terms. In the tenth chapter of Alma, Amulek introduces himself with some justifiable pride as `a man of no small reputation.' He is influential in the community. He's wealthy. He has many friends and relatives. Then Amulek tells us he knew about spiritual things. But he had hardened his heart against those promptings. As he put it, he `knew but would not know.'"

Ron continued persuasively, "Yet Amulek eventually chose to follow Alma, forsaking his own riches and comforts to endure persecution and untold hardship. That intrigues me. It's not as though Amulek had been beaten to his knees by life's circumstances. He actually had a pretty good life. And yet he abandoned it, leaving everything behind to follow a prophet."

Nearly fifteen years later, Ron recalled that old dialogue. "Remember that dinner party we attended before we were married? The time when one of the Brethren asked everyone whom they would choose if they could have an hour with anyone in the scriptures?"

"You chose Amulek, as I recall."

"He still intrigues me," Ron replied. "That encounter with the messenger of the Lord was a real crossroads in his life. He could have ignored the Lord's call and continued to pursue the same path he'd been following all along. But he didn't. He turned his life in an entirely different direction. He chose a new path. It was by far the harder, less-traveled road. But it was—at least for him—the right road.

"The `Amulek Alternative.' It'd be an intriguing title for a book, wouldn't it?" he said with a grin.

I smiled, the mental wheels already turning. "Amulek's choice was a really major decision, the `two roads diverging in a woods' kind," I agreed. "But I also think small choices are important. I just read an article that suggested: `The choices that make or unmake a life are often so small.'"

Ron agreed, "They do add up. President Hinckley often talks about how the little decisions can be so crucial and so everlastingly important in their consequences."

"One of my favorite verses in all of scripture is Alma's plain but profound counsel to his son Helaman," I nodded. "You know the one: `By small and simple things are great things brought to pass.'"

Ron put on his glasses and reached for his scriptures while I turned my computer on and began to write.

President Thomas S. Monson reminds us that "life's choices remain for each one to make. No choice is insignificant, for we become what we think about. Our choices determine our destiny" (Ensign, May 1995, p. 97; italics added).

In a world of choice . . . the decisions are ours. So is the responsibility, the accountability for our choices.

An eternity awaits.
