Liahona’s Answer

Sunday School is a good opportunity to learn more about gospel subjects in depth. In class you have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss topics or principles you don’t quite understand. Perhaps the best way to enjoy your Sunday School lessons is by getting involved. Don’t just sit back and wait to be entertained. You need to bring your attention and preparation to the lessons, and you’ll be pleasantly surprised with how interesting they can be.

First, forget the notion that since you’ve discussed a subject a few times, you know everything there is to know about it. The more you study the gospel, the more you will discover. Nephi teaches us that the Lord gives us knowledge step by step: “For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have” (2 Ne. 28:30; see also Isa. 28:9–13).

Did you notice the warning at the end of this scripture? It says if we think we have learned enough, even that knowledge will be lost. The Lord wants us to understand the doctrines of His kingdom, and if we diligently search and learn, we will be blessed with increasing wisdom and knowledge.

You can find life-changing truths with the help of the Holy Ghost. Start by praying sincerely at the beginning of class and on your own for both your teacher and yourself—you both have a role to play if you are going to hear truth and gain enlightenment. If you are prayerful and diligent, you may find an answer to your prayers through the words of your Sunday School teacher or one of the other students. Be sure you are always in attendance. You never know which day the lesson will be taught in such a way or on such a topic that your mind is opened and enlightened.

As you participate more by bringing your scriptures, asking questions, and paying attention to what is being taught, you will find the lessons becoming more interesting, and you will receive a wealth of knowledge “line upon line.”

Readers’ Answers

I’ve had many experiences in which the Holy Ghost has confirmed the truth of the doctrine of Christ to me after I’ve been instructed on the same subject several times. When we open our minds and hearts and humbly receive the Lord’s messages, we will be edified and our testimonies will be strengthened. We will see there is something new we need to learn. Remember that three times the Lord asked of Peter, “Lovest thou me?” (see John 21:15–17).

Ana Escobar M.,
Buena Vista Ward, San Salvador El Salvador Cuzcatlán Stake

In order to be more involved and interested in the lesson, I prepare for the lesson as if I were the teacher. I contribute to the lesson by asking and answering questions. I also evaluate my life to know if it is in line with the lesson being taught. If it is not, I consider how I might apply the teachings to better my life.

Okoro Uche Kevin,
Ogbor-Hill Top Ward, Aba Nigeria Stake

Some subjects are repeated over and over again because they are of importance to us. To be more involved with the lesson, you can learn about the subject of the lesson so you can ask questions and be interested in the topic. You can also get to know your classmates better, so you are more comfortable and open.

Know that your Heavenly Father loves you very much and wants to show you—through His teachings—that you are His child. This is an eternal principle that will be repeated again and again.

Sunday School class for ages 14–18,
Rotterdam Second Ward, Rotterdam Netherlands Stake

One thing that helps me be more interested in Sunday School is the thought that I may be able to help others with what I learn in class. I know that at any moment someone might want to know more about the Church. If I know how to answer questions, I may be able to help someone join the Church.

Josana da Conceição Ribas,
Xaxim Ward, São José dos Pinhais Brazil Stake

To get more involved, I answer the questions, listen attentively to others’ answers, and think how each lesson can help me to always have the Lord’s Spirit with me. Then I leave class with joy and with my spirit enlightened.

Eliane Brychoy,
Villeneuve d’Ascq Ward, Lille France Stake

Having the same lessons all the time must mean that those lessons are truly important. The Lord said, “Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to my word, and learn of me what I will concerning you” (D&C 58:1). We should learn without ceasing in order to acquire a great knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Heinui Piritua,
Oremu Ward, Faaa Tahiti Stake

We should not forget to pray. Prayer invites the Holy Spirit to be with us and with the teacher. We should ask questions. Questions make the discussion come alive. And we should share our testimonies. Testimony bearing encourages everyone to share what he or she feels.

Adelfa A. Teoxon,
Morong Branch, Morong Rizal Philippines District

I believe there is always new gospel knowledge in any subject being discussed. No matter how often the subject has been taught, the Lord always has something new to teach us through such lessons. When we listen attentively to the lesson, we can gain gospel wisdom in oft-repeated subjects.

We must not be like the gentiles who the Book of Mormon prophesies will say, “A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible” (2 Ne. 29:3). We don’t want to be people who when “they are learned they think they are wise” (2 Ne. 9:28). The Lord always has more to teach us.

Boyce U. Nwankpa,
Okpu-Umuobo Road Ward, Aba Nigeria Stake

Some of the things that have helped me be more interested in Sunday School class are to participate, take my scriptures with me, voice my opinion, and always have a desire to learn more. It’s like reading the Book of Mormon: You read it again and again, and it’s the same scripture. But each time you read it, you find something you hadn’t found before.

Elder Darvin Roa,
Guatemala Guatemala City Central Mission
