Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

Preface

In 1830, Parley P. Pratt, a young traveling preacher from Ohio, proclaimed to the inhabitants of western New York that God's authority was not upon the earth and that there was a need to restore the primitive purity of the New Testament Church. As he unfolded his message of concern, an old Baptist deacon told him that a "very strange book" had recently been published. This book, he added, is "purported to have been originally written on plates either of gold or brass, by a branch of the tribes of Israel; and to have been discovered and translated by a young man who lived near Palmyra, New York."

"How or where may I obtain this book?" Parley enquired.

"If you return tomorrow," the Baptist responded in essence, "I shall have a copy available."

The next morning, Parley P. Pratt returned to the deacon's home where he was given a book entitled, "The Book of Mormon." "I opened it with eagerness," Parley recalled, "and read its title page. I then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation to the manner of its being found and translated. After this I commenced its contents by course. I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

"As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly . . . as a man comprehends and knows that he exists. My joy was now full."

After receiving a witness that this book contained "the fulness of the gospel of a crucified and risen Redeemer," Parley P. Pratt traveled to Palmyra to seek more information about the coming forth of this ancient record. From there, he was directed to a farm located in Manchester, a few miles south of Palmyra, where Parley met Hyrum Smith, brother of Joseph Smith the latter-day prophet. Hyrum told him the particulars of the discovery of the record, its translation, the restoration of God's authority, and the organization of Christ's church in the latter-days.

"After duly weighing the whole matter in mind," Parley declared, "I saw clearly that these things were true." Believing in the reality of the restoration and in the authenticity of a book that was a new witness for Christ, the itinerant from Ohio sought baptism and joined the restored Church which had recently been organized.

The strange book that had been given to Parley P. Pratt by a Baptist deacon changed the life of this restorationist. "This discovery," he testified, greatly enlarged "his heart and filled his soul with joy and gladness." He declared that the information contained in the Book of Mormon was more precious than all the riches of the world. "Yes," he concluded, "I would not at that time have exchanged the knowledge I then possessed, for a legal title to all the beautiful farms, houses, villages and property which passed in review before me, on my journey through one of the most flourishing settlements of western New York." [^1]

— — —

The story of the restoration of the everlasting gospel is one of the most remarkable histories in the annals of mankind. Joseph Smith, the young prophet-leader, and the men who followed him witnessed many remarkable event's during the decade of the 1820s preparatory to the formal organization on April 6, 1830 of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (referred to in this work as the Church or restored Church). All six men who participated in the organization of the Church were special witnesses of the restoration. Some learned through an angelic visitation and a voice from heaven that the Book of Mormon had been translated by the gift and power of God. All these men and others examined carefully the ancient record from which the translation had been made. One of these six men, Oliver Cowdery, not only viewed the ancient record and handled the plates, but, through the laying on of hands by messengers sent from God, received with Joseph Smith the authority to act in the name of God. The testimonies of these men are invaluable in understanding and appreciating these experiences.

Events leading to the organization of the Church have been related by many, both friend and foe, but no single compilation has been made of many of the unusual and powerful histories of this period which were recorded by the participants themselves shortly after the events transpired.

In 1951, Francis W. Kirkham published an exceptional collection of primary sources of the "evidence of divine power in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon" (A New Witness for Christ in America, 2 vols., 1951.) Since that work was published, many new records have been located and many specialized studies have been written that relate to the theme of Kirkham's history. Many sources cited by Francis W. Kirkham (along with many other primary and secondary accounts) have been incorporated into this volume but in a form very different from that employed by that scholar.

The purpose of this work is to reproduce the testimonies (descriptions of that which they saw and learned) of the participants in the restoration movement as they were initially recorded or published. Included in this publication are selections from all of Joseph Smith's major accounts of the rise of the Church. Two of these accounts were first published in 1842, and two were not published until 1969.

This volume begins with Joseph Smith's descriptions of his birth in Vermont in 1805, certain episodes in New England, and the Smith family's move to New York in 1816. To these accounts by Joseph have been added selected writings covering the same two decades recorded by his mother, Lucy Mack Smith. Descriptions of Joseph Smith's First Vision and the early appearances of Moroni have also been reproduced as initially recorded or published. Moreover, this volume contains early historical accounts of the restoration of the lesser and higher priesthoods, testimonies of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, accounts of the publication of that record, and descriptions of the organization of the Church.

While many selections included in this work have been reproduced from the earliest recordings or publications of events, in a few instances secondary sources have been cited. The secondary sources have been selected from the writings of contemporaries who, according to the compiler, generally wrote reliable accounts, based on what they learned from the participants of the restoration.

The chapters in this work, therefore, contain the writings of Joseph Smith regarding a certain aspect of his experiences plus accounts recorded by his contemporaries. Joseph's writings have been integrated so that, in most instances, four different histories prepared by Joseph have been combined into one account. In these integrated narratives, the compiler has attempted to preserve the flavor of Joseph Smith's histories by reproducing almost verbatim that which the Prophet wrote. For the convenience of the reader (for the sake of clarity and standardization of different types of sources, published and unpublished), editorial changes have been made in spelling, capitialization, punctuation, and grammar so that the writings reflect current English usage. A few transitional words (inserted in brackets) have also been added so that the integrated accounts flow as one continuous narrative.

Included in the writings of Joseph Smith are all histories which were written or dictated by the Prophet or prepared and published under his supervision. Joseph Smith, for example, commenced writing a history of the Church in April 1838. On occasions, he was probably assisted in this activity by Sidney Rigdon, First Counselor in the Presidency of the Church. [^2] This project was interrupted in October 1838 by the illegal imprisonment of the Prophet and the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri. Following Joseph's flight from Missouri in the spring of 1839, and his settlement in Commerce (renamed Nauvoo), Illinois, the Prophet resumed work on this history. In June of that year, aided by his scribe, James Mulholland, Joseph Smith dictated (with possible editorial changes and polishing) the history he had written in Missouri and then continued the work. [^3] Between June and October 1839, Joseph supervised the preparation of a fifty-nine page manuscript history of the Church covering the period from 1805 to September 1830. Although this work was again temporarily interrupted by the untimely death of Mulholland and Joseph Smith's trip to the national capital to secure redress for crimes committed against the Saints in Missouri, Joseph, with the assistance of various scribes and historians continued to record this history until his martyrdom in 1844.

The first portion of the history of the Church (the manuscript that is in Mulholland's handwriting) was published in the Times and Seasons (a Mormon periodical printed in Nauvoo) between March 15, 1842, and March 1, 1843. When the publication began in serial form under the heading, "History of Joseph Smith," the Mormon Prophet was editor of that periodical. This account of the birth of Mormonism was introduced by the statement: "In the last number I gave a brief history of the rise and progress of the Church, I now enter more particularly into that history, and extract from my journal. (Joseph Smith)" [^4] The initial printing of the early history of the Church written by Joseph with the assistance of Mulholland was a faithful rendition of the manuscript. Only minor editorial changes appeared in the printed work.

This work, then, is primarily a compilation of eyewitness accounts of some of the extraordinary events that led to the publication of the Book of Mormon and the reestablishment of Christ's Church upon the earth. These events have important consequences for each of us, as well as for those who experienced them. This is their story—their testimonies in their own words. These testimonies of the authenticity of a sacred record and the reliability of the writings of a Prophet and his contemporaries are a powerful, modern witness of the reality of the restoration of the everlasting gospel.
