Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

Acknowledgments

Although it is impossible to thank adequately all who have shared historical notes and references, read portions of the manuscript, offered suggestions, and assisted in other respects in the preparation of this work, a special note of appreciation is extended to Reid E. Bankhead for his constant encouragement and timely suggestions and to my father, Milton V. Backman, for his keen legalistic comments. Special appreciation is also extended to many of my colleagues who shared their insights and knowledge, including Richard L. Anderson, Larry Porter, J. Donl Peterson, Monte S. Nyman, and Lyndon W. Cook.

This work also could not have been completed without the cooperation of the staffs of many libraries and the assistance of many students enrolled at Brigham Young University. Librarians serving in the Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints; the Special Collections libraries at Brigham Young University, Oberlin College, and Bowling Green State University; the Palmyra Kings Daughters Free Public Library (New York); the Ontario County Historians Office (Lyons); Waterloo and Seneca Falls historical societies; Western Reserve (Cleveland, Ohio) and Lake County historical societies; Library of Congress; Missouri Historical Society (St. Louis); State Historical Society of Missouri (Columbia); and Kansas City Public Library were especially helpful. Many students also assisted by typing, proofreading, and searching for information relating to the birth of Mormonism.

Appreciation is further extended to the Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for granting permission to quote from the 1832 manuscript of the life of Joseph Smith, the Prophet's 1835 diary, and other similar manuscripts and to Brent F. Ashworth, Provo, Utah, for extending to the writer permission to quote from the Lucy Smith letter dated January 23, 1829, and the Martin Harris letter dated January 13, 1873. Grateful acknowledgment is further extended to my wife, Kathleen McLatchy Backman, for her continual assistance and frequent suggestions.
