Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER ONE

Boyhood of a Prophet

I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, state of Vermont . . . My father, Joseph Smith, Sr., left the state of Vermont and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) County, in the state of New York, when I was in my tenth year, or thereabout [s] [^1] (Joseph Smith)

As Joseph Smith commenced dictating a history of the restoration movement in 1838, he discussed the earliest events in his life, including his birth in Vermont and his move to New York. Since this history included an account of the appearance of God, the Father, and His son, Jesus Christ, to a nineteenth-century prophet, the appearance of angels to this prophet and his close associates, and of the coming forth of a book that was a modern witness for Christ, inquirers might ask, "Was Joseph Smith a trustworthy individual?" "Was he a reliable historian?" and "How accurate are the historical writings which he (with the assistance of scribes) produced?" As this volume unfolds, these questions will be considered from different avenues of investigation. The initial approach will be to consider the reliability of Joseph Smith's writings concerning the earliest events in his life, events that transpired before his First Vision of 1820.

Most of the information available concerning the boyhood of Joseph Smith is located in the writings of the Prophet and his mother, Lucy Mack Smith. On four different occasions Joseph Smith wrote or dictated to scribes accounts of his religious experiences of the 1820's, and in three of these histories the Prophet briefly described events in his life that occurred before his First Vision in the spring of 1820. The first of these three accounts was an autobiography which was partly written by the Prophet and partly dictated to Frederick G. Williams in the fall of 1832. Although this autobiography was never completed, it included a few details not found elsewhere concerning his early activities in New England, and his move to New York. Another history (mentioned in the Preface) was commenced by the Prophet in 1838 and was initially published in Nauvoo in the Times and Seasons in serial form beginning in March 1842. Included at the end of this history (as Note A) is a description of Joseph's leg operation which occurred while the Smiths were living in New Hampshire. Another brief history was prepared by the Prophet (with the probable assistance of others) at the request of John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, and this account was also initially published in the Times and Seasons in 1842. Although the Wentworth Letter was the last known history written by the Prophet, this account was the first of the Prophet's histories to be published. Primary sources relating to Joseph Smith's First Vision (plus other contemporary accounts) have previously been published in Milton V. Backman, Jr.'s Joseph Smith's First Vision (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980).

Some information, not found in any other primary source, relating to the boyhood of Joseph Smith was included in a family history prepared by Lucy Mack Smith. During the winter following the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, Lucy commenced dictating this history (which included a biography of her son, Joseph) to Martha Jane Knowlton Coray, a school teacher who had married Howard Coray, one of the scribes who had assisted Joseph in writing his history. [^2] In an attempt to obtain increased accuracy in her work, Lucy directed Martha and Howard Coray to assist in rewriting her history. [^3] A copy of the revised edition of Lucy's manuscript was obtained by her son, William. Eventually a copy of the document was secured by Isaac Sheen, a member of the Church living in Michigan. While Orson Pratt, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was traveling to England on a mission, he was shown the manuscript copy and purchased it from Sheen. This work was subsequently published in England under the title Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his Progenitors for many Generations (Liverpool: published for Orson Pratt and S. W. Richards, 1853). Selections from Lucy's history cited in this work are based upon the first published edition. A comparison has been made of Lucy's manuscript histories with the initial publication of her work and when a printing error occurred or when there was an omission of information that relates to the subject being discussed, words appearing in Lucy's manuscripts are quoted, with a footnote identifying the change.

A selection from Joseph Smith's Diary for November 9, 1835 (in the handwriting of Warren Cowdery)

Selection from Joseph Smith's "1832 History" The first half of the page is in the handwriting of Frederick G. Williams and the last half (the portion following the long dash) is in the handwriting of Joseph Smith.

Joseph Smith

Orson Pratt

Of particular significance in Joseph and Lucy's writings is the description of Joseph Smith's leg operation. Joseph's account was not published until after Lucy's death and was probably never examined by his mother. Therefore, the two independent descriptions of this event are now available for comparison. According to one contemporary, Lucy's account reads like a modern day medical report and includes many details that add credibility to this as well as her other writings. [^4] Joseph, meanwhile, wrote his account from the perspective of the patient, yet the harmony in the two accounts is striking, and it provides evidence that Joseph and Lucy were reliable, trustworthy historians who had a capacity to describe accurately events which they witnessed.

Selections from the Writings of Joseph and Lucy Smith Concerning his Boyhood Years

Joseph Smith

I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, . . . Vermont. [^5]

Lucy Smith

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCAfter selling the farm at Tunbridge, we moved only a short distance, to the town of Royalton. Here we resided a few months, then moved again to Sharon, Windsor county, Vermont. In the latter place, my husband rented a farm of my father, which he cultivated in the summer, teaching school in the winter. In this way my husband continued labouring for a few years, during which time our circumstances gradually improved, until we found ourselves quite comfortable again.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCIn the meantime we had a son, whom we called Joseph, after the name of his father; he was born December 23, 1805. I shall speak of him more particularly by and by.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCWe moved thence to Tunbridge. Here we had another son, whom we named Samuel Harrison, born March 13, 1808. We lived in this place a short time, then moved to Royalton, where Ephraim was born, March 13, 1810. We continued here until we had another son, born March 13, 1811, whom we called William. . . .

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCIn 1811, we moved from Royalton, Vermont, to the town of Lebanon, New Hampshire. . . .

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCAs our children had, in a great measure, been debarred from the privilege of schools, we began to make every arrangement to attend to this important duty. We established our second son Hyrum in an academy at Hanover; and the rest, that were of sufficient age, we were sending to a common school that was quite convenient. Meanwhile, myself and companion were doing all that our abilities would admit of for the future welfare and advantage of the family, and were greatly blessed in our labours.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCBut this state of things did not long continue. The typhus fever came into Lebanon, and raged tremendously. [^6]

Accounts of Joseph's Leg Operation

Joseph Smith

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCWhen I was five years old or thereabouts, I was attacked with the typus fever, and at one time, during my sickness, my father despaired of my life. The doctor broke the fever, after which it settled under my shoulder. Dr. Parker called it a sprained shoulder and anointed it with bone ointment and freely applied the hot shovel when it proved to be a swelling under the arm. After it was opened, it discharged freely. Later the disease descended into my left leg and ankle and terminated in a fever sore of the worst kind. I endured the most acute suffering for a long time under the care of doctors [Nathan] Smith, Stone and [Cyrus] Perkins of Hanover. [^7] At one time eleven doctors came from Dartmouth Medical College, at Hanover, New Hampshire, for the purpose of amputation, but, young as I was, I utterly refused to give my assent to the operation, but I consented to their trying an experiment by removing a large portion of the bone from my left leg, which they did, and before my leg healed, fourteen additional pieces of bone were removed. During this time I was reduced so very low that my mother could carry me with ease. After I began to recover, I went about on crutches until I started for the state of New York. [^8]

Lucy Smith

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodJoseph, our third son, having recovered from the typhus fever, after something like two weeks' sickness, one day screamed out while sitting in a chair, with a pain in his shoulder, and, in a very short time, he appeared to be in such agony, that we feared that consequence would prove to be something very serious. We immediately sent for a doctor. When he arrived, and had examined the patient, he said that it was his opinion that this pain was occasioned by a sprain. But the child declared this could not be the case, as he had received no injury in any way whatever, but that a severe pain had seized him all at once, of the cause of which he was entirely ignorant.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodNothwithstanding the child's protestations, still the physician insisted, that it must be a sprain, and consequently, he anointed his shoulder with some bone linament; but this was of no advantage to him, for the pain continued the same after the anointing as before.

When two weeks of extreme suffering has elapsed, the attendant physician concluded to make closer examination; whereupon he found that a large fever sore had gathered between his breast and shoulder. He immediately lanced it, upon which it discharged fully a quart of matter.

As soon as the sore had discharged itself, the pain left it, and shot like lightning (using his own terms) down his side into the marrow of the bone of his leg, and soon became very severe. My poor boy, at this, was almost in despair, and he, cried out "Oh, father! the pain is so severe, how can I bear it!"

His leg soon began to swell, and he continued to suffer the greatest agony for the space of two weeks longer. During this period, I carried him much of the time in my arms, in order to mitigate his suffering as much as possible; in consequence of which, I was taken very ill myself. The anxiety of mind that I experienced, together with physical overexertion, was too much for my constitution, and my nature sunk under it.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCHyrum, who was rather remarkable for his tenderness and sympathy, now desired that he might take my place. As he was a good, trusty boy, we let him do so; and, in order to make the task as easy for him as possible, we laid Joseph upon a low bed, and Hyrum sat beside him, almost day and night, for some considerable length of time, holding the affected part of his leg in his hands, and pressing it between them, so that his afflicted brother might be enable to endure the pain, which was so excruciating, that he was scarcely able to bear it.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodAt the end of three weeks, we thought it advisable to send again for the surgeon. When he came, he made an incision of eight inches, on the front side of the leg, between the knee and the ankle. This relieved the pain in a great measure, and the patient was quite comfortable until the wound began to heal, when the pain became as violent as ever.

The surgeon was called again, and he this time enlarged the wound, cutting the leg even to the bone. It commenced healing the second time, and as soon as it began to heal, it also began to swell again, which swelling continued to rise till we deemed it wisdom to call a council of surgeons; and when they met in consultation, they decided that amputation was the only remedy.

Soon after coming to this conclusion, they rode up to the door, and were invited into a room, apart from the one in which Joseph lay. They being seated, I addressed them thus: "Gentlemen, what can you do to save my boy's leg?" They answered, "We can do nothing; we have cut it open to the bone, and find it so affected that we consider his leg incurable, and that amputation is absolutely necessary in order to save his life."

This was like a thunder bolt to me. I appealed to the principal surgeon, saying, "Dr. Stone, can you not make another trial? Can you not, but cutting around the bone, take out the diseased part, and perhaps that which is sound will heal over, and by this means you will save his leg? You will not, you must not, take off his leg, until you try once more. I will not consent to let you enter his room until you make me this promise."

After consulting a short time with each other, they agreed to do as I had requested, then went to see my suffering son. One of the doctors, on approaching his bed, said, "My poor boy, we have come again." "Yes," said Joseph, "I see you have; but you have not come to take off my leg, have you, sir?" "No," replied the surgeon, "it is your mother's request that we make one more effort, and that is what we have now come for." [^9]

My husband who was constantly with the child, seemed to contemplate my countenance; then turning his eyes upon his boy [and] all his suffering together with my anxiety . . . burst into tears and sobbed like a child. [^10]

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodThe principal surgeon, after a moment's conversation, ordered cords to be brought to bind Joseph fast to the bedstead; but to this Joseph objected. The doctor, however, insisted that he must be confined, upon which Joseph said very decidedly, "No, doctor, I will not be bound, for I can bear the operation much better if I have my liberty." "Then," said Dr. Stone, "will you drink some brandy?"

"No," said Joseph, "not one drop."

"Will you take some wine?" rejoined the doctor. "You must take something, or you can never endure the severe operation to which you must be subjected."

"No," exclaimed Joseph, "I will not touch one particle of liquor, neither will I be tied down; but I will tell you what I will do—I will have my father sit on the bed and hold me in his arms, and then I will do whatever is necessary in order to have the bone taken out." Looking at me, he said, "Mother, I want you to leave the room, for I know you cannot bear to see me suffer so; father can stand it, but you have carried me so much, and watched over me so long, you are almost worn out." Then looking up into my face, his eyes swimming in tears, he continued, "Now, mother, promise me that you will not stay, will you? The Lord will help me, and I shall get through with it."

To this request I consented, and getting a number of folded sheets, and laying them under his leg, I retired, going several hundred yards from the house in order to be out of hearing.

The surgeons commenced operating by boring into the bone of his leg, first on one side of the bone where it was affected, then on the other side, after which they broke it off with a pair of forceps or pincers. They thus took away large pieces of the bone. When they broke off the first piece, Joseph screamed out so loudly, that I could not forbear running to him. On my entering his room, he cried out, "Oh, mother, go back, go back; I do not want you to come in—I will try to tough it out, if you will go away."

When the third piece was taken away, I burst into the room again and oh, my God! what a spectacle for a mother's eye! The wound torn open, the blood still gushing from it, and the bed literally covered with blood. Joseph was as pale as a corpse, and large drops of sweat were rolling down his face, whilst upon every feature was depicted the utmost agony!

I was immediately forced from the room, and detained until the operation was complete; but when the act was accomplished, Joseph put upon a clean bed, the room cleared of every appearnce of blood, and the instruments which were used in the operation removed, I was permitted again to enter.

Joseph immediately commenced getting better, and from this day onward, continued to mend until he became strong and healthy. [^11]

Events Following Joseph's Operation

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCJoseph Smith

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCWhen I was in my tenth year or thereabouts, my father left the state of Vermont [after moving from Lebanon, New Hamptshire to Norwich, Vermont] and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) County, New York. [^12]

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCMy father had gone to New York for the purpose of preparing a place for the removal of his family, which he effected by sending a man after us by the name of Caleb Howard. Although the snow was generally deep through the country during this journey, we performed the whole on wheels, except the first two days, when we were accompanied by my mother's mother, Grandmother Lydia Mack, who was injured by the upsetting of the sleigh and not wishing to accompany her friends west, tarried by the way with her friends in Vermont. Later we learned of her death, supposing that she never recovered from the injury received by the overturn of the sleigh. After Howard had started on the journey with my mother and family, he spent the money he had received of my father in drinking, gambling, etc. Meanwhile, we fell in with a family by the name of Gates who was traveling west. Howard drove me from the waggon and made me travel in my weak state through the snow forty miles per day for several days, during which time I suffered the most excruciating weariness and pain—all this that Mr. Howard might enjoy the society of two of Mr. Gates' daughters whom he took on the waggon where I should have ridden. Thus he continued day after day through the journey. When my brothers remonstrated with Mr. Howard for his treatment to me, he knocked them down with the butt of his whip.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCWhen we arrived at Utica, New York, Howard threw the goods out of the waggon into the street and attempted to run away with the horses and waggon, but my mother seized the horses by the reign, and, calling witnesses, forbid his taking them away, as they were her property. On our way from Utica I was left to ride on the last sleigh, belonging to the Gates family. I was knocked down by the driver, one of Gates' sons, and left to wallow in my blood until a stranger came along, picked me up, and carried me to the town of Palmyra. Since Howard had spent all our funds, my mother was compelled to pay our landlords' bills from Utica to Palmyra, in bits of cloth, clothing, etc., the last payment being made with the drops [earrings] taken from sister Sophronia's ears for that purpose. (Note A) Several years after my father's arrival at Palmyra, he moved with his family to Manchester, in the same county of Ontario. His family consisted of eleven souls: namely, my father, Joseph Smith, my mother, Lucy Smith (daughter of Solomon Mack), my brothers Alvin (who died November 18 [19], 1823, in the twenty-fifth year of his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos, and my sisters Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy. [^13]

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCBeing in indigent circumstances we were obliged to labor hard for the support of a large family, having nine children. It required the exertions of all that were able to render any assistance for the support of the family. Therefore we were deprived of the benefit of an education. Suffice it to say that I was merely instructed in reading, writing and the ground rules of arithmetic; these constituted my whole literary acquirements. [^14]

Lucy Smith

When health returned to us, as one would naturally suppose, it found us in quite low circumstances. We were compelled to strain every energy to provide for our present necessities, instead of making arrangements for the future, as we had previously contemplated.

Shortly after sickness left our family, we moved to Norwich, in the state of Vermont. In this place we established ourselves on a farm belonging to one Esquire Moredock. The first year our crops failed; yet, by selling fruit which grew on the place, we succeeded in obtaining bread for the family, and by making considerable exertion, we were enabled to sustain ourselves.

The crops the second year were as the year before—a perfect failure. Mr. Smith now determined to plant once more, and if he should meet with no better success than he had the two preceding years, he would then go to the state of New York, where wheat was raised in abundance.

The next year an untimely frost destroyed the crops, and being the third year in succession in which the crops had failed, it almost caused a famine. This was enough; my husband was now altogether decided upon going to New York. He came in, one day, in quite a thoughtful mood, and sat down; after meditating some time, he observed that, could he so arrange his affairs, he would be glad to start soon for New York with a Mr. [Caleb] Howard, who was going to Palmyra. He further remarked, that he could not leave consistently, as the situation of the family would not admit of his absence; besides, he was owing some money that must first be paid.

I told him it was my opinion he might get both his creditors and debtors together, and arrange matters between them in such a way as to give satisfaction to all parties concerned; and, in relation to the family, I thought I could make every necessary preparation to follow as soon as he would be ready for us. He accordingly called upon all with whom he had any dealings, and settled up his accounts with them. There were, however, some who, in the time of settlement, neglected to bring forward their books, consequently they were not balanced, or there were no entries made in them to show the settlement; but in cases of this kind, he called witnesses, that there might be evidence of the fact.

Having thus arranged his business, Mr. Smith set out for Palmyra, in company with Mr. Howard. After his departure, I and those of the family who were of much size, toiled faithfully, until we considered ourselves fully prepared to leave at a moment's warning. We shortly received a communication from Mr. Smith, requesting us to make ourselves ready to take up a journey for Palmyra. In a short time after this, a team came for us. As we were about starting on this journey, several of those gentlemen who had withheld their books in the time of settlement now brought them forth, and claimed the accounts which had been settled, and which they had, in the presence of witnesses, agreed to erase. We were all ready for the journey, and the teams were waiting on expense. Under these circumstances I concluded it would be more to our advantage to pay their unjust claims than to hazard a lawsuit. Therefore, by making considerable exertion, I raised the required sum, which was one hundred and fifty dollars, and liquidated the demand.

A gentlemen by the name of Flog, a wealthy settler, living in the town of Hanover, also a Mr. Howard, who resided in Norwich, were both acquainted with the circumstance mentioned above. They were very indignant at it, and requested me to give them a sufficient time to get the witnesses together, and they would endevour to recover that which had been taken from me by fraud. I told them I could not do so, for my husband had sent teams for me, which were on expense; moreover, there was an uncertainty in getting the money back again, and in case of failure, I should not be able to raise the means necessary to take the family where we contemplated moving.

They then proposed raising some money by subscription, saying, "We know the people feel as we do concerning this matter, and if you will receive it we will make you a handsome present." This I utterly refused. The idea of receiving assistance in such a way as this was indeed very repulsive to my feelings, and I rejected their offer.

My aged mother, who had lived with us some time, assisted in preparing for the journey. She came with us to Royalton, where she resided until she died, which was two years afterwards, in consequence of an injury which she received by getting upset in a waggon while travelling with us.

On arriving at Royalton I had a scene to pass through, and it was truly a severe one—one to which I shall ever look back with peculiar feelings. Here I was to take leave of my affectionate mother. The parting hour came; my mother wept over me, long and bitterly. She told me that it was not probable she should ever behold my face again; "But, my dear child," said she, "I have lived long—my days are nearly numbered—I must soon exchange the things of this world for those which pertain to another state of existence, where I hope to enjoy the society of the blessed; and now, as my last admonition, I beseech you to continue faithful in the service of God to the end of your days, that I may have the pleasure of embracing you in another and fairer world above."

This parting scene was at one Willard Pierce's, a tavern keeper. From his house my mother went to Daniel Mack's, with whom she afterwards lived until her decease.

Having travelled a short distance, I discovered that Mr. Howard, our teamster, was an unprincipled and unfeeling wretch, by the way in which he handled both our goods and money, as well as by his treatment of my children, especially Joseph. He would compel him to travel miles at a time on foot, notwithstanding he was still lame. We bore patiently with his abuse, until we got about twenty miles west of Utica, when one morning, as we were getting ready to continue our journey, my oldest son came to me and said, "Mother, Mr. Howard has thrown the goods out of the waggon, and is about starting off with the team." Upon hearing this, I told him to call the man in. I met him in the bar-room, in the presence of a large company of travellers, both male and female, and I demanded his reason for the course which he was taking. He told me the money which I had given him was all expended, and he could go no further.

I then turned to those present and said, "Gentlement and ladies, please give your attention for a moment. Now, as sure as there is a God in heaven, that team, as well as the goods, belong to my husband, and this man intends to take them from me, or at least the team, leaving me with eight children, without the means of proceeding on my journey." Then turning to Mr. Howard, I said, "Sir, I now forbid you touching the team, or driving it one step further. You can go about your own business; I have no use for you. I shall take charge of the team myself, and hereafter attend to my own affairs." I accordingly did so, and, proceeding our journey, we in a short time arrived at Palmyra, with a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash.

When I again met my husband at Palmyra, we were much reduced—not from indolence, but on account of many reverses of fortune, with which our lives had been rather singularly marked. Notwithstanding our misfortunes, and the embarassments with which we were surrounded, I was quite happy in once more having the society of my husband, and in throwing myself and the children upon the care and affection of a tender companion and father.

We all now sat down, and counselled together relative to the course which was best for us to adopt in our destitute circumstances, and we came to the conclusion to unite our strength in endeavouring to obtain a piece of land. Having done considerable at painting oil-cloth coverings for tables, stands, &c., I set up the business, and did extremely well. I furnished all the provisions for the family, and, besides this, began to replenish our housbold furniture, in a very short time, by my own exertions.

My husband and his sons, Alvin and Hyrum, set themselves to work to pay for one hundred acres of land, which Mr. Smith contracted for with a land agent. In a year, we made nearly all of the first payment, erected a log house, and commenced clearing. I believe something like thirty acres of land were got ready for cultivation the first year. . . . [^15]

When the time for making the second payment [of the farm] drew nigh, Alvin went from home to get work, in order to raise the money, and after much hardship and fatigue, returned with the required amount. This payment being made, we felt relieved, as this was the only thing that troubled us; for we had a snug log-house, neatly furnished, and the means of living comfortably. It was now only two years since we entered Palmyra, almost destitute of money, property, or acquaintance. The hand of friendship was extended on every side, and we blessed God, with our whole heart, for his "mercy, which endureth for ever." [^16]

I now come to the history of Joseph . . . I shall say nothing respecting him until he arrived at the age of fourteen. However, in this I am aware that some of my readers will be disappointed, for I suppose, from questions which are frequently asked me, that it is thought by some that I shall be likely to tell many very remarkable incidents which attended his childhood; but, as nothing occurred during his early life, except those trivial circumstances which are common to that state of human existence, I pass them in silence. [^17]
