Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER TWO

The Calling of a Prophet

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7.)

First VisionHCOne of the most important events in the religious history of the world occurred in a serene grove in the spring of 1820. A young farm boy, fourteen years of age, was called by God to be a modern witness for Christ and to usher in the fulness of the everlasting gospel. In response to Joseph Smith's humble prayer, God the Eternal Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, appeared and instructed the young man. The Father introduced the Son, and the Savior unfolded a momentous message. For hundreds of years a prophet had not been available to guide God's children on earth, but now with the heavens parting, light and knowledge burst upon the inhabitants of this world. During this divine call, Joseph Smith learned more about the nature and personality of God than anyone then living. He also learned that all churches were teaching incorrect doctrines and was promised that the fulness of the gospel would be revealed to him. As he walked from the sacred grove in western New York, he was endowed with a peace and joy that he had never previously experienced and a responsibility that was distinct among men of the early nineteenth century.

First VisionHCOn four different occasions Joseph Smith wrote or dictated a detailed account of this marvelous and sacred experience of 1820. Three of these recitals were referred to in Chapter One: the autobiography and history written in 1832 (which is the only account of the First Vision in Joseph's handwriting, the others being dictated by scribes), the history of the Church which was initiated in 1838, and the Wentworth Letter. A fourth history is the record of a conversation between Joseph Smith and a visitor to Kirtland, Ohio, a man named Matthias. This latter account was recorded in Joseph Smith's Kirtland diary by his scribe, Warren Cowdery, under the date Monday, November 9th, 1835.

First VisionHCAs one reads the full text of the four accounts of the First vision, he should remember that the accounts are of various lengths, were prepared under different circumstances at different periods in the life of the Prophet, and were addressed to different audiences. It is not surprising, therefore, that each of them emphasize different aspects of his experience. When Latter-day Saints today explain this remarkable vision to others, their descriptions often vary according to the audience of circumstances that prompt such recitals. If one were relating the incident to a group of high priests, for example, he would undoubtedly tell it somewhat differently than he would to individuals who had never heard of Joseph Smith or the restoration of the gospel.

First VisionHCOne can better understand and appreciate the different emphasis in Joseph's four recitals of the First Vision by examining their individual historical setting, by considering Joseph's efforts to write history, and by noting his attempts to improve the form in which the basic message of the restoration was conveyed to others. [^1]

First VisionHCFor example, in the 1832 account Joseph Smith emphasized his long quest for religious truth which emerged from his desire to secure a remission of sins. A concern for the welfare of his soul led him to an investigation of religious communities, and this investigation convinced the young boy that religious leaders were teaching doctrines that did not harmonize with New Testament Christianity. In 1832 when the Prophet described what he learned during his vision, he emphasized that the Lord forgave him of his sins, instructed him concerning the atonement, and said that others had turned aside from the gospel and were not keeping his commandments. [^2] Although in this account the Prophet does not refer to the appearance of the Father, the absence of this fact, along with the absence of other details, does not mean that Joseph did not behold the Father. In the two accounts addressed to non-Mormons, the Prophet said that two personages appeared to him without identifying those personages. In his official history and in a number of contemporary accounts of the First Vision we read that after the two personages appeared the Father introduced the Son by saying, "This is my Beloved Son. Hear Him!" Joseph never wrote a complete description of everything he learned from the Lord in 1820, and in his official history, which is the most complete account of this experience, the Prophet concluded by declaring that "Many other things did he say unto me which I cannot write at this time."

First VisionHCIn addition to the four accounts recorded by Joseph Smith regarding his visions, before the Prophet's death in 1844, four contemporaries wrote accounts of the First Vision based upon testimonies related to them by the Prophet. The first published account of the First Vision was written by Orson Pratt, and appeared in a work entitled A Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions (Edinburgh, 1840).

First VisionHCOrson Pratt was well qualified to write a history of the restoration. In addition to his capacity to write clearly and report accurately that which he observed and learned from others, following his conversion in 1830, he generally lived in the communities where Joseph Smith resided. Before and after his call in 1835 to serve as one of the members of the first quorum of the twelve apostles, he often listened as Joseph Smith in private and public gatherings unfolded the history and doctrine of the Church. He was not only a close associate of Joseph Smith but knew all of the other major participants (and members of their families) in the birth of Mormonism.

First VisionHCOrson Hyde, another apostle who was well acquainted with Joseph Smith, also prepared an account of the First Vision. His description of the early visions of Joseph Smith was written in German and was basically a translation of the English version prepared by Orson Pratt. This work, A Cry from the Wilderness, A Voice From the Dust of the Earth, was published in 1842 in Frankfurt, Germany.

First VisionHCA third early rendition of Joseph Smith's First Vision was written by a non-Mormon newspaper editor who visited Nauvoo and, following a conversation with the Mormon prophet, published a description of what he learned from Joseph Smith in the New York Spectator of September 23, 1843.

First VisionHCOn May 24, 1844, one month prior to the death of Joseph Smith, Alexander Neibaur, another convert and friend of the Prophet, listened as Joseph Smith related to him his experience in the sacred grove. Following this conversation, Neibaur recorded in his journal his impressions of what Joseph said on that occasion.

The Great Revival of 1819-1820 Western, Central, and Upstate New York.

Accounts of Joseph Smith's vision of 1820 prepared by Pratt, Hyde, the non-Mormon editor, and Neibaur have been published in Backman's Joseph Smith's First Vision. Since these four accounts repeat information written by Joseph Smith, references to these contemporary versions that contain information paralleling Joseph's statements have been included in a harmony printed in Appendix A, with appropriate notations of the sources.

The contemporary accounts of the First Vision clearly substantiate Joseph Smith's narrative; nearly every concept regarding the vision related in Joseph's histories are found in accounts recorded by contemporaries before Joseph's death in 1844. Moreover, there are no major concepts regarding that vision in these secondary sources that are not found in the writings of Joseph Smith. In conclusion, the five contemporary accounts provide evidence that Joseph Smith informed others of his sacred experiences of 1820 and this testimony was the same that he recorded in his histories of the Church.

Joseph Smith also wrote an accurate account of the historical setting of the First Vision. By using the tools of secular historians, one can neither prove nor disprove a vision, but one can assess the reliability of selected statements regarding the background of events. The prophet wrote in the history which he commenced in 1838 that in the second year after his removal to Manchester there was in the place where he lived religious excitement and that in the whole region of country great multitudes united themselves to the different religious persuasions. In addition to describing the war of words and contest of opinions that occurred during this religious quickening and writing that some members of his family joined the Presbyterian church, he declared that following his First Vision he experienced intense persecution. Historical records vindicate the Prophet's writings on all of these points. [^3] In conclusion, Joseph Smith not only accurately described the historical setting of his First Vision, but more importantly he accurately reported the message that God unfolded to him in 1820.

First VisionHCThe Theophany Near Palmyra

First VisionHCJoseph Smith

First VisionHC[When I was] about . . . twelve years [old,] my mind became seriously impressed with regard to the all important concerns . . . of my immortal sou1. [^4] I began to reflect upon the importance of being prepared for a future state [^5] and from the age of twelve years to fifteen . . . my mind became exceedingly distressed for I became convicted [convinced] of my sins . . . I also pondered many things in my heart concerning the situation of the world of mankind, the contentions and divisions, the wickedness and abominations, and the darkness which pervaded the minds of mankind . . . Believing as I was taught that . . . the scriptures . . . contained the word of God, [I] applied myself to them. My intimate acquaintance with those of different denominations led me to marvel exceedingly. [^6] I found that there was a great clash of religious sentiment concerning the plan of salvation. If I went to one society they referred me to one plan, and another to another, each one pointing to his own particular creed as the summum bonum of perfection. [^7] I felt to mourn for my own sins and for the sins of the world. [^8]

First VisionHCSome time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and some "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist. For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feelings, in order to have every body converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party, and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert, so that all their good feelings one for another, if they every had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words, and a contest about opinions. I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely, my mother, Lucy, my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia. [^9]

First VisionHCDuring this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasional would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of either reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets, and disprove all others.

First VisionHCIn the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right? Or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it? [^10] Considering that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much confusion I determined to investigate the subject more fully, believing that if God had a church it would not be split up into factions, and that if he taught one society to worship one way, and administer in one set of ordinances, he would not teach another principles which were diametrically opposed. [^11]

First VisionHCWhile I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." [^12] Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did, for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom that I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passage of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally. [^13]

First VisionHCAfter I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. [^14] I made a fruitless attempt to pray; my tongue seemed to be swollen in my mouth, so that I could not utter. I heard a noise behind me like some person walking towards me. I sprang up on my feet and looked around, but saw no person or thing that was calculated to produce the noise of walking. I kneeled down again. [^15] Immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment which I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such a marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being [^16]—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me, [^17] and I was filled with the spirit of God. [^18] When the light rested upon me, I saw two Personages whose brightness and glory defy all description and who exactly resembled each other in feature and likeness. [^19] One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! [^20] The Lord spake unto me saying, Joseph, my son thy sins are forgiven thee. [^21] Go thy way, walk in my statues and keep my commandments. Behold, I am the Lord of glory. I was crucified for the world that all who believe on my name may have eternal life. Behold the world lieth in sin. [^22]

First VisionHCMy object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself so as to be able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right (for at this time it had never entered into my heart that all were wrong)—and which I should join. [^23] I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong, [^24] that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines. [^25] The Personage who addressed me said those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." [^26] After informing me that the anger of the Lord was kindled against the inhabitants of the earth because of their ungodliness, the Savior said that everything spoken of by the mouth of the prophets and apostles would be fulfilled and that he would come quickly as prophecied. [^27] He again forbade me to join with any of them [^28] at the same time receiving a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto me. [^29] Many other things did he say unto me which I cannot write at this time. [^30] I [also] saw many angels in this . . . first communication . . . [or] vision. [^31] When I came to myself again, I found myself laying on my back, looking up into heaven. [^32]

First VisionHCDuring this vision my soul was filled with love and for many days following this experience I rejoiced with great joy and the Lord was with me. [^33] After I returned to my home, I leaned up to the fireplace. Mother enquired what was the matter. I replied, "Never mind. All is well. I am well enough off." I then told my mother that I had learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true. [^34]

First VisionHCSome few days after this experience, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there was no such thing as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there never would be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me and create a hot [bitter] persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me. It has often caused me serious reflection both then and since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, so as to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself. However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had had a vision. I have thought since that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me, or one of them did; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dare I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned, that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed. I had found the testimony of James to be true, that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain and not be upbraided. I continued to pursue my common vocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had seen a vision. [^35]

First VisionHCDuring the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three—having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me—I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say led me into divers temptations, to the gratification of many appetites, offensive in the sight of God. [^36]

First VisionHCIn making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cherry temperment. [^37]

Lucy Mack Smith's Confirmation of Joseph's Writings and Her Descriptions of Selected Events that Transpired About 1819 and 1820

Lucy Smith

Shortly after my husband received the foregoing vision, [a vision which Lucy reported he had received in 1819] there was a great revival in religion, which extended to all the denominations of Christians in the surrounding country in which we resided. Many of the world's people, becoming concerned about the salvation of their souls, came forward and presented themselves as seekers after religion. Most of them were desirous of uniting with some church, but were not decided as to the particular faith which they would adopt. When the numerous meetings were about breaking up, and the candidates and the various leading church members began to consult upon the subject of adopting the candidates into some church or churches, as the case might be, a dispute arose, and there was a great contention among them. . . . [^38]

At the age of fourteen, an incident occurred which alarmed us much, as we knew not the cause of it. Joseph being a remarkably quiet, well disposed child, we did not suspect that any one had aught against him. He was out one evening on an errand, and, on returning home, as he was passing through the door yard, a gun was fired across his pathway, with the evident intention of shooting him. He sprang to the door much frightened. We immediately went in search of the assassin, but could find no trace of him that evening. The next morning we found his tracks under a waggon, where he lay when he fired; and the following day we found the balls, which were discharged from the gun, lodged in the head and neck of a cow that was standing opposite the waggon, in a dark corner. We have not as yet discovered the man who made this attempt at murder, neither can we discover the cause thereof. [^39]

Conclusion

Orson Pratt

What are the circumstances that enabled him [Joseph Smith] to have manifestations from heaven at that early period of his life? He was very anxious, as most of mankind are, to be saved; and he was also very anxious to understand how to be saved . . . He was a farmer's boy; he was not brought up and educated in high schools, academies or colleges . . . First one and then another of the different persuasions would come and converse with him and try to influence him to join his lot with them; and seeing so much confusion, each sect claiming that they were the true people of God, he became at a loss what to do. He occasionally devoted an hour, when his labors on the farm would permit, to reading the Bible, and while doing so his eyes happened to fall on a certain passage of scripture, recorded in the epistle of James, which says that if any man lack wisdom let him ask of God who giveth liberally to all men and upbraideth not. Now this youth . . . believe[d] that that passage really meant what it said. He went out into a little grove near his father's house, . . . and there he knelt down in all the simplicity of a child and prayed to the Father in the name of Jesus that He would show him which, among all the churches, was the true one. . . .

He had now come to a Person who was able to teach him. All his inquiries previously had been futile and vain, but he now applied to the right source. Did the Lord hear him? Yes. But he had to exercise faith. . . . The Lord hearkened. Being the same God who lived in ancient times, He was able to hear and answer prayers that were offered up in this sincere manner, and He answered the prayers of this youth. The heavens, as it were, were opened to him . . . and he was filled with the visions of the Almighty, and he saw, in the midst of this glorious pillar of fire, two glorious personages, whose countenances shone with an exceeding great lustre. One of them spoke to him, saying, while pointing to the other, "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him."

Now here was a certainty; here was something that he saw and heard; here were personages capable of instructing him, and of telling him which was the true religion. How different this from going to an uninspired man! . . . One minute's instruction from personages clothed with the glory of God coming down from the eternal worlds is worth more than all the volumes that ever were written by uninspired men. . . .

He was told there was no Christian church on the face of the earth according to the ancient pattern, as recorded in the New Testament; but they had all strayed from the ancient faith and had lost the gifts and power of the Holy Ghost; they had lost the spirit of revelation and prophecy, [and] the power to heal the sick. . . . "Go not after them," was the command given to this young man, and he was told that if he would be faithful in serving the true and living God, it should be made manifest to him, in a time to come, the true church that God intended to establish.

Now we can see the wisdom of God in not revealing everything to him on that occasion. He revealed as much as Joseph was capacitated to received. . . . [^40]

When he related [to others] that which he had received in this vision, the ministers immediately made light of it, and said to him, "God does not reveal anything in our days; he revealed all that was necessary in ancient times; he has not spoken for 1800 years to anyone." From that time forth he was persecuted. . . . This seemed to be the feeling manifested, not only by professors, but by all; but yet he knew that God had manifested himself to him; he could not be persuaded to the contrary, any more than Paul could when he heard Jesus in his first vision. [^41]
