Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER THREE

Unfolding Cumorah's Hidden Treasure 1823-1827

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, kindred, and tongue, and people. (Rev. 14:6.)

Following the First Vision, three years passed before Joseph Smith received additional instructions from a heavenly being. In the spring of 1820 Joseph learned that the fulness of the gospel would be revealed to him, and after waiting three years he thought his transgressions might have prevented the fulfillment of that promise. On the night of September 21-22, 1823, while the seventeen-year-old boy was seeking forgiveness and petitioning the Lord, the heavens were again opened; and Joseph Smith beheld a series of visions. Moroni, a prophet who had lived on the American continent, appeared to him and told Joseph that an ancient record was deposited in a hill near his home. This religious history, he said, contained the fulness of the everlasting gospel as taught by the Savior and his prophets to the early inhabitants of America. Joseph Smith learned that following Christ's resurrection, the Savior appeared as he predicted to his other sheep living on the American continent, and they heard his voice (John 10:16, 3 Nephi 15:21). This record which had been compiled by Mormon, the father of Moroni, is a new witness for Christ, a fifth gospel, and is a work which unfolds the teachings of Christ with clarity and purity.

The coming forth of the Book of Mormon is in harmony with a divine law of witnesses. Joseph Smith does not stand alone in bearing witness to the restoration of Christ's gospel. In other dispensations, prophets were supported by witnesses. Methuselah proclaimed the same warning message as Noah. Aaron served as a spokesman for Moses. Many witnesses testified of events in the life of the Savior, including his resurrection. The Book of Mormon is a modern witness for Christ, but it is also a witness of the divine calling of Joseph Smith. This work contains predictions of a gospel restoration following the American Revolution by a person named Joseph who was the son of a Joseph. (2 Nephi 3:11-15 and 1 Nephi 13:18-23.) The book itself also serves as a powerful, tangible evidence of the authenticity of this latter-day prophet. Moreoever, the Book of Mormon is a witness of the validity of the basic message of the Bible.

Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

Wherefore murmur ye, because ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also. (2 Nephi 29:7-8.)

While the Book of Mormon is a witness to the authenticity of the Bible and the divine calling of Joseph Smith, the Bible is a witness to the restoration. The Bible predicted the scattering of Israel, declaring that the descendents of Joseph would run over the wall (ocean) (Genesis 11:9 and 49:22-26.) Ancient prophets also predicted that the writings of Judah (the Bible) and the writings of Joseph (the Book of Mormon) would be one in the hands of others (Ezekiel 37:15-20 and 2 Nephi 3:12), that a book would be delivered to one who was unlearned, and that the unlearned would bring forth a marvelous work and a wonder (Isaiah 29:11-14, 18, 24). The Bible further predicted that Elijah would come before the great and dreadful day of the Lord (Malachi 4:5-6), that Elias would come and restore all things (Matthew 17:11 and Mark 9:12), and that another angel would come, bringing to the earth the everlasting gospel (Revelation 14:6).

Before obtaining the record which was a modern witness for Christ, Joseph Smith was visited by many heavenly beings who had lived anciently on this continent. These angelic messengers instructed him concerning life in ancient America, so that between 1823 and 1827, through visions and revelations, Joseph Smith became an authority on the religious, social, and political history of several American civilizations that were disrupted through multiple internal and external forces. [^1]

In addition to the four histories written by the Prophet other contemporary accounts are included in this chapter which confirm Joseph Smith's writings and amplify our understanding of his religious experiences during this 1823-1827 period.

Included among these other accounts are the writings of Lucy Smith and other members of the Smith family, Orson Pratt, Joseph Knight (an employer and friend of the Prophet), and Oliver Cowdery. The Oliver Cowdery history cited in this chapter was initially printed in the Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1834-1835 and subsequently reprinted in the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1840-1841. Oliver Cowdery was a school teacher who met Joseph Smith in April 1829. After becoming one of the major witnesses to the restoration movement, he wrote the first major history describing Joseph Smith's religious experiences of 1823. Although Oliver Cowdery testified that his writings were based upon what he learned from Joseph Smith, there is no evidence that the Prophet carefully ready this manuscript before its publication in order to correct possible mistakes. Nevertheless, the general accuracy of this history is attested to by its harmony with the writings of Joseph Smith, the similarity in this history to the one prepared by Orson Pratt, and its republication in the official Latter-day Saints' newspaper, the Times and Seasons, while Joseph was living in Nauvoo. The harmony which exists in the writings of Joseph Smith (describing his religious experiences between 1823 and 1827) and the histories written by Lucy Smith, Orson Pratt, and Oliver Cowdery provide confirming evidence of Moroni's appearances to the young prophet. (See Appendix B)

Joseph Smith (Courtesy RLDS Church) Emma Hale Smith (Courtesy RLDS Church)

THE HILL CUMORAH

The earliest known artist's sketch of the hill Cumorah, published in J. W. Barber and Henry Howe's Historical Collections of the State of New York (1841)

] Towns of Palmyra and Farmington

The Message of Moroni

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCOn the evening of September 21, 1823, [^2] when I was seventeen years of age, I retired to my bed for the night and while praying unto God asked for forgiveness of all my sins and follies and for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him. [^3] I had not been asleep, but was meditating upon my past life and experience. I was very conscious that I had not kept the commandments and I repented heartily of all my sins and transgressions and humbled myself before Him whose eyes are in all things. [^4] I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I had previously had one. [^5]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCWhile I was thus in the act of calling upon God, [^6] I discovered a light appearing in my room which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday. Indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected my whole body. In a moment a personage stood before me, surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. [^7] An angel appeared [^8] at my bedside and stood in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. [^9]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen, nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, pure and white, and his arms also, a little above the wrists; so, also were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open so that I could see into his bosom. [^10]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCNot only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description and his countenance truly like lightning. [^11] When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me. [^12] He called me by name and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me to bring joyful tidings [^13] and that his name was Moroni. [^14] He told me that the Lord had forgiven me of my sins [^15] and said, "Be faithful and keep His commandments in all things." [^16] I was informed that I was a chosen instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation. [^17]

Oliver Cowdery

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe messenger also informed Joseph Smith that the Lord had chosen him to be an instrument in His hand to bring to light that which shall perform his act, His strange act, and bring to pass a marvelous work and a wonder. He further said that Joseph Smith's prayers were heard that the scriptures might be fulfilled, which say—"God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things which are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Therefore, says the Lord, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder; the wisdom of their wise shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid;" [Isa. 29:14] for according to this covenant which he made with his ancient saints, his people, the house of Israel, must come to a knowledge of the gospel, and own that Messiah whom their fathers rejected, and with them the fulness of the Gentiles be gathered in, to rejoice in one fold under one Shepherd. [^18]<<

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe further told me that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. [^19]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates by Moroni and his father, containing an abridgment of the records of the ancient prophets who had lived on this continent, giving an account of these people; and I was shown who they were and from whence they came, learning that the Indians were literal descendants of Abraham. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants. A brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was make known unto me. [^20]

Orson Pratt

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCIt was also made manifest to him that the "American Indians" were a remnant of Israel; that when they first emigrated to America, they were an enlightened people, possessing a knowledge of the true God, enjoying his favor and peculiar blessings from his hand; that the prophets and inspired writers among them were required to keep a sacred history of the most important events transpiring among them: which history was handed down for many generations, till at length they fell into great wickedness: the most part of them were destroyed, and the records, (by commandment of God, to one of the last prophets among them) were safely deposited, to preserve them from the hands of the wicked, who sought to destroy them. He was informed that these records contained many sacred revelations pertaining to the gospel of the kingdom, as well as prophecies relating to the great events of the last days; and that to fulfill his [God's] promises to the ancients, who wrote the records, and to accomplish his purposes, in the restitution of their children, etc., they were to come forth to the knowledge of the people. If faithful, he [Joseph] was to be the instrument, who should be thus highly favoured in bringing these sacred things to light. [^21]

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe messenger further told me that two transparent stones in silver bows were deposited with the plates; and these stones, which were fastened to a breastplate, constitued what is called the Urim and Thummim. [^22] The angel said that possession and use of these stones was what constituted seers in ancient or former times and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book. [^23]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAfter telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. [^24] Instead of quoting the first verse of chapter four as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus: "For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for the day that cometh shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAnd again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord."

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe also quoted the next verse differently: "And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming." [^25]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCIn addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third chaper of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when "they who would not hear His voice should be cut off from among the people," but soon would come.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here. [^26]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe messenger, therefore, told me that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled; that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign. [^27]

Oliver Cowdery

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCMoreover, the messenger declared that before the history of the aborigines of this country is translated, the scripture must be fulfilled which says that the words of a book which were sealed were presented to the learned; [Isa. 29:11] for thus has God determined to leave men without excuse, and show to the meek that his arm is not shortened that it cannot save. [^28]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe angel instructed Joseph concerning the blessings, promises and covenants to Israel, and the great manifestations of favor to the world in the ushering in of the fulness of the gospel to prepare the way for the second advent of the Messiah. [^29] Most clearly was it shown to the prophet that the righteous should be gathered from all the earth before the great and dreadful day of the Lord and be taught the fulness of the gospel. [^30]

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAgain, he told me that when I got those plates of which he had spoken [for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled] I should not show them to any person, neither the breastplate wit the Urim and Thummim, only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did, I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAfter this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended up till he entirely disappeared. After the messenger gradually vanished out of my sight or the vision closed, the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance. [^31]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCI lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHe commenced, and again stated the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation, and much more; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things he again ascended as he had done before. [^32]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCBy this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; [^33] and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family), to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbid me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive but that of building his Kingdom; otherwise I could not get them. [^34]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAfter this third visit [^35] he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of the night. [^36]

The Vision in the Field

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCI shortly after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary labors of the day; but, in attempting to labor as at other times, I found my strength so exhausted as rendered me entirely unable. My father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything. [^37]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received. [^38]

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCI obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and [told me] to go and do as commanded by the messenger. [^39] I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me that the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there. [^40]

Oliver Cowdery

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAs you pass on the mail-road, from Palmyra, Wayne County, to Canadaigua, Ontario County, New York, before arriving at the little village of Manchester, say from three to four, or about four miles from Palmyra, you pass a large hill on the east side of the road. Why I say large, is because it is as large, perhaps, as any in that country.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe north end rises quite suddenly until it assumes a level with the more southernly extremity; and I think I may say, an elevation higher than at the south, a short distance, say half or three-fourths of a mile. As you pass towards Canadaigua, it lessens gradually, until the surface assumes its common level, or is broken by other smaller hills or ridges, water-courses and ravines. I think I am justified in saying that this is the highest hill for some distance round, and I am certain that its appearance, as it rises so suddenly from a plain on the north end, which has been described as rising suddenly from the plain, forms a promontory without timber, but covered with grass. As you pass to the south, you soon come to scattering timber, the surface having been cleared by art or wind; and short distance further left, you are surrounded with the common forest of the country. It is necessary to observe that even the part cleared was only occupied for pasturage; its steep ascent and narrow summit not admitting the plough of the husbandman with any degree of ease or profit. [^41]

Joseph Rebuked

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCOn the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner toward the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCHaving removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them. [^42]

Oliver Cowdery

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAt each edge [of the smooth stone cover] was placed a large quantity of cement, and into this cement, at the four edges of this stone, were placed erect, four other; their bottom edges resting in the cement, at the outer edges of the first stone. The four last names, when placed erect, formed a box: the corners, or where the edges of the four came in contact, were also cemented so firmly that the moisture from without was prevented from entering. It is to be observed, also, that the inner surfaces of the four erect or side stones were smooth. . . . From the bottom of the box, or from the breastplate, arose three small pillars, composed of the same description of cement used on the edges, and upon these three pillars were placed the record of the children of Joseph. [^43]

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHC[I] made three attempts to get [take] them but was forbidden by the messenger. I cried unto the Lord in the agony of my soul, [asking] why I could not obtain them, and the angel said unto me that I had not kept the commandments of the Lord . . . for . . . I had been tempted . . . [by] the adversary and sought the plates to obtain riches and kept not the commandment that I should have an eye single to the glory of God. Therefore, I was chastened. [^44]

Lucy Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCWhile Joseph . . . [was] at the place where the plates were deposited . . . the angel showed him, by contrast, the difference between good and evil, and likewise the consequences of both obedience and disobedience to the commandments of God, in such a striking manner that the impression was always vivid in his memory until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this circumstance, not long prior to his death, he remarked, that "ever afterwards he was willing to keep the commandments of God." [^45]

Oliver Cowdery

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHC[After making three attempts to secure the plates, Joseph Smith saw] the angel who had previously given him the directions concerning this matter. In an instant, all the former instructions, the great intelligence concerning Israel and the last days, were brought to his mind. He had come, to be sure, and found the word of angel fulfilled concerning the reality of the record, but he had failed to remember the great end for which they had been kept, and in consequence could not have power to take them into his possession and bear them away.

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAt that instant he looked to the Lord in prayer, and as he prayed darkness began to disperse from his mind and his soul was lit up as it was the evening before, and he was filled with the Spirit; and again did the Lord manifest his condescension and mercy: the heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about and rested upon him. While he thus stood gazing and admiring, the angel said, "Look!" and as he thus spake he beheld the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates. All this passed before him, and the heavenly messenger said, "All this is shown, the good and the evil, the Holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. You now see why you could not obtain this record. The plates are not deposited here for the sake of accumulating gain and wealth for the glory of the world. [^46]

Aftermath of Five Visions

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCThe angel also informed me that the time for bringing forth the record had not yet arrived, neither would until four years from that time, but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates. [^47]

Lucy Smith

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe ensuing evening, [September 22, 1823] when the family were all together, Joseph made known to them all that he had communicated to his father in the field, and also of his finding the Record, as well as what passed between him and the angel while he was at the place where the plates were deposited.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCSitting up late that evening, in order to converse upon these things, together with over-exertion of mind, had much fatigued Joseph; and when Alvin observed it, he said, "Now, brother, let us go to bed, and rise early in the morning, in order to finish our day's work at an hour before sunset, then, if mother will get our suppers early, we will have a fine long evening, and we will all sit down for the purpose of listening to you while you tell us the great things which God has revealed to you."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAccordingly, by sunset the next day we were all seated, and Joseph commenced telling us the great and glorious things which God had manifested to him; but, before proceeding, he charged us not to mention out of the family that which he was about to say to us, as the world was so wicked that when they came to a knowledge of these things they would try to take our lives; and that when we should obtain the plates, our names would be cast out as evil by all people. Hence the necessity of suppressing these things as much as possible, until the time should come for them to go forth to the world.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter giving us this charge, he proceeded to relate further particulars concerning the work which he was appointed to do, and we received them joyfully, never mentioning them except among ourselves, agreeable to the instructions which we had received from him.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCFrom this time forth, Joseph continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the same. I presume our family presented an aspect as singular as any that ever lived upon the face of the earth—all seated in a circle, father, mother, sons, and daughters, and giving the most profound attention to a boy, eighteen years of age, who had never read the Bible through in his life: he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCWe were now confirmed in the opinion that God was about to bring to light something upon which we could stay our minds, or that would give us a more perfect knowledge of the plan of salvation and the redemption of the human family. This caused us greatly to rejoice, the sweetest union and happiness pervaded our house, and tranquility reigned in our midst.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCDuring our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of travelling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life with them. [^48]

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAccordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner His Kingdom was to be conducted in the last days. [^49]

Lucy Smith

On the twenty-second of September, 1824, Joseph again visited the place where he found the plates the year previous; and supposing at this time that the only thing required, in order to possess until the time for their translation, was to be able to keep the commandments of God—and he firmly believed he could keep every commandment which had been given him—he fully expected to carry them home with him. Therefore, having arrived at the place, and uncovering the plates, he put forth his hand and took them up, but, as he was taking them hence, the unhappy thought darted through his mind that probably there was something else in the box besides the plates, which would be of some pecuniary advantage to him. So, in the moment of excitement, he laid them down very carefully, for the purpose of covering the box, lest some one might happen to pass that way and get whatever there might be remaining in it. After covering it, he turned round to take the Record again, but behold it was gone, and where he knew not, neither did he know the means by which it had been taken from him.

At this, as a natural consequence, he was much alarmed. He kneeled down and asked the Lord why the Record had been taken from him; upon which the angel of the Lord appeared to him, and told him that he had not done as he had been commanded, for in a former revelation he had been commanded not to lay the plates down, or put them for a moment out of his hands, until he got into the house and deposited them in a chest or trunk, having a good lock and key, and, contrary to this, he had laid them down with the view of securing some fancied or imaginary treasure that remained.

In the moment of excitement, Joseph was overcome by the powers of darkness, and forgot the injuction that was laid upon him.

Having some further conversation with the angel on this occasion, Joseph was permitted to raise the stone again, when he beheld the plates as he had done before. He immediately reached forth his hand to take them, but instead of getting them, as he anticipated, he was hurled back upon the ground with great violence. When he recovered, the angel was gone, and he arose and returned to the house, weeping for grief and disappointment.

As he was aware that we would expect him to bring the plates home with him, he was greatly troubled, fearing that we might doubt his having seen them. . . .

Joseph then related the circumstance in full, which gave us much uneasiness, as we were afraid that he might utterly fail of obtaining the Record through some neglect on his part. We, therefore, doubled our diligence in prayer and supplication to God, in order that he might be more fully instructed in his duty, and be preserved from all the wiles and machinations of him "who lieth in wait to deceive." [^50]

Katharine Salisbury (Joseph Smith's sister)

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCI well remember the trials my brother had, before he obtained the records. After he had the vision, he went frequently to the hill, and upon returning would tell us, "I have seen the records, also the brass plates and the sword of Laban with the breast plate and interpreters." He would ask father why he could not get them. The time had not yet come. [^51]

Joseph Smith

Joseph Smith Marries Emma HaleHCAs my father's worldly circumstances were very limited, we were under the necessity of laboring with our hands, hiring out by day's work and otherwise, as we could get opportunity. Sometimes we were at home, and sometimes abroad, and by continuous labor were enabled to get a comfortable maintenance. In the year 1823 my father's family met with a great affliction by the death of my eldest brother, Alvin. In the month of October, 1825, I hired with an old gentleman by the name of Josiah Stoal, [Stowell], who lived in Chenango County, state of New York. He had heard something of a silver mine having been opened by the Spaniards in Harmony, Susquehanna County, state of Pennsylvania; and had, previous to my hiring to him, been digging in order, if possible, to discover the mine. After I went to live with him, he took me, with the rest of his hands, to dig for the silver mine, at which I continued to work for nearly a month, without success in our undertaking, and finally I prevailed with the old gentleman to cease digging after it. Hence arose the very prevalent story of my having been a money-digger. [^52]

Joseph Smith Marries Emma HaleHCDuring the time that I was thus employed, I was put to board with a Mr. Isaac Hale, of that place; it was there I first saw my wife (his daughter) Emma Hale. On the 18th of January, 1827, we were married, while I was yet employed in the service of Mr. Stoal [Stowell]. Owing to my continuing to assert that I had seen a vision, persecution still followed me, and my wife's father's family were very much opposed to our being married at the house of Squire Tarbill [Tarbell], in South Bainbridge, Chenango County, New York. Immediately after my marriage, I left Mr. Stoal's [Stowell's] and went to my father's, and farmed with that season. [^53]

Emma Smith

Joseph Smith Marries Emma HaleHCI was married at South Bainbridge, New York; at the house of Squire Tarbell . . . when I was in my 22nd or 23rd year . . . I was visiting at Mr. Stowell's, who lived in Bainbridge, and saw your father there. I had no intention of marrying when I left home; but, during my visit at Mr. Stowell's [Joseph] . . . urged me to marry him, and preferring to marry him to any other man I knew, I consented. We went to Squire Tarbell's and were married . . . The account in Mother Smith's History is substantially correct as to date and place. [^54]

Joseph Knight

Joseph Smith Marries Emma HaleHCJoseph then went to Mr. Stowel's [Stowell] where he had lived sometime before. But Mr. Stowel could not pay him money for his work very well and he came to me perhaps in November [1826] and worked for me until about the time that he was married, which I think was in February [January]. And I paid him the money and I furnished him with a horse and cutter [sleigh] to go and see his girl down to Mr. Hail's [Hale's]. And soon after this he was married and Mr. Stowel moved him and his wife to his father's in Palmyra, Ontario County. [^55]

Conclusion

Lucy Smith

Perhaps you [Solomon Mack, brother of Lucy Smith] will inquire how this revelation [the Book of Mormon] came forth. It has been hid . . . in the earth fourteen hundred years, and was placed there by Moroni one of the Nephites, [and] it was engraven upon plates which have the appearance of gold. He being a prophet of the Lord, and seeing the wickedness of the people and knowing that they must be destroyed, and also knowing that if the plates fell into the hands of the Lamanites that they would destroy them, for they sought to destroy all sacred writings, therefore he hid them . . . in the earth having obtained a promise of the Lord that they should come forth in his own due time unto the world, and I feel to thank my God that he hath spared my life to see this day. [^56]

Orson Pratt

In what manner did Joseph Smith declare that a dispensation of the gospel was committed to him? He testified that an angel of God, whose name was Moroni, appeared unto him. It was not merely something speaking in the dark; it was not something wrapped up in mystery, with no glory attending it; but a glorious angel whose countenance shone like a vivid flash of lightning and who was arrayed in a white robe stood before him. He [also] testified that Moroni revealed unto him where he deposited the sacred records of his nation some fourteen hundred years ago; that these records contained the "everlasting gospel" as . . . anciently taught and recorded by this branch of Israel; and that the time was at hand for the record to be brought forth by the gift and power of God.

Here, then, was a reality—something great and glorious, and after having received from time to time, visits from . . . glorious personages, and talking with them, as one man would talk with another, face to face, beholding their glory, he was permittd to go and take these plates from the place of their deposit—plates of gold—records, some of which were made nearly six hundred years before Christ. And then, to show still further a reality . . . [he] obtained with the record . . . something tangible, the Urim and Thummim, a glorious instrument, used by ancient seers, through which, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost and by the commandment of Almight God, he translated that record into our language, and the book was published in the fore part of the year 1830 . . .

How does this testimony of Joseph Smith agree with the book of John's prophecy given on the Isle of Patmos? John testifies that when the dispensation of the gospel is again committed to the nations, it shall be through the medium of an angel from heaven. J[oseph] Smith testifies that a dispensation of the gospel for all nations has been committed to him by an angel. The one uttered the prediction; the other testified its fulfillment. [^57]
