Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER FOUR

A Sealed Book and a Lost Manuscript September 1827 to April 1829

And thou shalt be brought down . . . and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. . . . And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. . . .Behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. (Isaiah 29:4, 11-12, 14 and 2 Nephi 27:6-10.)

After waiting four years, Joseph Smith rode to the Hill Cumorah, and on September 22, 1827, the twenty-one-year-old prophet obtained the Urim and Thummim and a set of plates containing a religious history of ancient America. Upon securing this record, persecution intensified, and in December of that year Joseph and his wife, Emma, decided to move to Harmony, Pennsylvania. There he began a serious translation of a new witness for Christ.

During the eighteen month period that commenced with Joseph Smith's securing the plates, two major developments occured which centered around the activities of Martin Harris. The first of these was Martin Harris' journey to New York City where he met scholars who were unable to translate characters which Joseph had copied from the plates. The other major development was the loss of 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript and the subsequent loss of the power to translate. Even though an unlearned young man was beginning to accomplish a marvelous work, this work proceeded slowly, so that in April 1829, the translation was still in a preliminary stage.

Many contemporary accounts which describe this eighteen month period were written by members of Joseph Smith's family and other close associates. All of them substantiate the Prophet's history. Joseph's contemporaries have stated that persecution intensified in the fall of 1827, and that after Joseph had secured the record on September 22, 1827, some of them assisted him in hiding the plates. Contemporaries also believed Martin Harris when he told them about his journey to New York City, and they accepted his account of losing 116 pages of the manuscript. Although no one except Joseph Smith claimed to have seen the plates during these months, others said they felt the plates (which were wrapped in cloth) and examined the Urim and Thummim. There are no primary sources which suggest that prior to the fall of 1827 Joseph Smith possessed metal plates, a Urim and Thummim, a script containing characters that appeared like ancient writing, nor a manuscript containing a religious history of ancient America. Nor are there any primary sources which indicate that before or during these eighteen months Joseph Smith was composing (by writing and rewriting) a history or studying scholarly publications that might have aided him in writing about the past.

The earliest reports of Joseph Smith's visions by non-Mormons also date to the autumn of 1827. Shortly after Joseph Smith obtained the metal plates, Martin Harris informed others of this event and of the remarkable visions that preceded the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. One writer who described this narrative, as it was related to him by Harris in 1827 and 1828, was the Episcopal minister of Palmyra, Rev. John A. Clark. Rev. Clark's account was written in 1840 after he had moved to Philadelphia. At that time he was serving as rector of St. Andrews Church and as one of the editors and proprietors of the Episcopal Recorder, a religious periodical published in Philadelphia. His account was also included in a book which he wrote, entitled Gleanings by the Way (1842). Although this report was based on Clark's memory and was written thirteen years after the incident had occurred, Clark did state that his memory of some of the details concerning the rise of Mormonism was refreshed during a visit to Palmyra in the late 1830s. [^1]

Rev. Clark's recollection of his conversation with Martin Harris, early one morning in the autumn of 1827, includes many details that harmonize with Joseph Smith's testimony of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. For example, the Episcopal clergyman wrote that Harris told him of Joseph Smith's nocturnal vision in which he was "assured" by an angel that he was chosen of the Lord to be a prophet of the Most High God. He (Joseph) was further told that he would "bring to light hidden things that would prove of unspeakable benefit to the world." During this vision, Clark continued, Joseph learned about the "golden Bible" that had been kept on "metallic plates covered with characters embossed in gold." This book had been deposited in a chest, ark, or box. [^2] According to Clark, Martin Harris also said that during this vision Joseph saw the place where the book was deposited and was instructed to "follow implicitly the divine direction or he would draw down upon him the wrath of heaven." While explaining the process of translation, Clark said that he learned that Joseph Smith would translate the record with the aid of "two transparent stones that had been laid with the golden Bible." Clark reported Harris' sincere interest and belief in this "divine manifestation" and his declaration that Joseph Smith had recently obtained the record and that a "great flood of light was about to burst upon the world." [^3] (See Appendix C.)

Joseph Smith and some of his contemporaries wrote accounts of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and described Harris' experience in New York in February 1828. Before journeying to New York City, Martin Harris secured from the Prophet a page of characters that Joseph had transcribed from the Book of Mormon plates and Joseph's translation of these characters. Harris was interested in securing professional opinions of these documents from America's leading scholars of classical languages. Among the scholars visited by Harris during this trip to New York City were Professor Charles Anthon and Dr. Mitchell (probably Samuel Lathan Mitchill). [^4]

Charles Anthon (1797-1867) and Samuel L. Mitchill (1764-1831) were well known for their knowledge of ancient languages. Anthon knew Latin, Greek, French, and German, and Mitchill could translate German and Latin and had a keen interest in many ancient languages. Both of these men were born, reared, and educated in or near New York City. Dr. Samuel Mitchill's early studies were in the classics, and, after studying science and medicine in New York and Edinburgh, he became a celebrated physician and scientist and wrote scholarly books, articles, and pamphlets on a variety of subjects. Because of his extensive knowledge in so many different areas, Dr. Mitchill was known as a "living encyclopedia." [^5]

Charles Anthon was also well known by 1828 for his many accomplishments. After graduating from Columbia College with highest honors, he was admitted to the practice of law in 1819. Shortly after entering this practice and serving as a judge, he accepted a teaching position at Columbia. During the 1820s, Professor Anthon gained distinction for his knowledge of Greek and Roman languages and culture and for his interest in Egyptology and other specialized studies of the ancient world. The work that established Anthon as the foremost classicist in early nineteenth-century America was his edition of J. Lempriere's Classical Dictionary. This popular work, translated and enlarged by Anthon, was published in 1825 and went through six or more editions by 1828. [^6]

Since Martin Harris was a western New York farmer without any special training in ancient languages, he did know the extent nor the limitations of contemporary scholars' knowledge in this area. Harris could not read the characters which he was carrying to New York City, and when he started on this journey he probably did not know that scholars in America could not read them either. Many of the Book of Mormon characters were in a "reformed" (possibly meaning modified) Egyptian script. Mormon, one of the last prophets to write on the plates, stated that he wrote in a language that was not understood by other people (Mormon 9:34). Moreover, scholars in America and other parts of the world could not read ancient Egyptian writings in 1828, so that even if the characters which Martin Harris took to New York were Egyptian script, no one in this country could have translated them.

Although Charles Anthon and Samuel Mitchill could not read ancient Egyptian in 1828, they were acquainted with this "mysterious" language. They owned books that contained many examples of Egyptian characters and they knew that scholars in Europe, aided by the Rosetta stone, were beginning to translate Egyptian. [^7]

The Rosetta stone had enabled scholars to resolve many of the mysteries of Egyptian script. This monumental stone was discovered in the Nile Valley in 1799 near the town of Rosetta. It measured about 3.75 inches long, 2.5 feet wide and 11 inches thick and contained an inscription written in 196 B.C. by a group of priests praising King Ptolemy V. The decree was written in three different kinds of writing. On the top panel was the hieroglyphic or pictographic script (sacred picture writing) used by the priests. The middle panel repeated the account in the demotic script of spoken Egyptian. The bottom panel contained the same decree in a Greek script that could be easily translated by scholars. After others had unsuccessfully tried to solve the riddle of the Rosetta stone, Jean-Francois Champollion, in 1808, began to study the stone. Eventually, he was able to translate many of the Egyptian characters by comparing the Greek writing with the two Egyptian scripts. [^8]

Before meeting Martin Harris, Charles Anthon had studied one book which Champollion had published—Precis du Systems Hieroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens (Paris, 1824). Although in the early 1820s Champollion was beginning to translate some of the characters, such as royal titles, there was little actual translation in the Precis. This work, however, informed Anthon and other readers that Champollion was beginning to break a formidable language barrier. [^9]

A copy of the characters on the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Following the death of David Whitmer, this transcript passed to members of the Whitmer family. Eventually, it was given to the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.

Martin Harris Charles Anthon

Samuel L. Mitchell Rosetta Stone

Martin Harris testified that after examining the characters and reading the accompanying translation, Professor Anthon "stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian." Harris further stated that Charles Anthon gave him a "certificate certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct." Before leaving, Harris added, Professor Anthon asked him to explain the origin of the manuscripts. After Martin Harris told Anthon about the coming forth of the Book of Mormon through an angelic visitation and that a portion of the plates were sealed and were not to be translated at that time, Harris said that Anthon took the certificate, tore it to pieces, and said, "I cannot read a sealed book."

Harris also said that he showed the characters and the translation to a "Dr. Mitchell" who verified the opinion of Anthon regarding both the characters and the translation. [^10] It is possible that Martin Harris visited Dr. Mitchill before conversing with Professor Anthon. Perhaps Harris took to Anthon a letter of introduction from Mitchill, and then returned to Mitchill's home or office after meeting with Anthon. At any rate, Martin Harris returned from this trip to New York City convinced that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, that he possessed a set of golden plates, and that by the power of God he was able to translate the sacred record. Fortified by this conviction, and learning from Joseph that his journey fulfilled a prophecy that had been recorded by Isaiah centuries before the birth of Christ, Martin Harris was prepared to give his time, his energy, and his material wealth to help Joseph Smith bring forth "a marvelous work and a wonder."

A question that has often been asked is "Why did Anthon inform Harris that the translation of the characters was correct if he could not have read the ancient American script?" Perhaps, when Charles Anthon compared the characters on the manuscript with other ancient scripts, he recognized that many of the characters appeared genuine and that when he saw the Prophet's translation he did not want to admit that he could not decipher the characters. [^11] In light of the discovery of the Rosetta stone, perhaps he thought there was already someone who could translate Egyptian. He must have been puzzled as he read the manuscript but, as Martin Harris declared, Anthon did indicate to him that the translation appeared correct. Perhaps Anthon was interested in securing an ancient document, thereby enhancing his reputation by being personally involved in an important discovery. [^12] After learning about the unusual circumstances surrounding the Book of Mormon and that a portion of the plates was sealed and not to be translated, Anthon undoubtedly recognized his mistake, destroyed the certificate that he had prepared, and said that he could not read a sealed book.

At the request of others, Charles Anthon wrote two known letters describing Martin Harris' visit with him in which he was shown a transcript from the Book of Mormon plates. The first of these letters was published by its recipient, E. D. Howe of Painesville, Ohio, in Mormonism Unvailed (1834), and the second was sent to Rev. Dr. Thomas Winthrop Coit, Rector of Trinity Church, Rochelle, Westchester County, New York, and later published in Rev. John A. Clark's Gleanings by the Way (1842). [^13]

There are several obvious contradictions in Anthon's letters. In the second letter (1841), Anthon wrote that "until the present time" no one had ever requested from him a "statement in writing" about his encounter with Martin Harris, as if to say that he had never written the 1834 Howe letter. This seems even more puzzling when one compares the two letters which contain similar words and phrases. There are so many similarities that it appears as though Anthon might have used the first letter as basis for the second, even copying portions of the first letter. In Anthon's 1834 letter, he reported that he had declined to give Harris ("the stranger") any opinion regarding the ancient characters, yet, in the 1842 letter he wrote that at the request of the "plain looking countryman," he had given his "opinion in writing about the paper which he had shown" him without hesitation.

There are also conflicts in the writings of Anthon and statements of Harris. Anthon denied saying that the characters were authentic and did not refer in his letters to examining a translation. A basic theme of the Anthon letters is that this professor convinced the stranger that the manuscript was a hoax while statements of Harris reveal that, at least during part of the visit, Anthon indicated to him that the characters appeared genuine and the translation seemed to be correct. Since both accounts cannot be entirely correct, why should one believe Harris rather than Anthon? Copies of the characters taken to New York City which have been preserved provide evidence that these inscriptions appear like ancient Egyptian script. Moreover, if Anthon would have convinced Harris that the manuscript was a hoax, then why would Harris have immediately returned to Pennsylvania to assist Joseph Smith with the translations, and why would Harris have sacrificed financially to pay for the publication of the Book of Mormon and contributed much of his material wealth to the advancement of the restored gospel? Undoubtedly, Charles Anthon was embarrassed by some of the things which he had said to Harris, especially for that which he had written on a certificate, and therefore, he wrote some inaccurate statements. Despite his original interest (according to Harris) and his later vehement denial of the characters' authenticity, Anthon never pursued the matter any further. He refused to investigate the history and doctrines of the restored church. He refused to attend any meeting conducted by a Mormon preacher, even after he learned that his name was being mentioned in the sermons delivered by missionaries of the church. [^14]

Although there are contradictions in the two letters written by Anthon and conflicts between the statements of Anthon and Harris, these letters substantiate some aspects of Martin Harris' testimony. They clearly prove that Harris did take characters which had been copied from the Book of Mormon plates to New York City and that he showed them to Professor Anthon and Dr. Samuel Mitchell, and that these scholars were unable to translate the characters. (See Appendix D.)

Many contemporary records, some written by critics of the Church, identify Martin Harris as the individual who showed Charles Anthon the characters which Joseph Smith copied from the golden plates as well as a translation of this script. One non-Mormon contemporary who verified many aspects of the visit of Martin Harris to New York was Pomeroy Tucker. Tucker was a resident of Palmyra who became acquainted with the Smith family shortly after they arrived in Palmyra from Vermont in 1816. His acquaintance with the Smiths continued after they moved to Manchester township in 1818. He was editor and proprietor of the Wayne Sentinel when the Book of Mormon was being printed on the press which produced his paper. He assisted in the printing of the Book of Mormon and claimed that he had frequent interviews with Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and members of the Smith family. [^15] According to Tucker, Martin Harris desired to secure the opinion of scholars regarding the ancient characters before he invested his money in the Book of Mormon project. Therefore, he procured from Joseph Smith "some resemblances of antique characters of hieroglyphics purporting to be exact copies from the plates; which, together with the translations . . . he carried to New York City, where he sought for them the interpretation and bibliogical scrutiny of such scholars as Hon. Luther Bradish, Dr. Mitchell, Professor Anthon, and others." [^16] Tucker quoted Anthon's 1834 letter in a critical work which he published in 1867 (Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism), and he concluded that the scholars of New York had pronounced Joseph Smith's claims as fraudulent. Yet he also wrote that Harris had always been known for his "honesty" and stated that, following the trip to New York, Harris was willing to make substantial financial sacrifices to bring forth the "golden Bible." In Tucker's opinion, the Book of Mormon would not have been published without Harris' financial aid. [^17]

Rev. John Clark another critic, also stated that Martin Harris had shown Book of Mormon characters to Professor Anthon and returned from this experience with a determination to help Joseph Smith publish the Book of Mormon. Clark identified the approximate date of the New York trip by writing that Harris had visited him soon after his interview with Anthon and had discussed the Anthon conversation with him (Clark). According to Rev. Clark, Martin Harris had not doubts regarding Joseph Smith's commission and was willing "to sustain Smith in carrying on this work of the lord; and that he was determined that the book should be published, though it consumed all his worldly substance." [^18]

Another non-Mormon who identified Martin Harris as the individual who showed characters that appeared like ancient writings to scholars in New York City was James Gordon Bennett. He was a writer for the New York Courier and Enquirer and became one of America's most renowned early journalists. While traveling in western New York in August 1831, Bennett interviewed Charles Butler, a lawyer and philanthropist of Geneva, New York; Egbert B. Grandin, publisher of the Book of Mormon; and others living in the Finger Lake Country. Employing notes taken during his interviews, Bennett wrote a feature story on August 15, 1831, that appeared in two issues of the Morning Courier and Enquirer. According to this account, Harris showed "several manuscripts" to one of the professors of Columbia who "thought them very curious . . . [but] admitted that he could not decypher them," and counseled Harris to take the manuscripts to Dr. Mitchell. Complying with this suggestion, Harris visited Dr. Mitchell who examined the characters and "compared them with the hieroglyphics discovered by Champollion in Egypt—and set them down as the language of a people formerly in existence in the East, but now no more." [^19]

In addition to the writings of Joseph Smith, Lucy Smith, and Orson Pratt, this chapter contains other contemporary accounts which substantiate Joseph Smith's statements regarding events that transpired in 1827 and 1828. Martin Haris did not keep a diary during this period (nor did he write an autobiography describing events in which he was involved during the 1820s. Therefore, his experiences are based on a few of his letters and on various reports of interviews with him.

Joseph Obtains the Plates

Joseph Smith

Moroni's Visits to Joseph SmithHCAfter I had received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of September 22, 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records, the Urim and Thummim, and breastplate into my hands. [I had] gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they [the plates] were deposited, and the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected. [^20]

William Smith

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter my father's family moved to New York State, in about five years they cleared sixty acres of land, and fenced it. The timber on this land was very heavy. Some of the elms were so large that we had to nigger them off. They were too large to be cut with a cross-cut saw. We built a frame dwelling house and out buildings. My brothers Joseph and Hyrum had to work. Joseph did not have time to make gold plates.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe time to receive the plates came at last. When Joseph received them, he came in and said: "Father, I have got the plates." All believed it was true, father, mother, brothers and sisters. You can tell what a child is. Parents know whether their children are truthful or not. . . . Father knew his child was telling the truth. When the plates were brought in they were wrapped up in a tow frock. My father then put them into a pillow case. Father said, "What, Joseph, can we not see them?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHC"No, I was disobedient the first time, but I intend to be faithful this time; for I was forbidden to show them until they are translated, but you can feel them. . . . [^21]

Other Important Events in New YorkHCI was permitted to lift them as they laid in a pillow case; but not to see them, as it was contrary to the commands he had received. They weighed about sixty pounds according to the best of my judgment. . . . [^22] They were not quite as large as this Bible. . . .One could easily tell that they were not stone, hewn out to deceive, or even a block of wood. Being a mixture of gold and copper, they were much heavier than stone, and very much heavier than wood. [^23]

Katharine Salisbury, Sister of the Prophet

Other Important Events in New YorkHCWhen [the time to secure the plates had] arrived, he [Joseph Smith] was commanded to go on the 22nd day of September 1827 at 2'clock. We had supposed that when he should bring them home, the whole family would be allowed to see them, but he said it was forbidden of the Lord. They could be seen only by those who were chosen to bear their testimony to the world. We had therefore to be content until they were translated and we could have the book to read. [^24]

Lucy Smith

On the twentieth of September, Mr. [Joseph] Knight and his friend Stoal [Josiah Stowell], came to see how we were managing matters with Stoddard and Co.; and they tarried with us until the twenty-second. On the night of the twenty-first, I sat up very late, as my work rather pressed upon my hands. I did not retire until after twelve o'clock at night. About twelve o'clock, Joseph came to me and asked me if I had a chest with a lock and key. I knew in an instant what he wanted it for, and not having one, I was greatly alarmed, as I thought it might be a matter of considerable moment. But Joseph, discovering my anxiety, said, "Never mind, I can do very well for the present without it—be calm—all is right."

Shortly after this, Joseph's wife passed through the room with her bonnet and riding dress; and in a few minutes they left together, taking Mr. Knight's horse and waggon. I spent the night in prayer and supplication to God, for the anxiety of my mind would not permit me to sleep. At the usual hour, I commenced preparing breakfast. My heart fluttered at every footstep, as I now expected Joseph and Emma momentarily, and feared lest Joseph might meet with a second disappointment.

When the male portion of the family were seated at the breakfast table, Mr. Smith enquired for Joseph, for he was not aware that he had left home. I requested my husband not to call him, for I would like to have him take breakfast with his wife that morning.

"No, no;" said my husband, "I must have Joseph sit down here and eat with me."

"Well, now, Mr. Smith," continued I, "do let him eat with his wife this morning; he almost always takes breakfast with you."

His father finally consented, and eat without him, and no further inquiries were made concerning his absence, but in a few minutes Mr. Knight came in quite disturbed.

"Why, Mr. Smith," exclaimed he, "my horse is gone, and I can't find him on the premises, and I wish to start for home in a half an hour."

"Never mind the horse," said I. "Mr. Knight does not know all the nooks and corners in the pastures; I will call William, he will bring the horse immediately."

This satisfied him for the time being; but he soon made another discovery. His waggon also was gone. He then concluded, that a rogue had stolen them both.

"Mr. Knight said I, do be quiet; I would be ashamed to have you go about, waiting upon yourself—just go out and talk with Mr. Smith until William comes, and if you really must go home, your horse shall be brought, and you shall be waited upon like a gentleman. He accordingly went out, and while he was absent Joseph returned.

I trembled so with fear, lest all might be lost in consequence of some failure in keeping the commandments of God, that I was under the necessity of leaving the room in order to conceal my feelings. Joseph saw this, and said, "Do not be uneasy mother, all is right." [^25]

Joseph Knight

Translation of the Book of MormonHC[In] the forepart of September [1827], I went to Rochester on business and returned by Palmyra to be there by the 22nd of September. I was there several days. . . . That night we went to bed and in the morning I got up and my horse and carriage were gone. . . . After a while he [Joseph Smith] came home [with] the horse. All came into the house to breakfast but nothing [was] said about where they had been. After breakfast Joseph called me into the other room. . . . He set his foot on the bed, leaned his head on his hand and said, . . . "It is ten times better than I expected." Then he went on to tell length and width and thickness of the plates; and said he, "They appear to be gold." But he seemed to think more of the glasses or the Urim and Thummim than he did of the plates, for, said he, "I can see anything; they are marvellous. Now they are written in characters and I want them translated." [^26]

Joseph Knight, Jr.

In 1827 [the winter of 1826-1827] he [my father] hired Joseph Smith. Joseph and I worked and slept together. My father said Joseph was the best hand he ever hired. We found him a boy of truth. He was about 21 years of age. I think it was in November [1826] he made known to my father and I that he had seen a vision, that a personage had appeared to him and told him where there was a gold book of ancient date buried, and if he would follow the directions of the angel he could get it. We were told it in secret; I being the youngest son, my two older brothers did not believe in such things. My father and I believed what he told us. I think we were the first [to believe] after his father's family [and probably Martin Harris]. . . . At last he got the plates, and rode in my father's wagon and carried them home. [^27]

A Description of the Plates, Urim and Thummim, and Breastplate

Joseph Smith

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold; each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters and bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument which the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. [^28]

Lucy Smith

Other Important Events in New YorkHC[On the morning of September 22, after Joseph had returned from the hill, he placed] the article [the Urim and Thummim] of which he spoke into my hands, and, upon examination, [I] found that it consisted of two smooth three-cornered diamonds set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows, which were connected with each other in much the same way as old fashioned spectacles.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThat of which I spoke, which Joseph termed a key, was indeed, nothing more nor less than the Urim and Thummim, and it was by this that the angel showed him many things which he saw in vision; by which he could also ascertain, at any time, the approach of danger, either to himself or the Record, and on account of which he always kept the Urim and Thummim about his person.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter bringing home the plates, Joseph commenced working with his father and brothers on the farm, in order to be as near as possible to the treasure which was confided to his care.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCSoon after this, he came in from work, one afternoon, and . . . handed me the breastplate spoken of in his history.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCIt was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could see the glistening metal, and ascertain its proportions without any difficulty.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCIt was concave on one side, and convex on the other, and extended from the neck downwards, as far as the centre of the stomach of a man of extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers, (for I measured them,) and they had holes in the end of them, to be convenient for fastening.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe whole plate was worth at least five hundred dollars: after I had examined it, Joseph placed it in the chest with the Urim and Thummim. [^29]

Persecution Intensifies

Joseph Smith

I soon found out the reason why I received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me, and false reports, misrepresentations and slander flew as on the wings of the wind in every direction. Rumor with her thousand tongues was all the time employed in circulating tales about my father's family, and about myself. If I were to relate a thousandth part of them, it would fill up volumes. The house was frequently beset by mobs and evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at and very narrowly escaped. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them [the plates] from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands until I had accomplished by them what was required. [^30]

Joseph Knight

Now he [Joseph Smith] was commanded not to let [anybody] see those things [plates and the Urim and Thummim] except for a few witnesses at a given time. Now it soon got about that Joseph had found the plates and people came to see them, but he told them they could not, for he must not show them. But many insisted and offered money and property to see them. [And] for keeping them from the people, they [others] persecuted and abused him. The Smiths were obliged to hide them [the plates], and they hid them under a brick hearth in the west room. [^31]

Lucy Smith

Other Important Events in New YorkHC[A few days after Joseph obtained the Record], one of the neighbours asked Mr. Smith many questions concerning the plates. I will here observe, that no one ever heard anything from us respecting them, except a confidential friend, whom my husband had spoken to about them some two or three years previous. It appeared that Satan had now stirred up the hearts of those who had gotten a hint of the matter from our friend, to search into it, and make every possible move towards thwarting the purposes of the Almighty. . . .

Other Important Events in New YorkHC[One day Joseph] sent Carlos, my youngest son, to his brother Hyrum's, to have him come up immediately, as he desired to see him. When he came, Joseph requested him to get a chest, having a good lock and key, and to have it there by the time he (Joseph) should return. And, after giving these instructions, Joseph started for the plates.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe plates were secreted about three miles from home, in the following manner. Finding an old birch log much decayed, excepting the bark, which was in a measure sound, he took his pocket knife and cut the bark with some care, then turned it back, and made a hole of sufficient size to receive the plates, and laying them in the cavity thus formed, he replaced the bark; after which he laid across the log, in several places, some old stuff that happened to lay near, in order to conceal, as much as possible, the place in which they were deposited.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCJoseph, on coming to them, took them from their secret place, and, wrapping them in his linen frock, placed them under his arm and started for home.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter proceeding a short distance, he thought it would be more safe to leave the road and go through the woods. Travelling some distance after he left the road, he came to a large windfall, and as he was jumping over a log, a man sprang up from behind it, and gave him a heavy blow with a gun. Joseph turned around and knocked him down, then ran at the top of his speed. About half a mile further he was attacked again in the same manner as before; he knocked this man down in like manner as the former, and ran on again; and before he reached home he was assaulted the third time. In striking the last one he dislocated his thumb, which, however, he did not notice until he came within sight of the house, when he threw himself down in the corner of the fence in order to recover his breath. As soon as he was able, he arose and came to the house. He was still altogether speechless from fright and the fatigue of running.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter resting a few moments, he desired me to send Carlos . . . to Hyrum's, to tell him to bring the chest.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCI did as I was requested, and when Carlos arrived at Hyrum's, he found him at tea, with two of his wife's sisters. Just as Hyrum was raising a cup to his mouth, Carlos touched his shoulder. Without waiting to hear one word from the child, he dropped the cup, sprang from the table, caught the chest, turned it upside down, and emptying its contents on the floor, left the house instantly with the chest on his shoulder.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe young ladies were greatly astonished at his singular behaviour, and declared his wife—who was then confined to her bed, her oldest daughter, Lovina, being but four days old—that he was certainly crazy.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCHis wife laughed heartily, and replied, "Oh, not in the least, he has just thought of something which he has neglected, and it is just like him to fly off in a tangent when he thinks of anything in that way."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCWhen the chest came, Joseph locked up the Record, then threw himself upon the bed, and after resting a little, so that he could converse freely, he arose and went into the kitchen, where he related his recent adventure to his father, Mr. Knight, and Mr. Stoal [Stowell], besides many others, who had by this time collected, with the view of hearing something in regard to the strange circumstance which had taken place. He showed them his thumb, saying, "I must stop talking, father, and get you to put my thumb in place, for it is very painful. . . . "

Other Important Events in New YorkHCShortly after this circumstance, Joseph . . . determined that a portion of the hearth should be taken up, and the Record and breast-plate should be buried under the same, and then the hearth be relaid, to prevent suspicion.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThis was done as speedily as possible, but the hearth was scarcely relaid when a large company of men well armed came rushing up to the house. Joseph threw open the doors, and taking a hint from the stratagem of his grandfather Mack, halloowed as if had a legion at hand, in the meanwhile, giving the word of command with great emphasis; while all the male portion of the family, from the father down to little Carlos, ran out of the house with such fury upon the mob, that it struck them with terror and dismay, and they fled before the little Spartan band into the woods, where they dispersed themselves to their several homes.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCIn a short time Joseph received another intimation of the approach of a mob, also of the necessity of removing the Record and breast-plate from the place wherein they were secreted, consequently he took them out of the box in which they were placed, and wrapping them in clothes, carried them across the road to a cooper's shop, and laid them in a quantity of flax which was stowed in the shop loft. After which he nailed up the box again, then tore up the floor of the shop, and put it under the same.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAs soon as night came, the mob came also, and commenced ransacking the place. They rummaged round the house, and all over the premises, but did not come into the house. After making satisfactory search they went away.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe next morning we found the floor of the cooper's shop torn up, and the box which was laid under it shivered in pieces. [^32]

The Move to Pennsylvania

Joseph Smith

Persecution became so intolerable that I was under the necessity of leaving Manchester, and going with my wife to Susquehanna County, in the state of Pennsylvania. While preparing to start—being very poor, and the persecution so heavy upon us that there was no probability that we would ever be otherwise—in the midst of our afflictions we found a friend in a gentleman by the name of Martin Harris, who came to us and gave me fifty dollars [to bear my expenses]. Mr. Harris was a resident of Palmyra Township, Wayne County, in the state of New York, and a farmer of respectability. By this timely aid, I was enabled to reach the place of my destination in Pennsylvania. [^33]

Lucy Smith

Soon afterwards, Alva Hale, Joseph's brother-in-law, came to our house, from Pennsylvania, for the purpose of moving Joseph to his father-in-law's, as word had been sent to them, that Joseph desired to move there as soon as he could settle up his business. During the short interval of Alva's stay with us, he and Joseph were one day in Palmyra, at a public-house, transacting some business. As they were thus engaged, Mr. Harris came in: he stepped immediately up to my son, and taking him by the hand, said, "How do you do, Mr. Smith." After which, he took a bag of silver from his pocket, and said again, "Here, Mr. Smith, is fifty dollars; I give this to you to do the Lord's work with; no, I give it to the Lord for his own work."

"No," said Joseph, "We will give you a note, Mr. Hale, I presume, will sign it with me."

"Yes," said Alva, "I will sign it."

Mr. Harris, however, insisted that he would give the money to the Lord, and called those present to witness the fact that he gave it freely, and did not demand any compensation, that it was for the purpose of helping Mr. Smith to do the Lord's work. And as I have been informed, many were present on that occasion, who witnessed the same circumstance.

Joseph, in a short time, arranged his affairs, and was ready for the journey. [He placed] the Record and breast-plate . . . [in a box and] nailed up . . . (the) box and then put . . . [the box] into a strong cask; and filling the cask with beans, headed it up again.

When it became generally known that Joseph was about moving to Pennsylvania, a mob of fifty men collected themselves together, and they went to one Dr. McIntyre, and requested him to take the command of the company, stating, that they were resolved on following "Joe Smith," and taking his "gold bible" from him. The doctor's ideas and feelings did not altogether harmonize with theirs, and he told them they were a pack of devilish fools, and to go home and mind their own business; that, if Joseph Smith had any busines of that sort to attend to, he was capable of doing it, and that it would be better for them to busy themselves about that which more concerned them.

After this, a quarrel arose among them respecting who should be captain, and it ran so high that it broke up the expedition. [^34]

Orson Pratt

[After packing] his goods [and] putting the plates into a barrel of beans [Joseph] proceeded upon his journey. He had not gone far before he was overtaken by an officer with a search-warrant, who flattered himself with the idea that he should surely obtain the plates; after searching very diligently, he was sadly disappointed at not finding them. Mr. Smith then drove on, but before he got to his journey's end, he was again overtaken by an officer on the same business, and after ransacking the wagon very carefully, he went his way, as muchg chagrined as the first at not being able to discover the object of his research. Without any further molestation, [Joseph] pursued his journey until he came into the northern part of Pennsylvania, near the Susquehannah River, in which part his father-in-law resided. [^35]

William Smith

We were all very much scoffed at and persecuted during all this time, while Joseph was receiving his visions and translating the plates. . . .In consequence of his vision and his having the golden plates and refusing to show them [to others], a great persecution arose against the whole family, and he [Joseph] was compelled to remove to Pennsylvania with the plates, where he translated them by means of the Urim and Thummim, which he obtained with the plates. [^36]

Martin Harris' Experience in New York City

Joseph Smith

Translation of the Book of MormonHCImmediately after my arrival there [Harmony, Pennsylvania], I commenced copying the characters off the plates. I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the Urim and Thummim, I translated some of them, [which I did] between the time I arrived at the house of my wife's father, in the month of December, and the following February. [Meanwhile,] because of [the] faith and righteous deed of Martin Harris [in giving financial assistance for the move to Pennsylvania], the Lord appeared to him in a vision and showed him the marvelous work which he [the Lord] was about to do. He [Martin Harris] immediately came to Susquehannah sometime in the month of February, and said that the Lord had shown him that he must go to New York City with some of the characters. [After I had given him] the characters which I had drawn off the plates, he started with them to the city of New York.

Translation of the Book of MormonHCWhile in New York City, Martin Harris showed the manuscript to the learned, saying, "Read this, I pray thee." The learned replied, "I cannot," but said that if Martin Harris would bring the plates to him, he would read it. But the Lord forbade it. After Martin Harris' return to Pennsylvania, I told the Lord that I was not learned and could not translate the record, but the Lord [had] prepared spectacles (the Urim and Thummim) for me to read the book by, therefore I commenced translating the characters. Thus, the prophecy of Isaiah which is written in the 29th chapter of that book was fulfilled.

Translation of the Book of MormonHCFor [a descrition of] what took place [in New York City,] I refer to his [Martin Harris'] own account of the circumstances, as he related them to me after his return:

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said that they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house when Mr. Anthon called me back and asked me how the young man found that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him. He then said to me, "Let me see the certificate." I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, "I cannot read a sealed book." I left him and went to Dr. Mitchel [probably Mitchill], who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and translation. [^37]

Additional Contemporary Accounts of Martin Harris' Trip to New York

Lucy Smith

Not long after the circumstance of the mob's going into the cooper's shop, and splitting in pieces the box, Joseph began to make arrangements to accomplish the translation of the Record. The first step that he was instructed to take in regard to this work, was to make a fac-simile of some of the characters, which were called reformed Egyptian, and to send them to some of the most learned men of this generation, and ask them for the translation thereof.

The reader will here observe, that on a preceding page of this volume, I spoke of a confidential friend to whom my husband merely mentioned the existence of the plates, some two or three years prior to their coming forth. This was no other than Martin Harris, one of the witnesses to the book subsequent to its being translated. . . .

When Joseph had had a sufficient time to accomplish the journey, and transcribe some of the Egyptian characters, it was agreed that Martin Harris should follow him—and that he (Martin) should take the characters to the East, and, on his way, he was to call on all the professed linguists, in order to give them an opportunity to display their talents in giving a translation of the characters. [^38]

Martin Harris — Interviews

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI took a transcript of the characters of the plates to Dr. Anthon of New York. When I arrived at the house of Professor Anthon, I found him in his office and alone, and [I] presented the transcript to him and asked him to read it. . . .Professor Anthon . . . pronounced them [the characters copied from the golden plates] correct Egyptian characters, but somewhat changed and gave me a certificate, . . . certifying that the characters were Arabic, Chaldaic, and Egyptian. . . .he said if I would bring [him] the plates, he would assist in the translation. I told him I could not, for they were sealed. . . . I then [was preparing to leave] . . . and was near the door, when he said, "How did the young man know the plates were there?" I said an angel had shown them to him. Professor Anthon then said, "Let me see the certificate:"—upon which I took it from my waistcoat pocket and unsuspectingly gave it to him. He then tore it up in anger, saying there was no such thing as angels now—it was all a hoax. I then went to Dr. Mitchell with the transcript, and he confirmed what Professor Anthon had said. . . .

Translation of the Book of MormonHC[David Whitmer has] a transcript of a portion of the characters as found on the golden plates taken or copied on a small piece of paper, perhaps about six or seven inches by four or five. Seven or eight lines of them were very carefully transmitted to this paper as the words of this book which were taken [by me] to Professor Charles Anthon of New York. . . . Oliver Cowdery . . . left this relic with David Whitmer . . . shortly before his demise [death]. [^39]

Orson Pratt

The perfect agreement between the prediction of Isaiah (chap. xxix) and Mr. Smith's account of the finding and translation of the Book of Mormon is another collateral proof that he was divinely commissioned. Mr. Smith testifies that the plates from which that book was translated were taken out of the ground, from where they were originally deposited by the prophet Moroni; that the box containing them was composed of stone, so constructed as to exclude, in a great degree, the moisture of the soil; that with the plates he discovered a Urim and Thummim, through the aid of which he afterward was enabled to translate the book into the English language. Soon after obtaining the plates, a few of the original characters were accurately transcribed and translated by Mr. Smith, which, with the translation, were taken by a gentleman by the name of Martin Harris to the city of New York, where they were presented to some of the most learned individuals in the United States to see if they could translate them. Among the rest, they were presented to Professor Anthon of New York City, who professed to be extensively acquainted with many languages, both ancient and modern. He examined them but was unable to decipher them correctly, but he presumed that if the original records could be brought, he could assist in translating them. No man was found able to read them by his own learning or wisdom. Mr. Smith, though an unlearned man, testifies that he was commanded to translate them, through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim and that the Book of Mormon is that translation. Now, Isaiah says to Israel, "Thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and they speech shall whisper out of the dust." (Isaiah 29:4.) [^40]

The Translation Resumes

Joseph Smith

Having returned from this tour, he [Martin Harris] left me and went home to Palmyra, arranged his affairs and returned again to my house about the twelfth of April, eighteen hundred and twenty eight. [^41]

Lucy Smith

[After Martin Harris returned from his journey to New York City, Mrs. Harris] endeavoured to dissuade her husband from taking any further part in the publication of the Record; however, Mr. Harris paid no attention to her, but returned [to Harmony] and continued writing

Immediately after Martin Harris left home for Pennsylvania, his wife went from place to place, and from house to house, telling her grievances, and declaring that Joseph Smith was practising a deception upon the people, which was about to strip her of all that she possessed, and that she was compelled to deposit a few things away from home in order to secure them. So she carried away her furniture, linen, and bedding; also other moveable articles, until she nearly stripped the premises of every thing that could conduce either to comfort or convenience, depositing them with those of her friends and acquaintances, in whom she reposed sufficient confidence to assure her of their future safety. [^42]

Success and Failure

Joseph Smith

[After returning to Harmony in April 1828, Martin Harris] commenced writing for me, while I translated the plates. We continued until the fourteenth of June following, by which time he had written one hundred and sixteen pages of manuscript on foolscap paper [typically 13 x inches]. [^43]

Martin Harris — Interview

Translation of the Book of MormonHCThe Prophet Joseph Smith . . . possessed a seer stone by which he was enabled to translate, as well as from the Urim and Thummim, and for convenience he then used the seer stone. . . .The seer stone differed in appearance entirely from the Urim and Thummim that was obtained with the plates (which was two clear stones set in two rims, very much resembling spectacles). . . .After continued translation, we would become weary, and would go down to the river and exercise by throwing stones out on the river, etc. While so doing on one occasion, I found a stone very much resembling the one used for translating, and on resuming our labor of translation, I put in place the stone that I had found. . . . The Prophet remained silent, unusually and intently gazing in darkness. . . .Much surprised, Joseph exclaimed, "Martin! What is the matter? All is as dark as Egypt!" My countenance betrayed me, and the Prophet asked me why I had done so. I said, to stop the mouths of fools, who had told me that the Prophet had learned those sentences and was merely repeating them . . . Not many pages [were] translated while I wrote. [^44]

Joseph Smith

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptTranslation of the Book of MormonHCSome time after Mr. Harris had begun to write for me, he began to tease me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them, and he desired of me that I would enquire of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim if he might not do so. I did enquire, and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer and desired that I should enquire again. I did so, and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented but insisted that I should enquire once more. After much solicitation, I again enquired of the Lord and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions, which were that he show them only to his brother, Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father, and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in the most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings and went on his way. [^45]

Lucy Smith

After leaving Joseph he [Martin Harris] arrived at home with the manuscript in safety. Soon after he exhibited the manuscript to his wife and family. His wife was so pleased with it, that she gave him the privilege of locking it up in her own set of drawers, which was a special favour, for she had never before this allowed him even the privilege of looking into them . . .

Shortly after Mr. Harris left [Harmony], Joseph's wife became the mother of a son, which, however, remained with her but a short time before it was snatched from her arms by the hand of death. And the mother seemed, for some time, more like sinking with her infant into the mansion of the dead, than remaining with her husband among the living. Her situation was such for two weeks, that Joseph slept not an hour in undisturbed quiet. At the expiration of this time she began to recover, but as Joseph's anxiety about her began to subside, another cause of trouble forced itself upon his mind. Mr. Harris had been absent nearly three weeks, and Joseph had received no intelligence whatever from him, which was altogether aside of the arrangement when they separated. But Joseph kept his feelings from his wife, fearing that if she became acquainted with them it might agitate her too much.

In a few days, however, she mentioned the subject herself, and desired her husband to go and get her mother to stay with her, while he should repair to Palmyra, for the purpose of learning the cause of Mr. Harris's absence as well as silence. At first Joseph objected, but seeing her so cheerful, and so willing to have him leave home, he finally consented. [^46]

Joseph Smith

In the mean time while Martin Harris was gone with the writings, I went to visit my father's family at Manchester. [^47]

Lucy Smith

He [Joseph Smith] set out in the first stage that passed for Palmyra, and, when he was left to himself, he began to contemplate the course which Martin had taken, and the risk which he (Joseph) had run in letting the manuscript go out of his own hand—for it could not be obtained again, in case Martin had lost it through transgression, except by the power of God, which was something Joseph could hardly hope for—and that, by persisting in his entreaties to the Lord, he had perhaps fallen into transgression, and thereby lost the manuscript. When, I say, he began to contemplate these things, they troubled his spirit, and his soul was moved with fearful apprehensions. And, although he was now nearly worn out, sleep fled from his eyes, neither had he any desire for food, for he felt that he had done wrong, and how great his condemnation was he did not know. [^48]

The Loss of 116 Pages

Joseph Smith

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCNotwithstanding the great restrictions which he [Martin Harris] had been laid under and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them [116 pages of the manuscript] to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered nor obtained back again unto this day. [^49]

Lucy Smith

When Joseph had taken a little nourishment [after his arrival from Harmony] . . . the requested us to send immediately for Mr. Harris. This we did without delay. . . .

For a short time previous to Joseph's arrival, Mr. Harris had been otherwise engaged, and thought but little about the manuscript. When Joseph sent for him, he went immediately to the drawer where he had left it, but, behold it was gone! He asked his wife where it was. She solemnly averred that she did not know anything respecting it. He then made a faithful search throughout the house . . .

[After we had sent for Martin Harris], we commenced preparing breakfast for the family; and we supposed that Mr. Harris would be there, as soon as it was ready, to eat with us, for he generally came in such haste when he was sent for. At eight o'clock we set the victuals on the table, as we were expecting him every moment. We waited till nine, and he came not till ten, and he was not there—till eleven, still he did not make his appearance. But at half-past twleve we saw him walking with a slow and measured tread towards the house, his eyes fixed thoughtfully upon the ground. On coming to the gate, he stopped, instead of passing through, and got upon the fence, and sat there some time with his hat drawn over his eyes. At length he entered the house. Soon after which we sat down to the table, Mr. Harris with the rest. He took up his knife and fork as if he were going to use them, but immediately dropped them. Hyrum, observing this, said "Martin, why do you not eat; are you sick?" Upon which, Mr. Harris pressed his hands upon his temples, and cried out, in a tone of deep anguish, "Oh, I have lost my soul! I have lost my soul!"

Joseph, who had not expressed his fears till now, sprang from the table, exclaiming, "Martin, have you lost that manuscript? have you broken your oath, and brought down condemnation upon my head, as well as your own?"

"Yes, it is gone," replied Martin, "and I know not where."

"Oh, my God!" said Joseph, clinching his hands. "All is lost! all is lost! What shall I do? I have sinned—it is I who tempted the wrath of God. I should have been satisfied with the first answer which I received from the Lord; for he told me that it was not safe to let the writing go out of my possession." He wept and groaned, and walked the floor continually.

At length he told Martin to go back and search again.

"No," said Martin, "it is all in vain; for I have ripped open beds and pillows; and I know it is not there."

"Then must I," said Joseph, "return to my wife with such a tale as this? I dare not do it, lest I should kill her at once. And how shall I appear before the Lord? Of what rebuke am I not worthy from the angel of the Most High?"

I besought him not to mourn so, for perhaps the Lord would forgive him, after a short season of humiliation and repentance. But what could I say to comfort him, when he saw all the family in the same situation of mind as himself; for sobs and groans, and the most bitter lamentation filled the house. However, Joseph was more distressed than the rest, as he better understood the consequences of disobedience. And he continued, pacing back and forth, meantime weeping and grieving, until about sunset, when, by persuasion, he took a little nourishment . . .

The manuscript [Martin Harris lost] has never been found; and there is no doubt but Mrs. Harris took it from the drawer, with the view of retaining it, until another translation should be given, then, to alter the original translation, for the purpose of showing a discrepancy between them, and thus make the whole appear to be a deception. [^50]

Lucy Smith's Description of the Contents of the 116 Pages of the Early Translation of the Book of Mormon

Lucy Smith

I now come to say something of the record it was placed in the earth many hundred years ago by the forefathers of our Indians, they descended from a prophet of the Lord whose name was Lehi he fled from Jerusalem with his family and also his wife's brother's family a few days before Nebuchadnezzar besieged the city and layed it in ashes, for although Lehi prophesied unto the Jews in the name of the Lord that they must repent of their sins yet they would not, neither would they believe the wonders which were shown to him in dreams concerning Christ that he should be Crucified, therefore God commanded the people of Lehi to get out of Jerusalem and flee into the wilderness and at length they were directed to enter upon the Land of America: now a part of the people of Lehi whose head was named Laman (a son of Lehi) became savage and they sought to exterminate their more virtuous brethren who were called the people of Nephi therefore God cast off the people of Laman and he cursed them with a dark skin but the people of Nephi he preserved and prospered so long as they obeyed his commandments, and they were not unskilled workmen having a knowledge of the arts together with the sciences. But they had among them that same secret society which had brought Jerusalem and the whole nation of the Jews to destruction; and after many years they became the more wicked than their accursed brethren, and God seeing that they would not repent of the evil he visited them with extinction. [^51]

Joseph Returns to Pennsylvania

Joseph Smith

I continued there [Joseph's parents' home in Manchester] for a short season and then returned to my place in Pennsylvania. [^52]

Lucy Smith

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCWe parted with heavy hearts, for it now appeared that all which we had so fondly anticipated, and which had been the source of so much secret gratification, had in a moment fled, and fled for ever. . . .

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCIt seemed as though Martin Harris, for his transgression, suffered temporally as well as spiritually. The same day on which the foregoing circumstance took place, a dense fog spread itself over his fields, and blighted his wheat while in the blow, so that he lost about two-thirds of his crop, whilst those fields which lay only on the opposite side of the road, received no injury whatever.

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCI well remember that day of darkness, both within and without. To us, at least, the heavens seemed clothed with blackness, and the earth shrouded with gloom. I have often said within myself, that if a continual punishment, as severe as that which we experienced on that occasion, were to be inflicted upon the most wicked characters who ever stood upon the footstool of the Almighty—if even their punishment were no greater than that, I should feel to pity their condition. [^53]

An Interruption in the Translation

Joseph Smith

Since the Lord suffered the writings to fall into the hands of wicked men, Martin was chastened for his transgression and I also was chastened for my transgression for asking the Lord a third time. Therefore, the plates and the Urim and Thummim were taken from me by the power of God and I was not able to obtain them for a season. [A short time later,] I was walking a little distance when the former heavenly messenger appeared and handed to me the Urim and Thummim again. I enquired of the Lord through them and obtained the following revelation. [^54]

Revelation to Joseph Smith, Jr. given July 1828 concerning certain manuscripts on the first part of the Book of Mormon, which had been taken from the possession of Martin Harris. [See D&C Section 3:9-15]

Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall. But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you and thou art chosen, and art again called to the work; except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift.

And when thou deliveredst up that which God had given thee sight and power to translate, thou deliveredst up that which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man, who has set at nought the counsels of God, and has broken the most sacred promises which were made before God, and has depended upon his own judgment and boasted in his own wisdom. And this is the reason that thou has lost thy privileges for a season—for thou hast suffered the counsel of thy director to be trampled upon from the beginning.

After I had obtained the above revelation [D&C Section 3], both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were taken from me again: but in a few days they were returned to me, when I enquired of the Lord, and the Lord said unto me. [^55]

Revelation given to Joseph Smith, Jr., informing him of the alteration of the manuscript of the forepart of the Book of Mormon. [See D&C Section 10:1-3, 7-11, 30] [^56]

Now, behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them. And you also lost your gift at the same time, and your mind became darkened. Nevertheless, it is now restored unto you again; therefore see that you are faithful and continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation as you have begun. . . . And for this cause I said that he is a wicked man, for he has sought to take away the things wherewith you have been entrusted; and he has also sought to destroy your gift. And because you have delivered the writings into his hands, behold, wicked men have taken them from you. Therefore, you have delivered them up, yea, that which was sacred, unto wickedness. And, behold, Satan has put it into their hearts to alter the words which you have caused to be written, or which you have translated, which have gone out of your hands. And behold, I say unto you, that because they have altered the words, they read contrary from that which you translated and caused to be written. . . .

Behold, I say unto you that you shall not translate again those words which have gone forth out of your hands; for, behold, they shall not accomplish their evil deisgns in lying against those words. For, behcld, if you should bring forth the same words they will say that you have lied [and] that you have pretended to translate, but that you have contradicted yourself. And, behold, they will publish this, and Satan will harden the hearts of the people to stir them up to anger against you, that they will not believe my words. Thus Satan thinketh to overpower your testimony in this generation. [^57]

Lucy Smith

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCFor nearly two months after Joseph returned to his family, in Pennsylvania, we heard nothing from him, and become anxious about him, Mr. Smith and myself set off to make him a visit. When we came within three-quarters of a mile of the house, Joseph started to meet us, telling his wife, as he left, that father and mother were coming. When he met us, his countenance wore so pleasant an aspect, that I was convinced he had something agreeable to communicate with regard to the work in which he was engaged. When I entered, the first thing which attracted my attention was a red morocco trunk, lying on Emma's bureau, which Joseph shortly informed me contained the Urim and Thummim, and the plates. And, in the evening, he gave us the following relation of what had transpired since our separation:—

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHC"On leaving you," said Joseph, "I returned immediately home. Soon after my arrival, I commenced humbling myself in mighty prayer before the Lord, and, as I was pouring out my soul in supplication to God, that if possible, I might obtain mercy at his hands, and be forgiven of all that I had done contrary to his will, an angel stood before me, and answered me, saying, that I had sinned in delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man, and, as I had ventured to become responsible for his faithfulness, I would of necessity have to suffer the consequences of his indiscretion, and I must now give up the Urim and Thummim into his (the angel's) hands."

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHC"This I did as I was directed, and as I handed them to him, he remarked, 'If you are very humble and penitent, it may be you will receive them again; if so it will be on the twenty-second of next September.'"

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCJoseph then related a revelation which he received soon after the angel visited him. [See D&C Section 3] . . .

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCWhile on this visit we became acquainted with Emma's father, whose name was Isaac Hale; also his family, which consisted of his wife, Elizabeth, his sons, Jesse, David, Alva, Isaac Ward, and Reuben; and his daughters, Phebe, Elizabeth, and A---[Tryal and Emma].

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCThey were an intelligent and highly respectable family. They were pleasantly situated, and lived in good style, in the town of Harmony, on the Susquehannah river, within a short distance of the place where Joseph resided.

Loss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHCThe time of our visit with them, we passed very agreeably, and returned home relieved of a burden which was almost insupportable, and our present joy far overbalanced all our former grief. [^58]

Return of the Plates

Joseph Smith

[After the angel returned the plates and Urim and Thummim to me] I did not go immediately to translating, but went to laboring with my hands upon a small farm which I had purchased of my wife's father, in order to provide for my family. [^59]

Lucy Smith

Translation of the Book of MormonLoss of 116 Pages of the Book of Mormon ManuscriptHC"After the angel left me," said he [Joseph], "I continued my supplications to God, without cessation, and on the twenty-second of September, I had the joy and satisfaction of again receiving the Urim and Thummim, with which I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me, but the angel said that the Lord would send me a scribe, and I trust his promise will be verified. The angel seemed pleased with me when he gave me back the Urim and Thummim, and he told me that the Lord loved me, for my faithfulness and humility." [^60]

Joseph Smith

In March 1829 I obtained the following revelation: [see D&C Section 5:4.] [^61]

And you [Joseph Smith] have a gift to translate the plates; and this is the first gift that I bestowed upon you; and I have commanded that you should pretend to no other gift until my purpose is fulfilled in this; for I will grant unto you no other gift until it is finished.

Conclusion

Orson Pratt

Joseph Smith . . . was a farmer by occupation. His advantages for acquiring scientific knowledge were exceedingly small, being limited to a slight acquaintance with two or three of the common branches of learning. He could read without much difficulty, and write a very imperfect hand; and had a very limited understanding of the elementary rules of arithmetic. These were his highest and only attainments; while the rest of those branches, so universally taught in the common schools throughout the United States, were entirely unknown to him. . . .

[After] he frequently received instructions from the mouth of the heavenly messenger, . . . on the morning of the 22d of September, A.D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into his hands. . . . Having provided himself with a home, he commenced translating the record, by the gift and power of God, through the means of the Urim and Thummim; and being a poor writer, he was under the necessity of employing a scribe, to write a translation as it came from his mouth. [^62]

Joseph Smith's accounts of the restoration of the gospel by an angel, of his taking out of the ground the sacred records of the tribe of Joseph, [and] of their subsequent translation by the gift of God . . . are all events clearly predicted by the ancient Jewish apostles and prophets. . . . If Joseph Smith [, for example,] was an imposter and wished to palm himself off upon the world as the great prophet who was to usher in the preparatory dispensation for the coming of the Lord, how came he to discover all the . . . minute particulars contained in Isaiah's prophecy [29th chapter]. . . . He sent the "words of a book" which he found, as before stated, to Professor Anthon. But it was a sealed writing to the learned professor—the aboriginal language of ancient America could not be deciphered by him. He [Charles Anthon] was as much puzzled as the wise men of Babylon were to interpret the unknown writing upon the wall. Human wisdom and learning, in this case, were altogethr insufficient. It required another Daniel, who was found in the person of Mr. Smith. What a marvellous work! What a wonder! How the wisdom of the wise and learned was made to perish by the gift of interpretation given to the unlearned! . . . [In conclusion,] Joseph Smith presents the world with the fulfillment [of Biblical prophecies] at the predicted time, in the predicted manner, and for the predicted purpose as anciently specified. [^63]
