Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER FIVE

Three Remarkable Months April 7-Early July 1829

Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand . . .

And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hands before their eyes. (Ezekiel 37:16-17, 20.)

No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. (Hebrews 5:4.)

One of the most remarkable periods in the history of Christianity began on April 7, 1829. Between April and early July of that year, five of the most significant events in the history of the restoration movement occurred. The writings of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Lucy Smith, and David Whitmer and reported interviews with individuals who were closely associated with the Prophet in 1829 affirm that nearly all of the Book of Mormon (excluding the 116 pages of the Book of Lehi) was translated during these three months. Moreover, these writings inform us that, with the possible exception of Oliver Cowdery's translation of a few words, Joseph Smith was the sole translator of that record. [^1] While various individuals served as scribes to the Prophet, there are no primary historical sources which indicate that any person assisted Joseph Smith in the composition of the Book of Mormon. The young man had received only a meager formal education, and he did not have access to any major library. In 1829 he could not dictate a coherent letter nor write a series of well-structured English sentences. Yet day after day, for approximately three months, he dictated a manuscript (containing more than five hundred pages) describing the religious history of a people spanning more than two thousand years. [^2]

Some critics have suggested that Sidney Rigdon was a principle author of the Book of Mormon. They have argued that he used as a guide, for the historical portions of this work, a romance written by Solomon Spaulding. However, no records have been located which indicate that Sidney Rigdon knew Joseph Smith before 1830. A preponderance of evidence shows that Sidney Rigdon himself certified that he first learned the Book of Mormon. While testifying of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, Sidney Rigdon himself certified that he first learned about that sacred record when it was presented to him by Parley P. Pratt in the fall of 1830. [^3] Others have declared that when Rigdon was initially given a copy of that book his response was negative. Like many other restorationist preachers of the 1820s, Rigdon taught that the Bible was the sole standard of faith. For this reason he "partly condemned it," [^4] and, as Parley P. Pratt recalled, Rigdon questioned the proclamation of a new book containing the teachings of Christ. "He was much surprised," Parley added, "and it was with much persuasion and argument that he was prevailed on to read it." [^5] Nevertheless, as many contemporaries have noted, following his careful examination of that book, Rigdon publicly announced his conversion to Mormonism. [^6]

Shortly after he joined the restored Church and traveled to western New York to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith, critics accused Rigdon of being the author of the Book of Mormon. Many of Joseph Smith's non-Mormon contemporaries refused to believe that the young prophet or his known associates of the 1820s, could have written that work. Therefore, critics in 1831 selected Sidney Rigdon as the author. [^7] However, individuals who were closely associated with Joseph Smith before 1831 deny this theory. For example, Rigdon's son, John Wickliffe Rigdon, reported that his father repeatedly told friend and foe alike that he did not write the Book of Mormon. Rigdon insisted that he "never saw the Book of Mormon until Parley Pratt presented it to him," and that he met Joseph Smith for the first time after his baptism. When others suggested that Rigdon had used Solomon Spaulding's manuscript as a basis for writing the historical portions of the Book of Mormon, he urged that never in his life had he seen the Spaulding manuscript. [^8]

There are no significant parallels in the known writings of Solomon Spaulding and the Book of Mormon. [^9] In fact, except for the King James Version of the Bible, there are no quotations in the Book of Mormon from any book available in any library or any published manuscript written before 1830. Portions of the Old Testament and the writings of Isaiah and other prophets were recorded on the Book of Mormon plates as well as some of the same sermons which Christ had unfolded to audiences in the land of Palestine. Because of this and the fact that the Book of Mormon contains these messages in the Biblical language popular during the early nineteenth century, [^10] its credibility has been challenged. It was also during the same months that most of the Book of Mormon was translated that the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods were restored. These two events are without a parallel in the annals of modern religious history. In these visions the power and authority to act in the name of God were restored to man on earth. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery testified that they beheld angelic messengers who gave them verbal instructions and that they felt the hands of the heavenly beings upon their heads as they received the holy priesthood. No other individuals in the modern history of Christianity have made such claims. Whenever, as far as we know, Joseph Smith received priesthood keys, another witness was present to verify the reality of the experience and to receive the same power and authority.

Several other important events that took place during the months of April-July 1829, related to the Book of Mormon. For example, eleven men testified that in the presence of Joseph Smith they saw the plates from which the Book of Mormon had been translated. An account of their experiences and a harmony of their testimonies has been included in Chapter Seven.

Translation of a Sacred Record

Joseph Smith

Translation of the Book of MormonHCThe Lord appeared to a young man by the name of Oliver Cowdery and showed [the plates] to him in a vision and also the truth of the work and what the Lord was about to do through me, his unworthy servant. Therefore, he was desirous to come and write for me [as I translated.] Now, my wife had written some for me and also my brother, Samuel H. Smith, but we had become reduced in property and my wife's father was about to turn me out of doors. . . . I had nowhere to go . . . I cried unto the Lord that he would provide for me to accomplish the work whereunto he had commanded me. [^11]

Translation of the Book of MormonHCOn the fifteenth [5th] day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery [whom I had never previously seen] came to my house [Harmony], Pennsylvania]. . . .He stated to me that having been teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided, and my father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to board for a season at his [my father's] house, and while there the family related to him the circumstance of my having received the plates. . . .Accordingly he had come to make enquiries of me. [^12]

Lucy Smith

Soon after we returned from [visiting Joseph in] Harmony, a man by the name of Lyman Cowdery, came into the neighborhood, and applied to Hyrum, (as he was one of the trustees,) for the district school. A meeting of the trustees was called, and Mr. Cowdery was employed. But the following day, this Mr. Cowdery brought his brother Oliver to the trustees, and requested them to receive him instead of himself, as circumstances had transpired which rendered it necessary for him to disappoint them, or which would not allow of his attending to the school himself; and he would warrant the good conduct of the school under his brother's supervision. All parties being satisifed, Oliver commenced his school, boarding for the time being at our house. He had been in the school but a short time, when he began to hear from all quarters concerning the plates, and as soon began to importune Mr. Smith upon the subject, but for a considerable length of time did not succeed in eliciting any information. At last, however, he gained my husband's confidence, so far as to obtain a sketch of the facts relative to the plates.

Shortly after receiving this information, he told Mr. Smith that he was highly delighted with what he had heard, that he had been in a deep study upon the subject all day, and that it was impressed upon his mind, that he should yet have the privilege of writing for Joseph. Furthermore, that he had determined to pay him a visit at the close of the school, which he was then teaching.

On coming in on the following day, he said, "The subject upon which we were yesterday conversing seems working in my very bones, and I cannot, for a moment, get it out of my mind, finally, I have resolved on what I will do. Samuel, I understand, is going down to Pennsylvania to spend the spring with Joseph; I shall make my arrangements to be ready to accompany him thither, by the time he recovers his health; for I have made it a subject of prayer, and I firmly believe that it is the will of the Lord that I should go. If there is a work for me to do in this thing, I am determined to attend to it." . . . In April, Samuel, and Mr. Cowdery set out for Pennsylvania. The weather, for some time previous, had been very wet and disagreeable—raining, freezing, and thawing alternately, which had rendered the roads almost impassable, particularly in the middle of the day. Notwithstanding, Mr. Cowdery was not to be detained, either by wind or weather, and they persevered until they arrived at Joseph's.

Joseph had been so hurried with his secular affairs, that he could not proceed with his spiritual concerns so fast as was necessary for the speedy completion of the work; there was also another disadvantage under which he laboured, his wife had so much of her time taken up with the care of her house, that she could write for him but a small portion of the time. On account of these embarrassments, Joseph called upon the Lord, three days prior to the arrival of Samuel and Oliver, to send him a scribe, according to the promise of the angel; and he was informed that the same should be forth coming in a few days. Accordingly, when Mr. Cowdery told him the business that he had come upon, Joseph was not at all surprised. [^13]

Joseph Smith

Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 17th of April), [7th], I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he commenced to write for me. [This] having continued for some time, I enquired of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained the following revelation. [^14]

Revelation given April 1829 to Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith, Jr. [see D&C Section 6:10-13, 18-19, 22-25).

Behold thou [Oliver Cowdery] has a gift [the spirit of revelation], and blessed art thou because of thy gift. Remember it is sacred and cometh from above—And if thou wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries which are great and marvelous; therefore thou shalt exercise thy gift, that thou mayest find out mysteries, that thou mayest bring many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, convince them of the error of their ways. Make not thy gift known unto any save it be those who are of thy faith. Trifle not with sacred things. If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation. . . .

Therefore be diligent; stand by my servant Joseph, faithfully, in whatsoever difficult circumstances he may be for the word's sake. Admonish him in his faults, and also receive admonition of him. . . .

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God? And now, behold, you have received a witness; for if I have told you things which no man knoweth have you not received a witness? And, behold, I grant unto you a gift [to translate the record], if you desire of me, to translate, even as my servant Joseph.

After we had received this revelation, he [Oliver Cowdery], stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family communicated to him concerning my having got the plates, that one night, after he had retired to bed, he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so and that the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but that he had kept the circumstance entirely secret and had mentioned it to no being, so that after this revelation having been given, he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation but God and himself. [^15]

During the month of April, I continued to translate and he to write with little cessation. . . . While continuing the work of translation . . . Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate bestowed upon him, and in relation to this desire, the following revelations were obtained. [^16]

Revelation given April 1829 [See D&C Section 8:1-2, 5-8, 11]

Oliver Cowdery, verily, verily, I say unto you, that assuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart, believing that you shall receive a knowledge concerning the engraving of old records, which are ancient, which contain those parts of my scripture of which has been spoken by the manifestation of my Spirit. Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. . . .

Oh, remember these words, and keep my commandments. Remember, this is your gift. Now this is not all thy gift; for you have another gift, which is the gift of Aaron; [^17] behold, it has told you many things; behold, there is no other power, save the power of God, that can cause this gift of Aaron to be with you. Therefore, doubt not, for it is the gift of God; and you shall hold it in your hands, and do marvelous works; and no power shall be able to take it away out of your hands, for it is the work of God.

. . . Ask that you may know the mysteries of God, and that you may translate and receive knowledge from all those ancient records which have been hid up, that are sacred; and according to your faith shall it be done unto you.

Revelation given to Oliver Cowdery, April 1829 [^18] [See D&C Section 9:1-2, 4-5, 7-11]

Behold, I say unto you, my son, that because you did not translate according to that which you desired of me, and did commence again to write for my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., even so I would that ye should continue until you have finished this record, which I have entrusted unto him. And then, behold, other records have I, that I will give unto you power that you may assist to translate. . . .

Behold, the work which you are called to do is to write for my servant Joseph. And, behold, it is because that you did not continue as you commenced, when you began to translate, that I have taken away this privilege from you. . . . [^19]

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me.

Now, if you had known this you could have translated; nevertheless, it is not expedient that you should translate now. Behold, it was expedient when you commenced; but you feared, and the time is past, and it is not expedient now. . . .

Oliver Cowdery

Translation of the Book of MormonHCNear the time of the setting of the sun, Sabbath evening, April 5th, 1829, my natural eyes, for the first time beheld this brother [Joseph Smith]. On Monday the 6th, I assisted him in arranging some business of a temporal nature, and on Tuesday the 7th, commenced to write the Book of Mormon. These were days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, "Interpreters," the history, or record, called the Book of Mormon. [^20]

Emma Smith — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonTranslation of the Book of MormonHC[During the translation] the plates often lay on the [table in our home], without any attempt at concealment, wrapped in a small linen tablecoth, which I had given him [Joseph Smith] to fold them in. I once felt . . . the plates, as they thus lay on the table, tracing their outline and shape. They seemed to be pliable like thick paper, and would rustle with a metalic sound when the edges were moved by the thumb, as one does sometimes thumb the edges of the book. . . . I did not attempt to handle the plates, other than [through the linen cloth] . . . I was satisfied that it was the work of God, and therefore did not feel it to be necessary to do so. I knew that he [Joseph Smith] had them, and was not specially curious about them. I moved them from place to place on the table, as it was necessary in doing my work. . . . Oliver Cowdery and . . . [Joseph Smith] wrote in the room where I was at work. . . . [^21]

Restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood

Joseph Smith

Baptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver CowderyRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCWe still continued the work of translation, when, in the ensuing month, (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" [see D&C Section 13]. He said this Aaronic priesthood had not the power of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me. [^22]

Oliver Cowdery

Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood

Baptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver CowderyRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCAccordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me—after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same preisthood—for so we were commanded.

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodBaptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver CowderyRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCThe messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us. [At that time] I should be called the first Elder of the Church and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger and baptized. Immediately upon our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy . . . [and], standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of this Church and many other things connected with the Church, and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. [^23]

Oliver Cowdery

Restoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCAfter writing the account given of the Savior's ministry to the remnant of the seed of Jacob, upon this continent, it was easily to be seen . . . that amid the great strife and noise concerning religion, none had authority from God to administer the ordinances of the gospel. For, the question might be asked, have men authority to administer in the name of Christ, who deny revelations? when his testimony is no less than the spirit of prophecy? and his religion based, built, and sustained by immediate revelations in all ages of the world, when he has had a people on earth? . . . Our souls were driven out in mighty prayer to know how we might obtain the blessings of baptism and of the Holy Spirit, according to the order of God, and we diligently sought for the right of the fathers, and the authority of the holy priesthood. . . . We . . . waited for the commandment to be given, "Arise and be baptized." [^24]

Restoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCThis was not long desired before it was realized. He [Joseph Smith] . . . in company with myself, in the town of Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, on Friday, the 15th of May 1829 . . . called upon him [God] in a fervent manner, aside from the abodes of men, [and the Lord] condescended to manifest to us his will. On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed in glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance! What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world were [was] racked and distracted—while millions were grouping [groping] as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld— our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day"; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sun beam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispeled every fear. We listened—we gazed—we admired! 'Twas the voice of the angel of glory—'twas a message from the Most High! and as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? No where: uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while faction and deception had fled forever! . . . What joy filled our hearts and with what surprise we must have bowed . . . when we received under his hand the holy priesthood, . . . [or were] ordained by the angel John unto the lesser or Aaronic priesthood . . . as he said, "upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer this priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!" . . . [^25]

Restoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCEarth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to cloth language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as they were delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! . . . The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description. . . .

Baptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver CowderyRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCAfter . . . [we were ordained] we repaired to the water, even to the Susquehannah River, and were baptized, he first ministering unto me and after I to him. [^26]

Orson Pratt

In the year 1829, Mr. Smith and Mr. Cowdery, having learned the correct mode of baptism, from the teachings of the Saviour to the ancient Nephites, as recorded in the "Book of Mormon," had a desire to be baptized, but knowing that no one had authority to administer that sacred ordinance in any denomination, they were at a loss to know how the authority was to be restored, and while calling upon the Lord with a desire to be informed on the subject, a holy angel appeared and stood before them, and laid his hands upon their heads, and ordained them, and commanded them to baptize each other, which they accordingly did. [^27]

Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood

Joseph Smith

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHCI received the holy priesthood by the ministering of angels to administer the letter of the gospel. I received the high priesthood after the holy order of the son of the living God. I received the power [and the authority] to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances [thereof]. The keys of the kingdom [were also] conferred upon me. [^28]

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodRestoration of the Aaronic PriesthoodHC[When]John the Baptist laid his hands upon my head and ordained me . . . a priest, [I was told that this] office was to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, and also to baptize. But I was informed that this office did not extend to the laying on of hands for the giving of the Holy Ghost; that that office was a greater work and was to be given afterwards. . . .[John the Baptist also told me] that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us [Joseph and Oliver]. [^29]

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCThe Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias gave the keys to Peter, James, and John on the mount, when they were transfigured before him . . . How have we . . . [obtained] the Priesthood in the last days? It came down, in regular succession. Peter, James, and John had it given to them and they gave it to others. [^30]

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHC[The Lord] sent unto [me, Joseph Smith] . . . Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanny County, and Colesville, Broome County, on the Susquehannah River, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times . . . [and] by whom I [was] ordained . . . and confirmed . . . to be apostles, and especial witnesses. [D&C Section 27:12-13; 128:20.]

There are, in the Church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God.

But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the Church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. [See D&C Section 107:1-4.] [^31]

Oliver Cowdery

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCWe [Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery] received the high and holy priesthood . . . after . . . we . . . were baptized. [^32] I . . . stood in the presence of John, with our departed Joseph, to receive the Lesser Priesthood—and in the presence of Peter, to receive the Greater. [^33]

Oliver Cowdery — Interview

Long after the authority to administer in holy things had been taken away, the Lord opened the heavens and sent forth his word for the salvation of Israel. In fulfillment of the sacred Scripture the everlasting Gospel was proclaimed by the might angel (Moroni) who, clothed with the authority of his mission, gave glory to God in the highest. This gospel is the "stone taken from the mountain without hands." John the Baptist, holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood; Peter, James and John holding the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, have also ministered for those who shall be heirs of salvation, and with these ministrations ordained men to the same Priesthoods. These priesthoods, with their authority, are now, and must continue to be, in the body of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . . In connection with Joseph the Seer, [I] was blessed with the above ministrations. [^34]

Orson Pratt

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCA revelation and restoration to the earth of the everlasting gospel through the angel Moroni would be of no benefit to the nations, unless some one should be ordained with authority to preach it and administer its ordinances. Moroni might reveal a book containing a beautiful and glorious system of salvation, but no one could obey even its first principles without a legally authorized administrator, ordained to preach, baptize, lay on hands for the gifts of the Holy Ghost, etc. Did Moroni ordain Mr. Smith to the apostleship, and command him to administer ordinances? No, he did not. But why not confer authority by ordination, as well as reveal the everlasting gospel? Because in all probability he had no right so to do. All angels have not the same authority—they do not all hold the same keys. . . . How then did Mr. Smith obtain the office of an apostle, if Moroni had no authority to ordain him to such office? Mr. Smith testifies that Peter, James, and John came to him in the capacity of ministering angels, and by the laying on hands ordained him an apostle, and commanded him to preach, baptize, lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and administer all the ordinances of the gospel as they themselves did in ancient days. [^35]

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCWe consider the restoration of the Aaronic priesthood [by John the Baptist] to be among some of the most important events of the last dispensation. . . . As this priesthood has not authority to administer the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost . . . Peter, James, and John appeared as ministering angels, and conferred the Apostleship upon Joseph Smith and others; after which they were authorized to confirm the Church by the laying on of hands. [^36]

Response by Others to the Restoration of the Priesthood

Joseph Smith

Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of. In the meantime, we were forced to keep secret the circumstances of our having received the Priesthood and our having been baptized, owing to a spirit of persecution which had already manifested itself in the neighborhood. We had been threatened with being mobbed, from time to time, and this, too by professors of religion. And their intentions of mobbing us were only counteracted by the influence of my wife's father's family (under Divine providence), who had become very friendly to me, and who were opposed to mobs, and were willing that I should be allowed to continue the work of translation without interruption; and therefore [they] offered and promised us protection from all unlawful proceedings as far as in them [protection] lay.

After a few days, however, feeling it to be our duty, we commenced to reason out of the scriptures with our acquaintances and friends, as we happened to meet with them. About this time, my brother Samuel H. Smith came to visit us. We informed him of what the Lord was about to do for the children of men, and [we reasoned] with him out of the Bible. We also showed him that part of the work which we had translated and labored to persuade him concerning the gospel of Jesus Christ, which was now about to be revealed in its fulness. He was not, however, very easily persuaded of these things, but after much enquiry and explanation he retired to the woods in order that by secret and fervent prayer he might obtain of a merciful God wisdom to enable him to judge for himself. The result was that he obtained revelations for himself sufficient to convince him of the truth of our assertions to him, and, on the fifteenth day [twenty-fifth] of that same month in which we had been baptized and ordained, Oliver Cowdery baptized him; and he returned to his father's house greatly glorifying and praising God, being filled with the Holy Sprit. [^37]

[While Oliver and I were working on the translation of the Book of Mormon], an old gentleman, came to visit us of whose name I wish to make honorable mention: Mr. Joseph Knight, Sen. of Colesville, Broome County, New York, who, having heard of the manner in which we were occupying our time, very kindly and considerately brought us a quantity of provisions in order that we might not be interrupted in the work of translation by the want of such necessaries of life; and I would just mention here (as in duty bound) that he several times brought us supplies (a distance of at least thirty miles), which enabled us to continue work which otherwise we must have relinquished for a season.

Being very anxious to know his duty as to this work, I enquired of the Lord for him and obtained as follows:

Revelation given to Joseph Knight, Sr. at Harmony, Susquehannah County, Pennsylvania, May 1829 [see D&C Section 12:1, 3, 6-8]. A great and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men. . . . Behold, the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whose desireth to reap let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts. . . .

Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.

Behold, I speak unto you, and also to all those who have desires to bring forth and establish this work; and no one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care. [^38]

Joseph Knight

When Joseph began to translate he was poor . . . and had no one to write for him but his wife, and, in the winter, her brother wrote a little for him. Even though his wife, Emma, did write for him she could not do much because she had to take care of the house. His wife's father and family were all against him [Joseph] and would not help him. He and his wife came up to see me [in Colesville, New York,] the first winter of 1828 and told me his case. But I was not in easy circumstances and I did not know what it might amount to, and my wife and family were all against me helping him. But I did give him a few provisions and a few things out of the store: a pair of shoes and three dollars in money to help him a little. . . .

The last of March [1828] I told my wife that I must go down and see Joseph again. She asked, "Why do you go so soon?"

I said, "Come, go and see."

And she went with me. Next morning we went down and found them well and they were glad to see us. Joseph talked to us about his translating and some revelations he had received. From that time my wife began to believe. . . .

In the spring of 1829 Oliver Cowdery [traveled to Pennsylvania where] he received a revelation concerning the work. Oliver was convinced of the truth of the work and agreed to write for Joseph until the work was finished. Now Joseph and Oliver came up to see me and asked if I could help them buy some provisions, they having no way to buy them. When they arrived I was not there. I was in the Catskills. But when I came home my folks told me what Joseph wanted. I had engaged to go to the Catskills again the next day and I went, but I did buy a barrel of mackrel and some lined paper for writing. When I returned home, I bought some nine or ten bushels of grain and five or six bushels of taters and a pound of tea. I left to see them and they were in want. Joseph and Oliver were gone seeking employment for provisions, but they found none. They returned home and found me there with the provisions and they were glad for they were out. Their family consisted of four, Joseph, and his wife, Oliver, and Samuel Smith. They went back to work and had provisions enough to last until the translation was finished. [^39]

The Move to Fayette

Joseph Smith

Shortly after commencing to translate, I became acquainted with Mr. Peter Whitmer of Fayette, Seneca County, New York, and also with some of his family. In the beginning of the month of June, his son, David Whitmer, came to the place where we were residing and brought with him a two horse wagon for the purpose of having us accompany him to his father's place and there remain until we should finish the work. He proposed that we should have our board free of charge and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me [and] also his own assistance when convenient.

Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous and being informed that the people of the neighborhood were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to enquire into these things, we accepted the invitation and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house. [^40]

David Whitmer — Interview

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAfter thinking over the matter for a long time [the story of Joseph Smith securing the golden plates that he had heard from people in the area of Palmyra], and talking with [Oliver] Cowdery, who also gave me a history of the finding of the plates, I went home; and after several months, Cowdery told me he was going to Harmony, Pennsylvania, where Joseph Smith had gone with the plates on account of the persecutions of the neighbors, . . . [to] see him [Joseph Smith] about the matter. He did go, and on the way stopped at my father's house and told me that as soon as he found out anything, either truth or untruth, he would let me know. After he got there he became acquainted with Joseph Smith, and shortly after, wrote to me telling me that . . . Joseph had told him his [Oliver's] secret thoughts, and all he had mediatated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself . . . [He also told me that] he was convinced that Smith had the records, and that he [Joseph Smith] had told him that it was the will of heaven that he [Oliver Cowdery] should be his scribe to assist in the translation of the plates. He went on and Joseph translated from the plates and he wrote it down. Shortly after this, Cowdery wrote me another letter, in which he gave me a few lines of what they translated, and he assured me that he knew of a certainty that he had a record of a people that inhabited this continent, and that the plates they were translating gave a complete history of these people. When Cowdery wrote me these things and told me that he had revealed knowledge concerning the truth of them, I showed these letters to my parents and my brothers and sisters. Soon after I received another letter from Cowdery, telling me to come down into Pennsylvania, and bring him and Joseph to my father's house, giving as a reason therefore that they had received a commandment from God to that effect. . . .

Other Important Events in New YorkHCI did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some twenty acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCI don't know who did it; but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThis enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished. . . .

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe next day after I got there they packed up the plates, and we proceeded on our journey to my father's house . . .

Other Important Events in New YorkHCWhen I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an old fashioned wooden spring seat and Joseph behind us; while traveling along in a clear open place, a very pleasant, nice-looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of our wagon and saluted us with, "good morning, it is very warm," at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and, by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, "No, I am going to Cumorah." This name was something new to me, I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked around enquiringly of Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again. . . . He [the stranger] was about 5 feet 8 or 9 inches tall and heavy set. . . . He was dressed in a suit of brown woolen clothes, his hair and beard were white. I also remember that he had on his back sort of a knapsack with something, shaped like a book. It was the messenger who had the plates, who had taken them from Joseph just prior to our starting from Harmony. . . .

Other Important Events in New YorkHCJoseph . . . said that . . . he had the plates of the Book of Mormon in the knapsack. [^41]

Events in Fayette (June 1829)

Joseph Smith

Upon our arrival [in Fayette], we found Mr. Whitmer's family very anxious concerning the work and very friendly towards ourselves. They continued so, boarded and lodged us according to proposal; and John Whitmer, in particular, assisted us very much in writing during the remainder of the work. [^42]

David Whitmer — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCSoon after our [Joseph, Oliver, and David] arrival home [in Fayette], I saw something which led me to the belief that the plates were placed or concealed in my father's barn. I frankly asked Joseph if my supposition was right, and he told me it was. Sometime after this, my mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him) who said to her: "You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tired because of the increase of your toil; it is proper therefore that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened." There upon he showed her the plates. My father and mother had a large family of their own, the addition to it therefore of Joseph, his wife Emma and Oliver very greatly increased the toil and anxiety of my mother. And although she had never complained she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities. [^43]

Joseph Smith

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCIn the meantime, David, John, and Peter Whitmer Jr. became our zealous friends and assistants in the work. . . . [^44] We [also] found the people of Seneca County in general friendly and disposed to enquire into the truth of these strange matters which now began to be noised abroad: many opened their houses to us in order that we might have an opportunity of meeting with our friends for the purposes of instruction and explanation. We met with many, who were willing to hear us and wishful, from time to time, who were to find out the truth as it is in Christ Jesus and apparently willing to obey the gospel when once fairly convinced and satisfied in their own minds. In this same month of June, my brother, Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, and Peter Whitmer, Jr. were baptized in Seneca Lake: the two former by myself, [and] the latter by Oliver Cowdery. From this time forth many became believers and were baptized, while we continued to instruct and persuade as many as applied for information. [^45]

Restoration of the Melchizedek PriesthoodHCMeantime, we continued to translate at intervals, when not necessitated to attend to the numerous enquirers that now began to visit us; some for the sake of finding the truth, others for the purpose of putting hard questions and trying to confound us. Among the latter class were several learned priests who generally came for the purpose of disputation: however, the Lord continued to pour out upon us his Holy Spirit, and, as often as we had need, he gave us in that moment what to say; so that, although unlearned and inexperienced in religious controversies, yet were able to confound those learned Rabbis of the day, whilst at the same time, we were enabled to convince the honest in heart that we had obtained (through the mercy of God) to the true and everlasting gospel of Jesus Christ, so that almost daily we administered the ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins to such as believed. We now became anxious to have that promise realized to us, which the angel that conferred upon us the Aaronic Priesthood had given us, viz: that, provided we continued faithful, we should also have the Melchizedek Priesthood, which holds the authority of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^46] We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, and at length we got together in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house in order more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired: and here to our unspeakable satisifaction did we realize the truth of the Savior's promise; "Ask, and you shall receive, seek, and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you," for we had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber, commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an elder in the church of Jesus Christ and that he also should ordain me to the same office, and then to ordain others as it should be made known unto us, from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such time as it should be practicable to have our brethren who had been and who should be baptized assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other and have them decide by vote whether they are willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not, when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them and to take wine, bless it and drink it with them, [and] afterward proceed to ordain each other according to the commandment, [and] then call out such men as the spirit should dictate and ordain them. Then [we should] attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord. [^47]

The following commandment will further illustrate the nature of our calling to this Priesthood as well as that of others who were yet to be sought after.

Revelation to Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer, making known the calling of twelve apostles in these last days, and also, instructions relative to building up the church of Christ, according to the fulness of the gospel: given in Fayette, New York, June, 1829. [See D&C Section 18:1-2, 9, 14-15, 26-27, 37-39.]

Now, behold, because of the thing which you, my servant Oliver Cowdery, have desired to know of me, I give unto you these words: Behold, I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are true. . . .

And now, Oliver Cowdery, I speak unto you, and also unto David Whitmer, by the way of commandment; . . . you are called to cry repentance unto this people. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! . . .

And now, behold, there are others who are called to declare my gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew; yea, even twelve; and the Twelve shall be my disciples, and they shall take upon them my name; and the Twelve are they who shall desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart . . .

And now, behold, I give unto you, Oliver Cowdery, and also unto David Whitmer, that you shall search out the Twelve, who shall have the desires of which I have spoken; and by their desires and their works you shall know them. And when you have found them you shall show these things unto them. [^48]

David Whitmer

In June 1829 . . . I was baptized, confirmed, and ordained an elder . . . by Bro. Joseph Smith. Previous to this, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had baptized, confirmed and ordained each other to the office of an elder. [^49]

Translation Completed in Fayette

Joseph Smith

Translation of the Book of MormonHCWe [Joseph, his wife, and Oliver] resided [in Peter Whitmer's home] until the translation was finished and the copyright secured. [^50]

David Whitmer — Interview

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI, as well as all of my father's family, Smith's wife, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris, were present during the translation . . . The translation at my father's occupied about one month, that is from June 1 to July 1, 1829. [^51]

Lucy Smith

Translation of the Book of MormonHC[After arriving at the Whitmer home, Joseph, Oliver, and others] continued without further interruption until the whole work [of translation] was accomplished. As soon as the Book of Mormon was translated, Joseph despatched a messenger to Mr. Smith, bearing intelligence of the completion of the work, and a request that Mr. Smith and myself should come immediately to Waterloo [a community located near the Whitmer farm] . . . Accordingly, the next morning, we all set off together, and before sunset met Joseph and Oliver at Mr. Whitmer's.

Translation of the Book of MormonHCThe evening was spent in reading the manuscript, and it would be superfluous for me to say, to one who has read the foregoing pages, that we rejoiced exceedingly. It then appeared to those of us who did not realize the magnitude of the work, as if the greatest difficulty was then surmounted. [^52]

Diedrich Willers, German Reformed Minister of Fayette

In the month of July [June 1829], Joseph Smith made his appearance in Seneca County, in the neighborhood of Waterloo, about 6 miles from my hometown. There a certain David Whitmer claimed to have seen an angel of the Lord, so Smith proceeded to his house, in order to complete the translation of the above work [Book of Mormon] himself. According to the reports, only there could he work—where men who have had association with the other world also reside . . .

He [Joseph Smith] asserted that the Angel of the Lord appeared to him and made it known that in the neighborhood of Palmyra there were golden plates in the earth, upon which was described the doings of a Jewish prophet's family, associated with many not yet fulfilled prophecies. The Angel indicated that the Lord destined him to translate these things into English from the ancient language, that under these plates were hidden spectacles, without which he could not translate these plates, that by using these spectacles, he [Smith] would be in a position to read these ancient languages, which he had never studied, and that the Holy Ghost would reveal to him the translation in the English language. Therefore, he [Smith] proceeded to Manchester township, Ontario County, and found everything as described, the plates buried next to the spectacles in the earth, and soon he completed the translation of this work.

Upon receiving this report, I hurried immediately to Whitmer's house to see this man, in order to learn the actual source of this story and to find out how it might be possible to nip this work in the bud. However, I received the reply from Whitmer's father that Smith had already departed to take his translation to press. [^53]

Summary

Testimonies That Joseph Smith was the Translator of the Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith

Moroni . . . who deposited the plates, from whence the Book of Mormon was translated, in a hill in Manchester, Ontario County, New York, being dead and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me and told me where they [the plates] were and gave me directions how to obtain them. I obtained them, and the Urim and Thummim with them, by the means of which I translated the plates . . . by the gift and power of God . . . and thus came the Book of Mormon. [^54]

Emma Smith — Interview

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI wrote for Joseph Smith during the work of translation, as did also Reuben Hale [Emma's brother] . . . and O. Cowdery. . . . The larger part of this labor was done [in] my presence and where I could see and know what was being done . . . During no part of it [the work of translation] did Joseph Smith have any mss. or book of any kind from which to read or dictate except the metalic plates which I knew he had. . . . [^55] Joseph Smith could neither write nor dictate a coherent and well-worded letter, let alone dictate a book like the Book of Mormon. . . . The Book of Mormon is of divine authenticity—I have not the slightest doubt of it. I am satisifed that no man could have dictated the writing of the manuscripts unless he was inspired; for, when acting as his scribe, your father would dictate to me hour after hour; and when returning after meals, or after interruptions, he would at once begin where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him. This was a usual thing for him to do. It would have been improbable that a learned man could do this; and, for one so ignorant and unlearned as he was, it was simply impossible. [^56]

Martin Harris, David Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery

We . . . know that they [the plates which contained the record from which the Book of Mormon was translated] have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. [^57]

Martin Harris — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCJoseph Smith was the first to handle the . . . tablets of gold . . . and I . . . the second. At one time . . . [I held] the plates on my knee an hour-and-a-half, whilest in conversation with Joseph, when we went to bury them in the woods, that the enemy might not obtain them . . . There was also found in the chest [that contained the Book of Mormon plates] the Urim and Thummim, by the means of which the writing upon the plates was translated, but not until after the most learned men had exhausted their knowledge of letters in the vain effort to decipher the characters. [^58]

Martin Harris

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI do firmly believe and do know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; for without I know he could not have translated . . . the plates containing the Book of Mormon . . . No man ever heard me in any way deny the truth of the Book of Mormon. [^59]

David Whitmer

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI testify to the world that I am an eye-witness to the translation of the greater part of the Book of Mormon. Part of it was translated in my father's house in Fayette, Seneca County, New York. . . .No man could read it [the characters on the plates], but God gave to an unlearned boy the gift to translate. . . .Brother Joseph would read . . . the English to Oliver Cowdery, who was his principle scribe . . . Thus the Book of Mormon was translated by the gift and power of God, and not by any power of man. [^60]

Translation of the Book of MormonHCNeither Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris or myself ever met Sydney Rigdon until after the Book of Mormon was in print. I know this of my own personal knowledge, being with Joseph Smith, in Seneca County, New York, in the winter of 1830, when Sydney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came from Kirtland, Ohio, to see Joseph Smith and where Rigdon and Partridge saw Joseph Smith for the first time in their lives. The Spaulding manuscript story is a myth; there being no direct testimony on record in regard to Rigdon's connection with the manuscript of Solomon Spaulding. . . .There is also no similarity whatever between it [the manuscript of Solomon Spaulding that had been discovered and placed in the library of Oberlin College] and the Book of Mormon. [^61]

Oliver Cowdery

Translation of the Book of MormonHCThrough him [Joseph Smith] the Lord revealed his will to the church: he was ministered unto by the angel, and by his direction he obtained the Records of the Nephites and translated [them] by the gift and power of God.

Translation of the Book of MormonHCDay after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his [Joseph Smith's] mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, "Interpreters," the history, or record, called "The Book of Mormon." [^62]

Oliver Cowdery — Interview

Translation of the Book of MormonHCI wrote with my own pen the entire book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet as he translated it by the gift and power of God by means of the Urim and Thummim or as it is called by the book holy Interpreters. I beheld with my eye and handled with my hands the gold plates from which it was translated. I also beheld the Interpreters. That book is true. Sidney Rigdon did not write it. Mr. Spaulding did not write it. I wrote it myself as it fell from the lips of the Prophet. It contains the everlasting gospel and came in fulfillment of the revelations of John where he says [that] he saw an angel come with the everlasting gospel to preach to every nation, tongue and people. [^63]

William Smith

The statements . . . concerning the strange vision[s] shown to Joseph Smith, are true; and the translation of the record as found by the [my] brother [Joseph] as stated, is also true, and in no other way did Joseph Smith compile, or compose the Book of Mormon only as stated by the gift and power of God. [^64]

Lucy Smith

Joseph, after repenting of his sins and humbling himself before God, was visited by an holy angel whose countenance was as lightning and whose garments were white above all whiteness, who gave unto him commandments which inspired him from on high; and who gave unto him, by the means of which was before prepared, that he should translate this book . . . [^65] I want you to remember that God himself has given to Joseph that he is able to translate . . . for as God lives I have written the truth. [^66]
