Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER SIX

Eleven Special Witnesses

In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. (2 Corinthians 13:1.)

Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word. (2 Nephi 27:14.)

There are many incredible statements in the writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. These include his testimonies that he was instructed in 1820 by God the Eternal Father and His Son, Jesus Christ; that he received numerous visitations from angelic messenger after 1823; that he was directed by a heavenly being to a prominent hill where he located a set of golden plates buried in a stone box; and that he translated these plates by the gift and power of God. Moreover, he testified that he received (in company with Oliver Cowdery) God's authority to baptize, confirm, ordain, and reestablish Christ's church upon the earth by the laying of hands from John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John.

The uncommon aspects of the restoration movement do not cease with these startling pronouncements. In the summer of 1829, eleven men examined the Book of Mormon plates and wrote testimonies that are unparalleled in the annals of religious history. Three men declared with words of soberness that they not only saw the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated and the engravings thereon, but that they were shown this record by a heavenly being and heard a voice from heaven which verified the correct translation of the book. [^1] A day or two after the Three Witnesses saw the plates during a heavenly vision, eight other men walked into a grove where they were shown the plates by Joseph Smith. These men, in the presence of one another, examined the golden plates meticulously. They hefted them, they saw the curious writings on the metal record, and they turned the thin leaves or pages which the Prophet had translated, one by one. [^2]

After the eleven witnesses had examined the golden plates, they wrote an account of their experience and signed their names to the document. [^3] Since three of the witnesses saw the plates during a vision, beheld an angel, and were instructed by the voice of God, and eight men examined the plates under different circumstances, the eleven special witnesses endorsed two separate accounts of their experiences. Both of these testimonies were published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon which was available for sale in March 1830, less than one year after the eleven had examined the record. The testimonies of these eleven men, with their names attached, have been republished in all subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon. These testimonies were also printed in many newspapers across the land, and were recopied or referred to periodically in the writings of these witnesses and many of their contemporaries. [^4]

The testimonies of the eleven witnesses of the Book of Mormon plates are without parallel in religious history and are a powerful external evidence of the divine calling of Joseph Smith. Ordinarily, the testimony of eleven men would be sufficient to establish the reality of an historical event. All were eye-witnesses of the record. All saw the plates during the daylight hours. All examined the plates in such close proximity as to see the curious inscriptions on the record. All became active members of the religious community organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith. All devoted their time and energy and sacrificed their material means to advance the restoration movement. Because of their refusal to deny that which they had declared in defense of the Prophet and of the Book of Mormon, they all experienced economic distress and financial loss. Some were forced to leave their homes and move to new communities. All experienced humiliation, defaming criticism, social ostracism, and other forms of persecution. Most were driven by ruthless mobs from their homes and one (Hyrum Smith) was killed by a mob at the time the Prophet was martyred. There is no reliable evidence that any of the eleven men at any time denied his testimony as published in the Book of Mormon. All of their wives and children and close associates knew that they bore an unwavering affirmation of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. After establishing their homes in different parts of the young nation, four of the men (Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, David Whitmer, and Samuel Smith) lost contact at one time or another with all the other witnesses, so that if they had been involved in a fraudulent plot they were granted opportunities to expose it without fear of reprisal. None, however, did. [^5]

The witnesses were members of five families. The Three Witnesses, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, were from three family groups and the Eight Witnesses also belonged to three families (with members of the Whitmer family being represented in both sets of witnesses). Three of the eight were Smiths: Joseph Smith's father, Joseph Smith, Sr., and his two brothers Hyrum and Samuel. Four were Whitmers: David's brothers, Christian, Jacob, Peter, and John. The other witness was Hyrum Page.

At the time of the viewing of the Book of Mormon plates, all eleven witnesses were men of maturity, competent observers, and trustworthy individuals who believed in living a life which harmonized with the teachings of Christ. The average age of these witnesses in 1829 was thirty, the youngest, Peter Whitmer, Jr., being nineteen and the oldest, Joseph Smith, Sr., being fifty-nine. There is no evidence that any of these witnesses had in 1829 (or before or after that date) any serious emotional or physical handicap that would have imparired their ability to judge accurately that which they observed. Records further indicate that the witnesses believed in the divinity of Christ. Before uniting with the restoration movement, the Whitmers were active members of a German Reformed church. [^6] Joseph Smith, Sr., helped organize a universalist church in Vermont, and Hyrum and Samuel Smith belonged to the Presbyterin church during the 1820s. [^7] All of the witnesses were baptized and became active members of the Church organized by the Prophet. [^8]

Although few Americans in 1829 accepted Joseph Smith's unusual claims, all of the witnesses had expressed genuine interest in the Prophet's work. Some had served as scribes and others had listened sympathetically as Joseph Smith informed them of the religious patterns of ancient America and other themes unfolded in the Book of Mormon. [^9] After the Three Witnesses had seen the plates, Joseph Smith invited members of his family, four brothers of David Whitmer, and Hiram Page to be special witnesses of the restoration. At that time (the summer of 1829), the Whitmers were visiting the Smiths in Manchester, New York. All of the Three Witnesses and three of the Eight Witnesses (John and Jacob Whitmer and Hiram Page) eventually rejected the leadership of Joseph Smith. A number of forces combined to create an internal crisis within the restored Church in 1837 and 1838 that led to the apostasy of many leaders. Economic failures, a visible pride and selfishness of some members, the unfolding of new doctrines by the Prophet, and the failure of some members to pattern their life after the revelatory writings of Joseph Smith (such as complying with provisions of the health code known as the Word of Wisdom) were included among these debilitating influences. Between the fall of 1837 and the summer of 1838, four of the witnesses were excommunicated (Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdry, and John Whitmer) and two others (Jacob Whitmer and Hiram Page) became alienated and never returned to active participation. Two of the six men (Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris) admitted that they had transgressed, repented of their mistakes, and were rebaptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints during the administration of President Brigham Young. Although these six witnesses criticized the Prophet in 1837 and 1838 for some of his actions, not one of the six denied viewing the plates nor rejected the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. Their testimony, therefore, regarding the Book of Mormon is strengthened because of the consistency of their affirmations even after denouncing the Prophet. Moreoever, all of the Three Witnesses and some of the eight made it a point to reaffirm their testimonies regarding the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon on their death beds. [^10]

David Whitmer Hyrum Smith

Viewing of the plates by the Eight Witness

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThe witness who was interviewed on more occasions than any other individual who examined the plates was David Whitmer. David was the last of the eleven witnesses to die and, following his excommunication in 1838, lived among non-members in Missouri for more than fifty years. During this half century, he served as a city councilman and mayor of Richmond and earned a living by farming and operating a transportation business (furnishing customers with horses and carriages). While living in Richmond, he was constantly interviewed by members and non-members alike. Many elders of the Church who were traveling east on missions stopped in Richmond specifically to visit him, desiring to hear from David's own lips his account of seeing the angel, the plates, and hearing a voice from heaven. [^11] During one of these interviews held in 1883, David Whitmer said that he had been "visited by thousands of people, believers and unbelievers, men and ladies of all degrees." He said that he had been interviewed as many as fifteen times in a single day, and that never he had failed to bear his testimony to those questioning him. "They will know some day," he predicted, "that my testimony is true." [^12]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCAn opportune occasion for David Whitmer to have denied his testimony occurred in 1833. While Latter-day Saints were being persecuted in Jackson County, Missouri, an armed mob threatened his life. After placing a loaded rifle next to David's chest, one of the mobsters told Whitmer that if he did not deny his testimony, he would shoot. This same mobster offered him a reward for renouncing his testimony. He said that by complying with his demands he would not only save his life, but that he would allow him to remain in the county and retain his property. Instead of repudiating his conviction in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer raised his hands before the angry crowd and declared that the Book of Mormon was "the word of God." "The testimony I bore [to] the mob," David recalled, "made them tremble before me. " [^13]

Although there is no reliable evidence that David Whitmer repudiated his testimony as published in the Book of Mormon, a few interviewers assumed that he was contradicting his published declaration when he told them that he saw the plates with his spiritual rather than his natural eyes. Explaining what he meant by this statement, David Whitmer wrote in 1887:

Of course we were in the spirit when we had the view, for no man can behold the face of an angel, except in a spiritual view, but we were in the body also, and everything was as natural to us, as it is at any time. Martin Harris . . . called it "being in vision". . . .A bright light enveloped us where we were . . . and there in a vision, or in the spirit, we saw and heard just as it is stated in my testimony in the Book of Mormon. [^14]

Some skeptics who did not endorse David Whitmer's published testimony suggested that he must have been deceived. When a military officer informed Whitmer that he must have been mentally disturbed or suffered an hallucination which caused him to think that he saw an angel, plates, and other objects, Whitmer replied emphatically that he "was not under any hallucination," nor was he "deceived." "I saw with these eyes, and I heard with these ears!" he asserted. "I know whereof I speak." [^15]

In partial response to accusations that he had denied his testimony and that he suffered some type of mental disturbance, David Whitmer published a pamphlet in 1887 entitled An Address to All Believers in Christ in which he emphasized that he and the other witnesses who examined the plates had never denied their testimonies as published in the Book of Mormon. Moreover, he insisted, "It was no delusion." [^16]

One contemporary who wrote about the consistency of the testimonies of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon was Edward Stevenson. Edward joined the Church during the early 1830s, when he was a teenager living with his parents in Pontiac, Michigan. In 1834 he heard Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Hyrum Smith, and Joseph Smith, Sr., bear witness of the truthfulness of their testimonies regarding their having examined the Book of Mormon plates. [^17] On other occasions during the 1830s, he heard the Three Witnesses testify concerning the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. In 1870, 1877, and 1886, he heard David Whitmer explain his experience of examining the plates in the presence of a heavenly messenger. [^18] Meanwhile, Edward Stevenson became a personal friend of Martin Harris. Stevenson ultimately encouraged Martin to move to Utah, and he traveled west with him in 1870. After arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Edward Stevenson rebaptized Martin Harris and listened as Martin bore his testimony to hundreds of Saints in public meetings and to many others in private conversations. [^19] Edward Stevenson, therefore, heard all three of the Three Witnesses bear their testimonies at different times during their lives and wrote in letters, journals, and articles the reaffirmations of all these men regarding the angel, the plates, and the voice from heaven. He also was acquainted with some of the Eight Witnesses and heard these men at different times bear witness to the reality of the Book of Mormon plates. [^20]

Since most interviewers of the eleven witnesses were not trained in the techniques of reporting, some undoubtedly did not quote with precise accuracy that which had been related to them. With the passage of time and the constant retelling of the same experience, the witnesses in some instances also might have erred in describing every detail of their experience. Nevertheless, the fact that more than one hundred detailed descriptions of their testimonies harmonize with the statements published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon is solid evidence that the witnesses constantly told others the same basic affirmation regarding the plates. (See Appendix E and F.) [^21]

The eleven witnesses also exhibited their conviction in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon by preaching the restored gospel to others. Without generally receiving any financial support from the Church, most witnesses served as full-time missionaries. While laboring in this capacity, they not only experienced the joy of seeing others accept the restored gospel and baptizing them into the Church, but they endured fatigue, hunger, physical pain, and public humiliation. In 1830, six months after the Church had been organized, two of the witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., were called, along with two other elders, to preach the gospel to Indians living in the Missouri frontier. [^22] If the witnesses to the Book of Mormon had been involved in a plot to deceive mankind, it is inconceivable that they would have undertaken such an extensive journey at their own expense to teach Americans who were unpopular and oppressed. One of the elders, Parley P. Pratt, who participated in this first extended mission in the history of the Church, aptly described the suffering of these missionaries as they crossed the sparsely settled state of Missouri in the winter of 1831:

We traveled for whole days, from morning till night, without a house or fire, wading in snow to the knees at every step . . . We carried on our backs our changes of clothing, several books, and corn bread and raw pork. We often ate our frozen bread and pork by the way, when the bread would be so frozen that we could not bite or penetrate any part of it but the outside crust. [^23]

All of the Smiths who handled the plates also served as full-time missionaries. In August 1830, in company with his son, Don Carlos, Joseph Smith, Sr., labored as a missionary in St. Lawrence County, New York. During this mission, he bore testimony to the truthfulness of the restored gospel to his father and brothers and sisters who lived in that county, and most of his family joined the Church. In 1836 he traveled with his brother John about 2,400 miles in the northeastern states preaching, baptizing, and bestowing patriarchal blessings on several hundred members. [^24] Meanwhile, Hyrum Smith was accepting calls to serve as a missionary. In the fall of 1830 he labored as a missionary with Newel Knight and Orson Pratt. In the summer of 1831 he preached to settlers living between northeastern Ohio and western Missouri. During the winter of 1831-1832, he preached in New York and Ohio and in 1836 he served as a missionary in Salem, Massachusetts. [^25]

Samuel Smith was another witness who was actively involved in missionary service. On June 30, 1830, after being set apart by his brother, Joseph, Samuel commenced missionary labors by preaching in western New York. In December of that same year he was called to preach in northeastern Ohio. In June 1831 he was called by revelation to labor in Missouri as a missionary in company with Reynolds Cahoon. After returning to Kirtland, Ohio, Samuel continued his missionary labors in Ohio. In January 1832, he was called to serve another mission in the eastern states, where, for approximately one year, he traveled with Orson Hyde in New York and New England, preaching, teaching, and baptizing. After his marriage to Mary Bailey in August 1834, he devoted more time to farming and less to missionary activity, but he continued to serve by holding various positions of responsibility in the Church. After fleeing from his home in Kirtland and being driven from his home in Far West, Missouri, Samuel moved with other exiled Saints to Illinios. His missionary service continued after he had settled in Nauvoo. In April 1841, he accepted a call to preach in Illinois, where he labored during the summer and fall of that year. [^26]

David Whitmer and Martin Harris also served the Church by participating in different types of missionary activity. During the winter of 1831-1832, David Whitmer preached in Ohio; and during the summer of 1831, at the call of the Prophet, Martin Harris traveled west to Missouri as one of Joseph Smith's companions. In 1834 Martin Harris again traveled from Ohio to Missouri with the Prophet as a member of Zion's Camp. This army of Latter-day Saints journeyed west in an attempt to aid members who, in November 1833, had been driven by mobs from their homes in Jackson County, Missouri. [^27]

Members of the restored Church demonstrated their conviction in the integrity of the witnesses by sustaining these men in positions of leadership and responsibility. David Whitmer served as president of the Church in Missouri with John Whitmer as one of his counselors. Oliver Cowdery and Hyrum Smith served as assistant presidents of the Church in Ohio. Joseph Smith, Sr., was called to serve as Patriarch to the Church, giving blessings to hundreds of Saints. (Following his death, Hyrum assumed this responsibility.) Christian and Peter Whitmer, Jr., served on the Missouri High Council—a judicial, decision-making, and advisory body—and Martin Harris and Samuel Smith served on the High council organized in Kirtland, Ohio. In many instances, these men held these ecclesiastical positions, sacrificing their time and talents, without receiving financial remuneration. [^28]

All of the members of the Smith family who were witnesses to the Book of Mormon died while they were actively involved in church service. Immediately following their deaths in the 1840s in Nauvoo, Illinois, members referred to some of their most noteworthy character traits. Joseph Smith, Sr., who was respectfully referred to as "Father Smith," was considered "one of the most benevolent of men." During his funeral, one of his friends, Elder Robert B. Thompson declared:

If ever there was a man who had claims on the affections of the community, it was our beloved but now deceased Patriarch . . . for truly we can say with the king of Israel, "A prince and a great man has fallen in Israel." A man endeared to us by every feeling calculated to entwine around and adhere to the human heart, by almost indissoluble bonds. A man faithful to his God and to the Church in every situation and under all circumstances through which he was called to pass. . . .He . . . was chosen by the Almighty to be one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon. From that time, his only aim was the promotion of truth—his soul was taken up with the things of the Kingdom; his bowels yearned over the children of men; and it was more than his meat and drink to do the will of his Father, who is in heaven. [^29]

Following the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, John Taylor, who witnessed the "brutal" murders of June 27, 1844, wrote that these men sealed their testimonies of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon with their blood. Hyrum Smith, he added, "was forty-four years old in February 1844, and Joseph Smith was thirty-eight in December, 1843; and henceforward their names will be classed among the martyrs of religion . . . In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated, . . . and glory is their eternal reward. From age to age shall their names go down to posterity as gems for the sanctified." [^30]

One month following the death of Joseph and Hyrum, Samuel H. Smith, aged thirty-six, died of "bilious fever." In the obituary notice published in the local Mormon paper, Times and Seasons, Samuel Smith was praised for his "steadfastness as one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon." He was also referred to as a "man of God," who had "many saintly traits of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity." [^31]

After becoming close friends or acquaintances with various witnesses to the Book of Mormon, many non-Mormons also declared that the witnesses they knew were men of integrity. Not one individual who had more than a fleeting acquaintance with these men wrote that they were dishonest, lacked sincerity, or were incompetent judges of events. Instead of denouncing their characters, many critics of the Church who knew the witnesses declared that they were trustworthy individuals. In 1830, for example, Martin Harris traveled to Geneva, New York, in an attempt to secure a loan of thirteen hundred dollars from Charles Butler, a financier and philantropist who founded the Union Theological Seminary. Butler wrote that Harris brought a letter of introduction to him from Mr. Jessup (probably Henry Jessup), a leading elder in the Presbyterian Church. Butler depended on Jessup's recommendations respecting character and financial status for all seeking loans who lived in the area of Palmyra. According to Butler, Jessup introduced Martin Harris as a "very worthy and substantial farmer, possessing a very excellent farm which would furnish a very ample security for the amount of money which he wished to obtain." Although Butler was favorably impressed with Harris' credentials, the financier decided not to grant him a loan when he learned that the money was to be used for the publication of a "Mormon Bible. " [^32]

In addition to Henry Jessup, others living in Palmyra judged Martin Harris to be honest and responsible. In 1829, the Palmyra Freeman reported that one of the few individuals who believed in the story of the "Golden Bible" was Martin Harris, "an honest and industrious farmer" of Palmyra. [^33] While traveling in western New York in 1831, James Gordon Bennett, a journalist for the New York Courier and Enquirer learned from those he interviewed that Martin Harris had a reputation of being a "respectable . . . hard working . . . substantial farmer" and was known for his "sobriety." [^34] When Martin Harris left Palmyra to gather with the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, the Wayne Sentinel reported that Harris was one of the earliest settlers of that town and "has ever borne the character of an honorable and upright" citizen. [^35] And after publishing the testimony of the Three Witnesses in his history of Mormonism, Pomeroy Tucker wrote, "How to reconcile the act of Harris in signing his name to such a statement, in view of the character of honesty which had always been conceded to him, could never be easily explained." [^36]

After leaving the Church in 1838, Oliver Cowdery established warm friendships with a number of non-members. Samuel Murdock, an attorney who became "intimately acquainted" with Cowdery while he was residing in Kirtland, wrote that he was indebted to him for his "special kindness" and "the many lessons of instruction" he received from him. Murdock concluded that Oliver Cowdery was one of the most "amiable, generous, and kindhearted" individuals he had ever known. [^37] Judge William Lang, Oliver Cowdery's law partner in Tiffin, Ohio, wrote that he was granted many opportunities "to study and love his noble and true manhood." According to Lang, Cowdery was "an able lawyer and a great adovcate. . . . He was modest and reserved, never spoke ill of any one, [and] never complained." [^38] Shortly after Oliver Cowdery moved from Tiffin, The Seneca Advertiser reported that Cowdery had been nominated as the democratic candidate for the House of Representatives in Wisconsin. During his seven year residency in Tiffin, the article continued,

our esteemed friend . . . earned himself an enviable distinction at the Bar of this place and of this Judicial circuit, as a sound and able lawyer, and as a citizen none could have been more esteemed. His honesty, integrity, and industry were worthy the imitation of all, whilst his unquestioned legal abilities reflected credit as well upon himself as upon the professin of which he was a member. [^39]

Following the death of Oliver Cowdery, the Ray County Missouri Bar Association formally declared that the law "profession has lost an accomplished member, and the community a valuable and worthy citizen." [^40] And The Seneca Advertiser declared that they were "pained to learn . . . of the death of . . . (their) much esteemed friend and former fellow citizen, Oliver Cowdery. . . . He was a man of more than ordinary ability, and during his residence among us had endeared himself to all who knew him in the private and social walks of life." [^41]

Non-Mormons also certified that John and David Whitmer were "truthful, honest and law abiding citizens." After living in Richmond, Missouri, for forty-three years, David Whitmer secured the signatures of twenty-two leading citizens of that town, including the mayor, attorneys, judges, bankers, merchants, and public servants who verified that they had "been long and intimately acquainted with him" and knew "him to be a man of the highest integrity, and of undoubted truth and veracity." [^42] A few days following his death, the Richmond Democrat published an article which apparently expressed the views of many of the friends of David Whitmer regarding his character and his testimony regarding the Book of Mormon.

No man ever lived here, who had among our people, more friends and fewer enemies. Honest, conscientious and upright in all his dealings, just in his estimate of men, and open, manly and frank in his treatment of all, he made lasting friends who loved him to the end . . .

Skeptics may laugh and scoff if they will, but no man can listen to Mr. Whitmer as he talks of his interview with the angel of the Lord, without being most forcibly convinced that he has heard an honest man tell what he honestly believes to be true. [^43]

Because more than one hundred detailed personal statements or descriptions of interviews with the Three Witnesses have been preserved (and additional testimonies of the Eight Witnesses also exist), the testimony of the Book of Mormon witnesses is better documented than any other declaration of direct revelation in the world's history. [^44] The striking harmony of reports spanning a variety of times and circumstances, coupled with numerous character references that portray the witnesses as men of integrity, is compelling evidence of the truthfulness of the testimonies published in the Book of Mormon. These numerous personal statements and interviews also serve as evidence that amidst persecution, economic trials, public criticism, and apostasy from the Church the eleven never deviated from their conviction that they carefully examined the metallic plates and that the Book of Mormon was a product of the translation of this record. Even though six of the eleven rejected the leadership of Joseph Smith in the late 1830s, there is no reliable evidence that any of the witnesses at any time deviated from their conviction in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. The published testimonies of the eleven witnesses, therefore, enable us to better understand a unique event in the ecclesiastical history of mankind and substantiate Joseph Smith's testimony that eleven men did indeed examine the ancient record which he translated "by the gift and power of God."

The combined testimonies of Joseph Smith and the eleven witnesses included in this chapter are based on countless sources. In some instances harmonies have been created by blending primary and secondary sources. Secondary sources are generally cited only when a number of interviewers reported the same basic concepts.

A Prophecy of Special Witnesses

Joseph Smith

In the course of the work of translation, we ascertained that three special witnesses were to be provided by the Lord, to whom he would grant that they would see the plates from which this work (the Book of Mormon) should be translated and that these witnesses should bear record of the same. [This] will be found [in the] Book of Mormon, first edition [which reads as follows:]

Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it, save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book, and the things therein. And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few, according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men . . . Wherefore, the Lord will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word. [^45]

Three Witnesses Identified by Revelation

Revelation given March 1829 [see D&C Section 5:1-3, 15-16, 18, 26-28, 32.]

Behold, I say unto you, that as my servant Martin Harris has desired a witness at my hand, that you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., have got the plates of which you have testified and borne record that you have received of me. And now, behold, this shall you say unto him—he who spake unto you, said unto you: I the Lord, am God, and have given these things unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., and have commanded you that you shall stand as a witness of these things; and I have caused you that you should enter into a covenant with me, that you should not show them except to those persons to whom I command you . . . And the testimony of three witnesses will I send forth of my word. And behold, whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the manifestation of my Spirit . . . And their testimony shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation if they harden their hearts against them. . . .And I the Lord command him, my servant Martin Harris, that he shall say no more unto them concerning these things, except he shall say: I have seen them, and they have been shown unto me by the power of God; and these are the words which he shall say. But if he deny this he will break the covenant which he has before covenanted with me, and behold, he is condemned. And now, except he humble himself and acknowledge unto me the things that he has done which are wrong, and covenant with me that he will keep my commandments, and exercise faith in me, behold, I say unto him, he shall have no such views, for I will grant unto him no views of the things of which I have spoken . . . I foresee that if my servant Martin Harris humbleth not himself and receive a witness from my hand, that he will fall unto transgression.

Almost immediately after we had made this dicovery [that three special witnesses would view the plates by the power of God], it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord to know if they might not obtain of him to be these three special witnesses. Finally, they became so very solicitous and teased me so much that at length I complied and through the Urim and Thummim I obtained of the Lord for them the following Revelation:

Revelation to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, at Fayette, Seneca County, N.Y., June 1829; given previus to their viewing the plates containing the Book of Mormon. [See D&C Section 17:16.]

Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea. And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even by that faith which was had by the prophets of old.

And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God; and this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work. And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has seen them, and it is because he had faith. And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him. [^46]

Lucy Smith

The next morning [the morning following the arrival of Joseph's father and mother and his friend, Martin Harris, at the Whitmer home], after attending to the usual services, namely, reading, singing and praying, Joseph arose from his knees, and approaching Martin Harris with a solemnity that thrills through my veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection, said, "Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer." [^47]

The Vision of the Three Special Witnesses

Joseph Smith

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCNot many days after the above commandment was given [D&C 17], we four, viz.: Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and myself agreed to retire into the woods and try to obtain by fervent and humble prayer the fulfillment of the promises given in the revelation: that they should have a view of the plates & etc. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house to which we retired, and, having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of thse promises. According to previous arrangements, I commenced by vocal prayer to our heavenly Father and was followed by each of the rest in succession; we did not yet, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of the divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer: each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before. Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he would withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us, and we kelt down again and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer when presently we beheld a light above us in the air of exceeding brightness. Behold, an angel stood before us; in his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these [Cowdery and Whitmer] to have a view of: he turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them and discover the engravings thereon distinctly. He addressed himself to David Whitmer and said, "David, blessed is the Lord and he that keeps his commandments." Immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God; the translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI now left David and Oliver and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in prayer and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things. At the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in ecstasy of joy, "Tis enough; mine eyes have beheld," and jumping up, he shouted hosanna, blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCHaving thus, through the mercy of God, obtained these manifestations, it now remained for these three individuals to fulfill the commandment which they had received, viz.: to bear record of these things, in order to accomplish which, they drew up and subscribed the following document:— [^48]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThe Testimony of Three Witnesses.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCBe it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come; that we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCOliver Cowdery David Whitmer Martin Harris

Testimonies of the Three Witnesses

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCDavid Whitmer — A Harmony of Primary and Secondary Sources

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCIn June 1829, the Lord called Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and myself as the three witnesses to behold the vision of the Angel, as recorded in the fore part of the Book of Mormon and to bear testimony to the world that the Book of Mormon is true. [^49] [I saw] the plates . . . about 11:00 a.m . . . in the latter part of June 1829. Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and myself were together, and the angel showed them to us . . . as I supposed to fulfill the words of the book itself. [^50] The angel was dressed in white and spoke and called me by name and said, "Blessed is he that keepeth His commandments. [^51] [As] the angel stood before us, he turned the leaves one by one. . [of] that part of the book which was not sealed. [^52] Martin Harris, the other witness, saw them the same day, and the eight witnesses . . . saw them [the] next day . . . or the day after. [^53] The plates . . . appeared to be of gold, about six by nine inches in size, about as thick as parchment, a great many in number, and bound together like the leaves of a book by massive rings passing through the back edges. The engravings upon them were very plain and of very curious appearance. . . . We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but he [the angel] also showed us the brass plates of the Book of Ether and many others. [^54]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThey [the plates] were shown to us in this way. Joseph and Oliver and I were sitting on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light more glorious than that of the sun . . . It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light . . . there appeared as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the directors—i.e., the ball which Lehi had, and the Interpreters. [^55] The Interpreters . . . which I saw . . . in the holy vision . . . looked like whitish stones put in the rim of a bow . . . like spectacles, only much larger. [^56] The heavenly messenger brought the several plates and laid them on the table before our eyes. [^57] I saw them just as plain as I see this bed . . . and the angel told us we must bear testimony to the world. . . . I [also] heard the voice of the Lord, distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God. [^58] Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is absolutely true, just as it is there written. [^59]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCIt is recorded in the American Cyclopaedia and the Encyclopaedia Britannica, that I, David Whitmer, have denied my testimony as one of the three witnesses to the divinity of the Book of Mormon; and that the other two witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, denied their testimony to that Book. I will say once more to all mankind, that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof. I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery or Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. [^60]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI wish now, standing as it were, in the very sunset of life, and in the fear of God, once [and] for all to make this public statement:

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThat I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof, which has so long since been published with that Book, as one of the three witnesses. Those who know me best, well know that I have always adhered to that testimony. And that no man may be misled or doubt my present views in regard to the same, I do again affirm the truth of all of my statements, as then made and published.

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC"He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear;" it was no delusion! What is written is written, and he that readeth let him understand. [^61]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCBeware how you hastily condemn that book which I know to be the word of God; for his own voice and an angel from heaven declared the truth of it unto me, and to two other witnesses who testified on their death-bed that it was true. [^62]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCAnd if these things are not true, then there is no truth; and if there is no truth, there is no God; and if there is no God, there is no existence. But I know there is a God, for I have heard His voice and witnessed the manifestation of his power. [^63]

Oliver Cowdery — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCIn company with the Prophet Joseph Smith and David Whitmer, [I] . . . beheld the plates, the leaves being turned over by the angel, whose voice I heard, and . . . we were commanded as witnesses to bear a faithful testimony to the world of the vision that we were favored to behold, and that the translation from the plates in the Book of Mormon was accepted of the Lord, and that it should go forth to the world and no power on earth should stop its progress. [^64]

Martin Harris

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI now solemnly state that as I was praying unto the Lord that I might behold the ancient record, lo there appeared to view a holy angel, and before him a table, and upon the table the holy spectacles or Urim and Thummim, and other ancient relics of the Nephites, and lo, the Angel did take up the plates, and turn them over so as we could plainly see the engravings thereon, and lo there came a voice from heaven saying "I am the Lord," and that the plates were translated by God and not by men, and also that we should bear record of it to all the world, and thus the vision was taken from us . . . [^65] No man ever heard me in any way deny the truth of the Book of Mormon [or] the administration of the angel that showed me the plates. The Lord has shown me these things by his Spirit. [^66]

Martin Harris — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThe Prophet Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer and myself went into the woods to pray that we might have the privilege of seeing the golden plates. We bowed our heads in prayer, but we seemed to be praying with no results. The Prophet was the spokesman. He prayed with no results twice, then I withdrew from them, telling them that it was on my account that their prayer was not answered. [^67] After they had been visited by the angel, the Prophet then came over to me where I was praying, and I asked the Prophet to pray with me so that I might have the privilege also of seeing the golden plates; and after praying, [^68] I saw the angel descend from heaven. [^69] The angel stood on the opposite side of the table on which were the plates . . . took the plates in his hand and turned them over . . one by one. [^70] I [also] saw the Urim and Thummim, the Breastplate, and the Sword of Laban. [^71] The angel declared that the Book of Mormon was correctly translated by the power of God and not of man, and that it contained the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Nephites, who were a branch of the lost sheep of the House of Israel and had come from the land of Jerusalem to America. [^72] When he [the angel] had finished his message, I saw him ascend up into heaven. Then . . . I heard the voice of God declare that everything the angel had told us was true and that the Book of Mormon was translated correctly. [^73] I was [then] commanded by God's voice to testify to the whole world what I had seen and heard. [^74] Following the vision, I cried out in . . . ecstasy. [^75]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC[I have] never failed to bear testimony to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. [^76] I know of a surety that the work is true. [^77] It is not a matter of belief . . . but of knowledge. [^78] Just as surely as the sun is shining on us and gives us light, and the sun and stars give us light by night, just as surely as the breath of life sustains us, so surely do I know that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God, chosen of God to open the last dispensation of the fulness of times; so surely do I know that the Book of Mormon was divinely translated. I saw the plates; I saw the angel; I heard the voice of God. I know that the Book of Mormon is true, and that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God. I might as well doubt my own existence as to doubt the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon or the divine calling of Joseph Smith. [^79]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC[My] testimony [which] has accompanied every copy of the Book [of Mormon], that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon . . . has not varied . . . in 41 years. [^80]

Historical Setting of the Vision of the Three Witnesses

Lucy Smith

Joseph, Martin, Oliver, and David, repaired to a grove, a short distance from the house, where they commenced calling upon the Lord, and continued in earnest supplication, until he permitted an angel to come down from his presence, and declare to them, that all which Joseph had testified of concerning the plates was true.

When they returned to the house it was between three and four o'clock P.M. Mrs. [Mary] Whitmer, Mr. Smith, and myself, were sitting in a bedroom at the time. On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed, "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world." Upon this, Martin Harris came in: he seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard.

Their written testimony . . . is contained in the Book of Mormon. [^81]

Eight Examine the Plates

Joseph Smith

Soon after these things had transpired [the Three Witnesses examining the plates], the following additional testimony was obtained: [^82] . . .

The Testimony of Eight Witnesses.

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: that Joseph Smith, Jr., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety, that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr. John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph smith, Sr. Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith

Historical Setting of the Experience of the Eight

Lucy Smith

The following day [the day after the Three Witnesses had viewed the plates] we returned [to our home in Manchester], a cheerful, happy company. In a few days we were followed by Joseph, Oliver, and the Whitmers, who came to make us a visit, and make some arrangements about getting the book printed. Soon after they came, all the male part of the company, with my husband, Samuel, and Hyrum, retired to a place where the family were in the habit of offering up their secret devotions to God. They went to this place, because it had been revealed to Joseph that the plates would be carried thither by one of the ancient Nephites. Here it was, that those eight witnesses, whose names are recorded in the Book of Mormon, looked upon them and handled them.

After these [eight] witnesses returned to the house, the angel again made his appearance to Joseph, at which time Joseph delivered up the plates into the angel's hands. The ensuing evening, we held a meeting, in which all the witnesses bore testimony to the facts, as stated above; and all of our family, even to Don Carlos, who was but fourteen years of age, testified of the truth of the Latter-day Dispensation—that it was then ushered in. [^83]

Testimonies of the Eight Witnesses

John Whitmer

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCDavid Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris, were the three witnesses whose names are attached to the Book of Mormon according to the prediction of the book, who knew and saw, for a surety, into whose presence the angel of God came and showed them the plates, the ball, the directors, etc. And also other witnesses even eight, viz., Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, John Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, are the men to whom Joseph Smith, Junior, showed the plates. These witnesses' names go forth also of the truth of this work in the last days, to the convincing or condemning of this generation in the last day. [^84]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCTo say that the Book of Mormon is a revelation from God, I have no hesitance; but with all confidence have signed my name to it as such. . . . I desire to testify to all that will come to the knowledge of this address; that I have most assuredly seen the plates from whence the Book of Mormon is translated, and that I have handled these plates, and know of a surety that Joseph Smith, Jr. has translated the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God. . . .I know that the Bible, Book of Mormon and book of Doctrine and Covenants of the church of the Latter Day Saints, contain the revealed will of heaven. [^85]

Hyrum Smith

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCHaving given my testimony to the world of the truth of the Book of Mormon . . . I thought that it might be strengthening to my beloved brethren, to give them a short account of my sufferings, for the truth's sake, and the state of my mind and feelings, while under circumstances of the most trying and afflicting nature. Prior to my settlement in Missouri [I] endured almost all manner of abuse, which was poured out upon the church of Latter Day Saints, from its commencement . . . After enduring many privations and much fatigue, . . . I arrived with my family in Far West. [In the fall of 1838, I was imprisoned with my brethren] for about six months . . . and suffered much for want of proper food, and from the nauseous cell in which I was confined . . . How inadequate is language to express the feelings of my mind, . . . knowing that I was innocent of crime, and that I had been dragged from my family at a time, when my assistance was most needed; that I had been abused and thrust into a dungeon, and confined for months on account of my faith, and the "testimony of Jesus Christ." However I thank God that I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I had bore testimony to . . . I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony, when nothing but death presented itself, as ever I did in my life . . . I yet feel a determination to do the will of God, in spite of persecutions, imprisonments or death. [^86]

Samuel H. Smith — Interview

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThe Book of Mormon, or, as it is called by some, the Golden Bible . . . is a revelation from God . . . I [am] one of the witnesses . . . I know the book to be a revelation from God, translated by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and that my brother Joseph Smith, Jr., is a Prophet, Seer and Revelator . . . If you will read this book with a prayerful heart, and ask God to give you a witness, you will know of the truth of this work. [^87]

The Last Testimonies

Testimony of Christian and Peter Whitmer, Jr., Reported by Oliver Cowdery

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCAmong those who have gone home to rest, we mention the names of our two brothers-in-law, Christian and Peter Whitmer, Jr. the former died on the 27th of November 1835, and othe other the 22nd of September last [1836], in Clay County, Missouri. By many in this church, our brothers were personally known: they were the first to embrace the new covenant, on hearing it, and during a constant scene of persecution and perplexity, to their last moments, maintained its truth—they were both included in the list of the eight witnesses in the Book of Mormon. [^88]

Oliver Cowdery's Final Testimony Reported by David Whitmer and John C. Whitmer, Son of Jacob Whitmer

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI was present at the deathbed of Oliver Cowdery in 1850. . . .Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw. . . . His last words were, "Brother David, be true to your testimony to the Book of Mormon, for we know that it is of God and that it is verily true." After shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, "Now I lay me down for the last time, I am going to my Savior," and died immediately, with a smile on his face. Many witnesses yet live in Richmond, who will testify to the truth of these facts, as well as to the good character of Oliver Cowdery. [^89]

Martin Harris' Last Testimony Reported by William H. Homer

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCJuly 10, 1875, marked the end. I stood by the bedside holding the patient's right hand and my mother at the foot of the bed. Martin had been unconscious for a number of days. When we first entered the room the old gentleman appeared to be sleeping. He soon woke up and asked for a drink of water. I put my arm under the old gentleman, raised him, and my mother held the glass to his lips. He drank freely, and then he looked up at me and recognized me. He said, "I know you. You are my friend." He said, "Yes, I did see the plates on which the Book of Mormon was written; I did see the angel; I did hear the voice of God; and I do know that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, holding the keys of the Holy Priesthood."

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThis was the end. [^90]

Final Testimonies of Jacob and John Whitmer Reported by Jacob's son, John C. Whitmer

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCMy father, Jacob Whitmer, was always faithful and true to his testimony to the Book of Mormon, and confirmed it on his deathbed. Of my Uncle John [Whitmer] I will say that I was with him a short time before he died at Far West, Missouri, when he confirmed to me what he had done so many times previously that he knew the Book of Mormon was true. [^91]

The Dying Testimony of Hiram Page and Other Witnesses Reported by Philander Page, son of Hiram

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCI knew my father to be true and faithful to his testimony of the divinity of the Book of Mormon until the very last. Whenever he had an opportunity to bear his testimony to this effect, he would always do so, and seemed to rejoice exceedingly in having been privileged to see the plates and thus become one of the Eight Witnesses. I can also testify that Jacob, John and David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery died in full faith in the divinity of the Book of Mormon. I was with all these witnesses on their deathbeds and heard each of them bear his last testimony. [^92]

David Whitmer's Last Testimonies Reported by Angus M. Cannon and the Richmond Democrat

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCMy friend [speaking to Angus M. Cannon on January 7, 1888], if God ever uttered a truth the testimony I now bear is true. I did see the angel of God and beheld the glory of the Lord and He declared that Record [to be] true. [^93]

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCOn Sunday evening at 5:30, Jan. 22, 1888, Mr. Whitmer called his family and some friends to his bedside, and addressing himself to the attending physician, said:

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHC"Dr. Buchanan, I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind, before I give my dying testimony."

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCThe doctor answered: "Yes, you are in your right mind, for I have just had a conversation with you."

Witnesses of the Book of MormonHCHe [David Whitmer] then addressed himself to all around his bedside in these words: "Now you must all be faithful in Christ. I want to say to you all, the Bible and the Record of the Nephites (Book of Mormon) is [are] true, so you can say you have heard me bear my testimony on my deathbed. All be faithful in Christ, and your reward will be according to your works. God bless you all. My trust is in Christ forever, world[s] without end.—Amen. [^94]

The Plates Returned to the Angel

Joseph Smith

By the wisdom of God, they [the plates] remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight. [^95]

Martin Harris

The plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated . . . were returned to the angel, Moroni, from whom they were received, to be brought forth again in the due time of the Lord; for they contain many things pertaining to the gathering of Israel, which gathering will take place in this generation and shall be testified of among all nations, according to the old Prophets; as the Lord will set his ensign to the people, and gather the outcasts of Israel. [^96]

Conclusion

Orson Pratt

The Lord would not permit the Book of Mormon to go forth to this generation without giving further evidence of its truth than that of its translation. Consequently three other men, . . . Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, had a testimony concerning the divine authenticity of this work, not by seeing the plates, merely; that would not have been sufficient. What was their testimony? They have left it on record, and it is printed and bound with the Book of Mormon to be sent forth to all nations, peoples and tongues under the whole heavens . . . [^97]

Now is there any chance for deception here? An angel . . . sent forth from God, . . . clothed in glory and brightness! An angel . . . [taking] these plates and turn[ing] them over leaf after leaf and show[ing] the engravings thereon [to Joseph Smith and the three witnesses] [^98]. . . .It would be impossible for four men . . . to be deceived in seeing an angel descend from heaven, . . . hearing his voice . . . seeing the plates [and] the engravings upon them, and . . . hearing the voice of the Lord out of heaven.

If these men, whose testimonies are attached to the Book of Mormon were not deceived, it must be admitted . . . [that] there are only two among the nations, have called up him [in western Missouri] from time to time, and they all bear the same testimony—that Mr. David Whitmer, still, in the most solemn manner, declares that he saw the angel and that he saw the plates in his hands. . . .

If these men, whose testimonies are attached to the Book of Mormon were not deceived, it must be admitted . . . [that] there are only two alternatives—that they were impostors, or else the Book of Mormon is a divine revelation from heaven.

Now let us inquire what grounds there are to suppose that they were impostors? . . . Did either of these three men, or did the translator of the Book of Mormon, ever deny the truth . . . [or] the divinity of the Book of Mormon? Never, no never. Whatever the circumstances they were placed in, however much they were mobbed and ridiculed, however much they suffered by the persecution of their enemies, their testimony all the time was—"We saw the angel of God, we beheld him in his glory, we saw the plates in his hands, and the engravings thereon, and we know that the Book of Mormon is true". . . .

Oliver Cowdery did not live his faith as he should have done, and he was excommunicated from this Church during Joseph's lifetime. Did he still continue to hold fast to his testimony? He did. Never was he known to swerve from it to the least degree; and after being out of the Church several years, he returned . . . and . . . acknowledged his sins, and humbly asked the church to forgive him, bearing his testimony to the sacred things recorded in the Book of Mormon . . . He was rebaptized a member of the Church, and soon after departed this life.

Martin Harris did not follow . . . this people [when they migrated west in the late 1830's and 1840's]; but we often heard of him, and whenever we did so we heard of him telling, in public and private of the great vision that God had shown to him concerning the divinity of the Book of Mormon. A few years ago he came to this Territory . . . and was rebaptized . . . [and] continue[d] to bear testimony. In his last testimony, he bore record concerning the divinity of the work.

One more witness remains who saw that angel and the plates, . . . David Whitmer . . . Many of the elders of this Church, in going to and fro among the nations, have called upon him [in western Missouri] from time to time, and they all bear the same testimony—that Mr. David Whitmer, still, in the most solemn manner, declares that he saw the angel and that he saw the plates. . . . [^99]

Have any persons ever seen the plates of the Book of Mormon, besides the four witnesses [referring to Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses]? Yes: there are eight other witnesses, who send forth their printed testimony, in connection with the Book of Mormon, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people. They testify that they saw and handled the plates, and examined the engravings upon them, and that they had "the appearance of the ancient work and of curious workmanship." They close their testimony with the following words: "And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it." Here, then, are twelve witnesses of the existence of the plates. Neither of these witnesses have ever denied their testimony to this day. Some of these witnesses have died—some have been martyred for their testimony; and others are still living. Is there a person on the earth, that can prove that these twelve witnesses did not see the plates? No, there is not. The existence of the plates, filled with engravings, is proved by twelve eye witnesses: while the correctness of their translation is proved by four eye witnesses, not only of the plates, but of the angel. Therefore, the evidences which this generation have of the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, and of the existence of the plates, are far greater than the evidences which they have for the truth of any of the books of the Bible. Hence, if they would be condemned for rejecting the Bible, how much more will they be condemned for rejecting the Book of Mormon which was confirmed, in its very origin, by so many witnesses? [^100]
