Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Prophet, The Book, and The Church July 1829-April 1830

"And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed . . . And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Daniel 2:44 and Matt. 24:14.)

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe decade stretching from the spring of 1820 to 1830 was a period of preparation. It began with the call of a prophet and culminated with the translation and publication of an ancient history and the organization of a church. Early in the spring of 1830, ten years following the First Vision, the first edition of the Book of Mormon was available for distribution and Christ's church was formally organized. Responding to latter-day revelations, Joseph Smith established an organization designed to prepare people for the Second Coming of Christ and for an eternal, celestial life with God. This "marvelous work and a wonder" was so important that all who embraced it were challenged with the responsibility of warning their neighbor and carrying the message of salvation and exaltation to all the world.

Printing of the Book of MormonHCFollowing the restoration of the priesthood and the organization of the Church, God manifested his power among the converts. Members prophesied, devils were cast out, the sick were healed, and all who received the gift of the Holy Ghost rejoiced. This manifestation of the power of God, which has continued to this day, is another evidence of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Although there have been many "faith healers" in the history of mankind, Joseph Smith was different from miracle workers in that he conferred the power and authority which he possessed on others.

Printing of the Book of MormonHCJoseph Smith's challenges in bringing forth the Book of Mormon did not end with the completion of the translation. Securing a copyright was not difficult (Joseph Smith deposited the title page with R. R. Lansing, clerk of the Northern District Court of New York on June 11, 1829.) [^1], locating a publisher was. Recognizing the advantages of having the work printed in Palmyra village where members of the Prophet's family could supervise the publication, Joseph Smith requested E. B. Grandin, publisher of the Wayne Sentinel, to print and bind the work. Because Grandin had heard negative stories about the "golden Bible," he initially refused to print the Book of Mormon. [^2] Following Grandin's rejection, Joseph Smith traveled to Rochester, New York, where he sought assistance from Thurlow Weed, a politician and publisher of the Rochester Telegraph. According to a reminiscence written by Weed, Joseph Smith informed him that "he had been directed in a vision to a place in the woods near Palmyra, where he resided, and that he found a 'golden Bible,' from which he was directed to copy the book that he wanted published." Although Weed told the Mormon prophet that he would not print the volume, this publisher recalled that shortly following this first visit, Joseph Smith, accompanied by Martin Harris, again called on him. Harris, continued Weed, was "a substantial farmer residing near Palmyra, who had adopted the Mormon faith and . . . offered to become security for the expense of printing." Although Weed was assured that he would be paid for his services, he again declined to publish the book for he "thought" that Joseph Smith was "either crazed or a very shallow imposter." [^3]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCFollowing Weed's refusal, Joseph Smith sought assistance from Elihu F. Marshall, another publisher living in Rochester, who "gave his terms for the printing and binding of the book with his acceptance of the profered mode of security for the payment." [^4] Before signing an agreement with Marshall, the Prophet returned to Palmyra and asked Grandin to reconsider his request. Since the work would be printed without his assistance, and this proposal was strictly a business arrangement, Grandin reluctantly agreed to print and bind 5,000 copies for $3,000, taking as security the bond and mortgage of Martin Harris. According to a mortgage dated August 26, 1829, Martin Harris agreed to pay Grandin $3,000 within eighteen months. The contract further specified that if Harris failed to meet his financial commitment his land was to be sold at public auction to satisfy the obligation. [^5]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe Book of Mormon was printed and later sold in the Grandin printing establishment. The printing office was located on the third floor of a building nestled among other stores in downtown Palmyra. The binding was accomplished on the second floor; and the book was sold in the Palmyra bookstore, located on the first floor. [^6]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe manuscript which was written on foolscap paper and delivered in stages to the publisher had been recopied from the original by Oliver Cowdery and other scribes. These two manuscripts (the original and the printer's copy) help us better understand some of the procedures employed in bringing forth the Book of Mormon and provide another evidence of the reliability of Joseph Smith's histories. The original manuscript remained in Joseph Smith's possession until October 1841. On the second of that month, Joseph placed this manuscript in the cornerstone of a hotel which was under construction in Nauvoo, called the Nauvoo House. [^7] Forty years later, in 1882, Lewis C. Bidamon, who had married Emma, the Prophet's widow, removed this document from its depository. After obtaining the manuscript, Bidamon found that many had been soaked and ruined. Other pages were destroyed as Bidamon distributed them to different people. Eventually, 72 1/2 leaves were given to the Church and were deposited in the archives in Salt Lake City. These surviving fragments comprise about 145 pages of the original text. [^8]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe second copy, the manuscript delivered to the printer, was preserved by Oliver Cowdery and following his death was protected by David Whitmer, Oliver's brother-in-law. Following Whitmer's death, his heirs held the manuscript and in 1903 gave these sheets to the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints where they are deposited today in their archives. With the exception of a few missing words on the first page of this manuscript, the printers copy is complete, containing 464 numbered and several unnumbered pages. When Oliver Cowdery and others recopied the manuscript they corrected some of the errors that scribes had made in the initial recording. Since nearly all of the changes on this second manuscript are corrections in spelling and capitalization, the printer's copy is like the original manuscript (the pages that have survived) in that it contains no punctuation and paragraphing. The printer, therefore, was responsible for the punctuation and paragraphing that appeared in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. [^9]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe original manuscript of the Book of Mormon suggests that this religious history was dictated to scribes who wrote word for word that which was related to them. The fact that there are few alterations in the text is evidence that there was no rewriting of the history as it was dictated. A number of grammatical errors (some of which would not be considered grammatical errors in Hebrew and other languages) and spelling errors (sometimes caused by the omission of a letter) were not corrected in the original manuscript. These errors help one "appreciate the great difficulty of writing carefully a longhand transcription from dictation" and indicate that some of the scribes were not good spellers. [^10] Although there are few scribal corrections in the pages of the original manuscript, some of the changes also suggest that the work was dictated. In one instance, for example, a scribe recorded the word "no" and then corrected it to read "know," which sounds the same but has a different meaning. The lack of punctuation, paragraphing, and capitalization of proper nouns in the original manuscript indicate that "the pressure on the scribe, writing longhand from dictation, was such as to preclude his attention to such grammatical considerations." [^11] In the writings of Oliver Cowdery, when he was not serving as a scribe for the Prophet, Oliver capitalized words and consistently created sentences with punctuation marks. The fact that the portion of the original manuscript which has been preserved is in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer also indicates that when Oliver Cowdery commenced writing for the prophet he began by recording information that followed the 116 pages that had been lost and that the last portion of the Book of Mormon to be translated (the section translated in the Whitmer home) was what is today the first section of the Book of Mormon, the portion taken from the Small plates of Nephi. [^12]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCDuring the printing of the Book of Mormon, a few chapters were published in serial form in the Palmyra Reflector. An ex-justice of the peace, Abner Cole, editor and proprietor of the Reflector, gained access to Grandin's printing establishment on Sundays and evenings and commenced publishing this paper on September 2, 1829, on the same press that was being used to print the Book of Mormon. [^13] Beginning with the January 2, 1830, issue and continuing in the 13 and 22 issues, Esquire Cole printed selections from 1 Nephi and Alma (1Nephi 1:1-20; 2:1-15 and Alma 43:22-20 in the current edition of the Book of Mormon or 1 Nephi parpagraphs 1-16 and Alma 20 paragraphs 5-9 in the first edition.) Undoubtedly Cole used printed sheets that he found in Grandin's office for his articles rather than the original manuscript, for the text was reproduced exactly (with the exception of a few printing errors) as it later appeared in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. [^14]

A few chapters of the Book of Mormon were clandestinely published in the Palmyra Reflector by Abner Cole.

Printer's copy of the Book of Mormon 1 Nephi 2:1-17

Printing of the Book of MormonHCAfter learning of Cole's illegal actions, the Prophet traveled from his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, to Palmyra, New York, and threatened to sue this editor. The problem was eventually resolved through arbitration, and, with some misgivings, Cole accepted the decision that he should stop violating the copyright. [^15]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCMeanwhile, Cole published a series of articles in the Reflector on the Book of Mormon. At first he denounced the publication, but his tone mellowed while he was printing the work in his paper. In one of the first commentaries published on this book, Cole wrote:

Printing of the Book of MormonHCThe Book, when it shall come forth before the public must stand or fall, according to the whims and fancies of its readers. How it will stand the test of criticism, we are not prepared to say, not having as yet examined many of its pages.—We are, however, prepared to state that from part of the first chapter, now before us, and which we this day publish, we cannot discover anything treasonable, or which will have a tendency to subvert our liberties. As to its religious character, we have as yet no means of determining, and if we had, we should be quite loth [sic] to meddle with the tender consciences of our neighbors. [^16]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCFollowing Joseph Smith's insistance that Cole discontinue printing selections from the Book of Mormon, Cole returned to a negative outlook of this book and denounced the Prophet for interfering with his publishing adventure. [^17]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCAlthough Esquire Cole undoubtedly hoped to increase the circulation of his paper by publishing selections from the Book of Mormon, many citizens who might have read selections from this work as it appeared in the newspaper, decided that they would not buy the book after it had been published. This boycott nearly stopped the publication of the book. Fearing that he would not be paid for his services, Grandin complained to Joseph. The Prophet succeeded in assuring Grandin that the contract which he had made with him would be honored. The work continued, and the book was released for public sale on March 26, 1830. [^18]

Printing of the Book of MormonHCIn order to raise the money owed Grandin, Martin Harris sold 151 acres of his farm to Thomas Lakey of Palmyra on April 7, 1831, receiving $3,000 for this property. Consequently, Martin Harris, one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, exemplified his conviction in the divine mission of Joseph Smith and in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon by first mortgaging and then selling a portion of his farm. [^19]

Organization of the ChurchHCA few days after the Book of Mormon was available for sale in Palmyra, about fifty persons crowded into the log-cabin farmhouse of Peter Whitmer, Sr. in Fayette, New York. On April 6, 1830, these settlers from Fayette, Manchester, Colesville, and other New York towns witnessed the formal organization of the Church of Christ, a church whose official name was given by an 1838 revelation as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. [^20] The visions, revelations, and authority which Joseph Smith had received, prepared the young prophet to reestablish on the earth the purity of the New Testament Church, and the book which was now available to members of this Church and to others in quest of religious truth, contained the fulness of the gospel of Christ. It was now the responsibility of members of this Church to warn others, informing them of the restoration and in turn becoming modern witnesses for Christ. [^21]

Publication of the Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith

Meantime, our translation drawing to a close, we went to Palmyra, Wayne County, New York, secured the copyright, and agreed with Mr. Egbert B. Grandin to print five thousand copies for the sum of three thousand dollars.

I wish also to mention here that the title page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general; and that said title page is not by any means a modern composition, either of mine or of any other man who has lived or does live in this generation. Therefore, in order to correct an error which generally exists concerning it, I give below that part of the title page of the English version of the Book of Mormon, which is a genuine and literal translation of the title page of the original Book of Mormon, as recorded on the plates.

THE BOOK OF MORMON An account written by the hand of Mormon, upon plates, taken from the plates of Nephi.

"Wherefore, it is an abridgement of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites—Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile—Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prohecy and of revelation—Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed—to come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof—Sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by the way of Gentile—the interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

An abridgement taken from the book of Ether also, which is a record of the people of Jared, who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were building a tower to get to heaven—Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations—And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgement-seat of Christ."

The remainder of the title page is of course, modern. [^22]

Pomeroy Tucker

In June [probably should be July or August], 1829, Smith the prophet, his brother Hyrum, Cowdery the scribe, and Harris the believer, applied to Mr. Egbert B. Grandin, the publisher of the Wayne Sentinel at Palmyra (now deceased), for his price to do the work of one edition of three thousand copies. Harris offered to pay or secure payment if a bargain should be made. Only a few sheets of the manuscript, as a specimen, with the title-page, were exhibited at this time, though the whole number of folios was stated, whereby could be made a calculation of the cost. Mr. Grandin at once expressed his disinclination to entertain the proposal to print at any price, believing the whole affair to be a wicked imposture and a scheme to defraud Mr. Harris, who was his friend, and whom he advised accordingly. This admonition was kindly but firmly resisted by Harris. . . .Further interviews followed, Grandin being earnestly importuned to reconsider his opinion and determination. He was assured by Harris, that if he refused to do the work, it would be procured elsewhere. And the subject was temporarily dropped, except that Grandin complied with Harris' request for an approximate estimate of the cost of the proposed edition. . . .

[After learning that arrangement had been made with Elihu F. Marshall to print the book] Mr. Grandin, on taking the advice of several discreet, fair-minded neighbors, finally reconsidered his course of policy, and entered into contract for the printing and binding of five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon at the price of $3,000, taking Harris's bond and mortgage as offered in security for payment. [^23]

Lucy Smith

[After] making a contract with . . . E. B. Grandin [and] . . . before [returning] . . . to Pennsylvania, where he had left his wife, he [Joseph Smith] received a commandment, which was, in substance, as follows:—

First, that Oliver Cowdery should transcribe the whole manuscript. Second, that he should take but one copy at a time to the office, so that if one copy should get destroyed, there would still be a copy remaining. Third, that in going to and from the office, he should always have a guard to attend him, for the purpose of protecting the manuscript. Fourth, that a guard should be kept constantly on the watch, both night and day, about the house, to protect the manuscript from malicious persons, who would infest the house for the purpose of destroying the manuscript. All these things were strictly attended to, as the Lord commanded Joseph. After giving these instructions, Joseph returned to Pennsylvania. [^24]

Pomeroy Tucker

In the beginning of the printing the Mormons professed to hold their manuscripts as "sacred," and insisted upon maintaining constant vigilance for their safety during the progress of the work, each morning carrying to the printing-office the instalment required for the day, and withdrawing the same at evening. No alteration from copy in any manner was to be made. These things were "strictly commanded," as they said. Mr. John H. Gilbert, as printer, had the chief operative trust of the typesetting and press-work of the job. After the first day's trial he found the manuscripts in so very imperfect a condition, especially in regard to grammar, that he became unwilling further to obey the "command," and so announced to Smith and his party; when, finally, upon much friendly expostulation, he was given a limited discretion in correcting, which was exercised in the particulars of syntax, orthography, punctuation, capitalizing, paragraphing, etc . . . Very soon, too—after some ten days— the constant vigilance by the Mormons over the manuscripts was relaxed by reason of the confidence they came to repose in the printers. [^25]

John H. Gilbert, Printer

Printing of the Book of MormonHCBut one copy of the manuscript was furnished the printer . . . As quick as Mr. Grandin got his type and got things all ready to commence the work, Hyrum Smith brought to the office 24 pages of manuscript on foolscap paper, closely written and legible. . . .This was about the middle of August, 1829, and the printing was completed in March, 1830. It was some weeks after this before the binder [Luther Howard] was able to deliver any copies.

Printing of the Book of MormonHCI cannot say whether the entire work of "translation" was completed at the time the printing was commenced or not, but think it was. [Before the contract was signed] a few pages of the manuscript were submitted as a specimen of the whole, and it was said there would be about 500 pages. . . .

Printing of the Book of MormonHCMartin Harris, Hyrum Smith and Oliver Cowdery, were very frequent visitors to the office during the printing of the Mormon Bible. The manuscript was supposed to be in the handwriting of Cowdery. Every Chapter, if I remember correctly, was one solid paragraph, without a punctation mark, from beginnig to end. Names of persons and places were generally capitalized, but sentences had no end . . . I punctuated it to make it read as I supposed the Author intended, and but very little punctuation was altered in proofreading. . . . [Some nights I took the manuscript] home with me and read it, and punctuated it with a lead pencil. . . .Cowdery held and looked over the manuscript when most of the proofs were read. Martin Harris once or twice, and Hyrum Smith once, Grandin supposing these men could read their own writing as well, if not better, than anyone else; and if there are any discrepancies between the Palmyra edition and the manuscript these men should be held responsible. [^26]

Lucy Smith

The work of printing still continued with litle or no interruption, until one Sunday afternoon, when Hyrum became very uneasy as to the security of the work left at the printing office, and requested Oliver to accompany him thither, to see if all was right. Oliver hesitated for a moment, as to the propriety of going on Sunday, but finally consented, and they set off together.

On arriving at the printing establishment, they found it occupied by an individual by the name of Cole, an ex-justice of the peace, who was busily employed in printing a newspaper. Hyrum was much surprised at finding him there, and remarked, "How is it, Mr. Cole, that you are so hard at work on Sunday?"

Mr. Cole replied, that he could not have the press, in the day time during the week, and was obliged to do his printing at night, and on Sundays.

Upon reading the prospectus of his paper, they found that he had agreed with his subscribers to publish one form of "Joe Smith's Gold Bible" each week, and thereby furnish them with the principal portion of the book in such a way that they would not be obliged to pay the Smiths for it. His paper was entitled, DOGBERRY PAPER ON WINTER HILL. In this, he had thrown together a parcel of the most vulgar, disgusting prose, and the meanest, and most low-lived doggrel, in juxtaposition with a portion of the Book of Mormon, which he had pilfered. At this perversion of common sense and moral feeling, Hyrum was shocked, as well as indignant at the dishonest course which Mr. Cole had taken, in order to possess himself of the work.

"Mr. Cole," said he, "what right have you to print the Book of Mormon in this manner? Do you not know that we have secured the copyright?"

"It is none of your business," answered Cole, "I have hired the press, and will print what I please, so help yourself."

"Mr. Cole," rejoined Hyrum, "that manuscript is sacred, and I forbid your printing any more of it."

"Smith," exclaimed Cole, in a tone of anger, "I don't care a d--n for you: that d--d gold bible is going into my paper, in spite of all you can do."

Hyrum endeavoured to dissuade him from his purpose, but finding him inexorable, left him to issue his paper, . . . the had already issued six or eight numbers, and by taking them ten or twenty miles into the country, had managed to keep them out of our sight.

On returning from the office, they asked my husband what course was best for them to pursue, relative to Mr. Cole. He told them that he considered it a matter with which Joseph ought to be made acquainted. Accordingly, he set out himself for Pennsylvania, and returned with Joseph the ensuing Sunday. The weather was so extremely cold, that they came near perishing before they arrived at home, nevertheless, as soon as Joseph made himself partially comfortable, he went to the printing office, where he found Cole employed, as on the Sunday previous. "How do you do, Mr. Cole," said Joseph, "You seem hard at work."

"How do you do, Mr. Smith," answered Cole, dryly.

Joseph examined his DOGBERRY PAPER, and then said firmly, "Mr. Cole, that book, [the Book of Mormon] and the right of publishing it, belongs to me, and I forbid you meddling with it any further."

At this Mr. Cole threw off his coat, rolled up his sleeves, and came towards Joseph, smacking his fists together with vengeance, and roaring out, "do you want to fight, sir? do you want to fight? I will publish just what I please. Now, if you want to fight, just come on."

Joseph could not help smiling at his grotesque appearance, for his behaviour was too ridiculous to excite indignation. "Now, Mr. Cole," said he, "you had better keep your coat on—it is cold, and I am not going to fight you, nevertheless, I assure you, sir, that you have got to stop printing my book, for I know my rights, and shall maintain them."

"Sir," bawled out the wrathy gentleman, "if you think you are the best man, just pull off your coat and try it."

"Mr. Cole," said Joseph, in a low, significant tone, "there is law, and you will find that out, if you do not understand it, but I shall not fight you, sir."

At this, the ex-justice began to cool off a little, and finally concluded to submit to an arbitration, which decided that he should stop his proceedings forthwith, so that he made us no further trouble.

Joseph, after disposing of this affair, returned to Pennsylvania, but not long to remain there, for when the inhabitants of the surrounding country perceived that the work still progressed, they became uneasy, and again called a large meeting. At this time, they gathered their forces together, far and near, and organizing themselves into a committee of the whole, they resolved, as before, never to purchase one of our books, when they should be printed. They then appointed a committee to wait upon E. B. Grandin, and inform him of the resolutions which they had passed, and also to explain to him the evil consequences which would result to him therefrom. The men who were appointed to do this errand, fulfilled their mission to the letter, and urged upon Mr. Grandin the necessity of his putting a stop to the printing, as the Smiths had lost all their property, and consequently would be unable to pay him for his work, except by the sale of the books. And this they would never be able to do, for the people would not purchase them. This information caused Mr. Grandin to stop printing, and we were again compelled to send for Joseph. These trips, back and forth, exhausted nearly all our means, yet they seemed unavoidable.

When Joseph came, he went immediately with Martin Harris to Grandin, and succeeded in removing his fears, so that he went on with the work, until the books wre printed, which was in the spring of eighteen hundred and thirty. [^27]

Pomeroy Tucker

The contract [with Grandin regarding publishing the Book of Mormon] was faithfully and satisfactorily fulfilled by both parties, and the book in its entire edition as bargained for was completed and delivered early in the summer [should be spring] of 1830 . . .

Meanwhile, Harris and his wife had separated by mutual arrangement, on account of her persistent unbelief in Mormonism and refusal to be a party to the mortgage. The family estate was divided, Harris giving her about eighty acres of the farm, with a comfortable house and other property as her share of the assets; and she occupied this property until the time of her death. The main farm and homestead, about one hundred and fifty acres of land, was retained by himself, the mortgage covering only this portion. . . . The farm mortgaged was sold by Harris in 1831 at private sale, not by foreclosure, and a sufficiency of the avails [proceeds] went to pay Grandin . . . $3,000. [^28]

Conversion and Early Missionary Activity of Solomon Chamberlain

First Missionary EffortsHCSolomon Chamberlain

First Missionary EffortsHCIn the year 1816 . . . the Lord showed me in a vision that there were no people on the earth that were right, and that faith was gone from the earth, excepting a few, and that all churches were corrupt. I further saw in the vision that he would soon raise up a church that would be after the apostolic order, that there would be in it the same powers and gifts that were in the days of Christ, and that I should live to see the day, and that there would [be] a book come forth, like unto the Bible, and the people would be guided by it, as well as the Bible . . .

First Missionary EffortsHC[About 1830] I had occasion to go on a visit into Upper Canada . . . When the boat came to Palmyra, I felt as if some Genii or good spirit told me to leave the boat. This was a few miles from where the record (Book of Mormon) was found. After leaving the boat, the Spirit manifested to me to travel a south course. I did so for about 3 miles. I had not as yet heard of the Gold Bible (so called) nor any of the Smith family. I was a stranger in that part of the country. . . .About sundown . . . my guide directed me to put up for the night, which I did to a farm house. In the morning the people of the house asked me if I had heard of the Gold Bible; when they said Gold Bible, there was a power like electricity [that] went from the top of my head to the end of my toes. This was the first time I ever heard of the Gold Bible. I was now within a half a mile of the Smith family where Joseph [had] lived. From the time I left the boat until now, I was wholly led by the Spirit or my Genii. I soon made my way across lots to Father Smiths and found Hyrum walking the floor as I entered the door. I said, "Peace be to this house."

First Missionary EffortsHCHe [Hyrum Smith] looked at me as one astonished and said, "I hope it will be peace."

First Missionary EffortsHCI then said, "Is there anyone here that believes in visions and revelations?"

First Missionary EffortsHCHe said, "Yes, we are a visionary house."

First Missionary EffortsHCI said, "Then I will give you one of my pamphlets, which was visonary and of my own experience."

First Missionary EffortsHCThey then called the people together which consisted of 5 or 6 men who were out at the door. Father Smith was one and some of the Whitmer's. They then sat down and read my pamphlet. Hyrum read first, but was so affected, he could not read it. He then gave it to a man, which I learned was Christian Whitmer. He finished reading it. I then opened my mouth and began to preach to them in the words that the angel had made known to me in the vision, that all churches and denominations on the earth had become corrupt and [that] no church of God [was] on the earth but that he would shortly raise up a church that would never be confounded or brought down, and be like unto the apostolic church. They wondered greatly who had been telling me these things, for said they, we have the same things written down in our house, taken from the Gold record that you are preaching to us . . .

First Missionary EffortsHCI then said, "If you are a visionary house, I wish you would make known some of your discoveries, for I think I can bear them."

First Missionary EffortsHCThey then made known to me that they had obtained a gold record and [had] just finished translating it. Now the Lord revealed to me by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost that this was the work I had been looking for. I stayed 2 days and they instructed me in the manuscripts of the Book of Mormon.

First Missionary EffortsHCAfter I had been there 2 days, I went with Hyrum and some others to Palmyra printing office where they began to print the Book of Mormon, and as soon as they had printed 64 pages, I took them with their leave and pursued my journey to Canada, and I preached all that I knew concerning Mormonism to all, both high and low, rich and poor, and thus you see this was the first, that ever printed Mormonism was preached to this generation. I did not see anyone in traveling 7 or 800 miles that had ever heard of the Gold Bible (so called). I exhorted all people to prepare for the great work of God that was now about to come forth. [^29]

Organization of the Church

Joseph Smith

[After receiving the priesthood,] we obtained of Him the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to His will and commandment, we should proceed to organize His Church once more here upon the earth. [^30]

[A Revelation on Church Government (see D&C Section 20:1-17)]

The rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh, it being regularly organized and established agreeable to the laws of our country, by the will and commandments of God, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is called April—Which commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jr., who was called of God, and ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this church; and to Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the second elder of this church, and ordained under his hand; and this according to the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory, both now and forever. Amen. After it was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the world; but after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God ministered unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and white above all other whiteness; and gave unto him commandments which inspired him; and gave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon; which contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also; which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them—proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever.

The Formal Organization: April 6, 1830

Joseph Smith

Organization of the ChurchHCWhilst the Book of Mormon was in the hands of the printer, we still continued to bear testimony and give information, as far as we had opportunity; and also made known to our brethren, that we had received commandment to organize the Church, and accordingly we met together for that purpose, at the house of the above mentioned Mr. [Peter] Whitmer, [Sr.] (being six in number) on Tuesday, the sixth day of April, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and thirty.

Organization of the ChurchHCHaving opened the meeting by solemn prayer to our Heavenly Father we proceeded (according to previous commandment) to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God, and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a church according to said commandment which we had received. To these they consented by an unanimous vote. I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery and ordained him an elder of the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints;" after which he ordained me also to the office of an elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord and rejoiced exceedingly. Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment: [^31]

Organization of the ChurchHCRevelation to Joseph Smith, Jr. given April 6, 1830. [See D&C Section 21:1-5, 9-12.]

Organization of the ChurchHCBehold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ, being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to build it up unto the most holy faith. Which church was organized and established in the year of your Lord eighteen hundred and thirty, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is called April.

Organization of the ChurchHCWherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; for his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. . . .

Organization of the ChurchHCFor, behold, I will bless all those who labor in my vineyard with a mighty blessing, and they shall believe on his words, which are given him through me by the Comforter, which manifesteth that Jesus was crucified by sinful men for the sins of the world, yea, for the remission of sins unto the contrite heart. Wherefore it behooveth me that he [Joseph Smith] should be ordained by you, Oliver Cowdery mine apostle; this being an ordinance unto you, that you are an elder under his hand, he being the first unto you, that you might be an elder unto this church of Christ, bearing my name—And the first preacher of this church unto the church, and before the world, yea, before the Gentiles; yea, and thus saith the Lord God, lo, lo! to the Jews also. Amen.

Organization of the ChurchHCWe now proceeded to call out and ordain some others of the brethren to different offices of the priesthood, according as the Spirit manifested unto us; and after a happy time spent in witnessing and feeling for ourselves the powers and the blessings of the Holy Ghost, through the grace of God bestowed upon us, we dismissed with the pleasing knowledge that we were now individually members of, and acknowledged of God, "The Church of Jesus Christ," organized in accordance with commandments and revelations given by him to ourselves in the last days, as well as according to the order of the Church as recorded in the New Testament.

Organization of the ChurchHCSeveral persons who had attended the above meeting and got convinced of the truth, came forward shortly after, and were received into the Church; among the rest, my own father and mother were baptized, to my great joy and consolation; and about the same time Martin Harris and A. [Orrin Porter] Rockwell. [^32]

Manifestations of the Power of God

Joseph Smith

Organization of the ChurchHC[Following the organization of the Church, others] were called and ordained by the Spirit of revelation and prophecy, and began to preach as the Spirit gave them utterance, and though weak, yet were they strengthened by the power of God, and many were brought to repentance, were immersed in the water, and were filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. They saw visions and prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed by the laying on of hands. From that time the work rolled forth with astonishing rapidity. [^33]

The First Miracle

Joseph Smith

Other Important Events in New YorkHCDuring this month of April, I went on a visit to the residence of Mr. Joseph Knight, of Colesville, Broome County, New York, with whom and his family I had been previously acquainted, and of whose name I have above mentioned as having been so kind and thoughtful towards us, while translating the Book of Mormon. Mr. Knight and his family were Universalists, but were willing to reason with me upon my religious views and were as usual friendly and hospitable. We held several meetings in the neighborhood; we had many friends and some enemies. Our meetings were well attended, and many began to pray fervently to Almighty God that he would give them wisdom to understand the truth. Amongst those who attended our meetings regularly was Newel Knight, son to Joseph Knight. He and I had many serious conversations on the important subject of man's eternal salvation. We had got into the habit of praying much at our meetings, and Newel had said that he would try and take up his cross and pray vocally during meeting; but when we again met together, he rather excused himself; I tried to prevail upon him making use of the figure, supposing that he should get into a mud-hole would he not try to help himself out? And [I said] that we were willing now to help him out of the mud-hole. He replied that provided he had got into a mud-hole through carelessness, he would rather wait and get out himself than have others help him; and so he would wait until he should get into the woods by himself, and there he would pray. Accordingly, he deferred praying until next morning, when he retired into the woods; where (according to his own account afterwards) he made several attempts to pray but could scarcely do so, feeling that he had not done his duty, but that he should have prayed in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and bring me to him. I went and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very strange manner. His visage and limbs distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment and tossed about most fearfully.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCHis situation was soon made known to his neighbors and relatives, and in a short time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to witness the scene. After he had thus suffered for a time, I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me, and, with great earnestness, requested of me that I should cast the devil out of him, saying that he knew he was in him and that he also knew that I could cast him out. I replied, "If you know that I can it shall be done;" and then almost unconsciously I rebuked the devil and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from him; when immediately Newel spoke out and said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThis was the first miracle which was done in this Church, or by any member of it, and it was done not by man nor by the power of man, but it was done by God, and by the power of godliness; therefore, let the honor and the praise, the dominion and the glory be ascribed to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. [^34]

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe scene was now entirely changed, for as soon as the devil had departed from our friend, his countenance became natural, his distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the spirit of the Lord descended upon him, and the visions of eternity were opened to his view.—He afterwards related his experience as follows:

Other Important Events in New YorkHCI now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting upon me, and immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation, insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that the spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAll this was witnessed by many, to their great astonishment and satisfaction, when they saw the devil thus cast out, and the power of God and his Holy Spirit thus made manifest. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily weakness was such that we were obliged to lay him upon his bed and wait upon him for some time. As may be expected, such a scene as this contributed much to make believers of those who witnessed it, and finally the greater part of them became members of the Church.

Other Important Events in New YorkHCSoon after this occurrence I returned to Fayette, Seneca County. The Book of Mormon, ('The stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim') [Ezekiel 37:16-20.] had now been published for some time, and as the ancient prophet had predicted of it: "It was accounted as a strange thing." No small stir was created by its appearance. Great opposition and much persecution followed the believers of its authenticity; but it had now come to pass that truth had sprung out of the earth; and righteousness had looked down from heaven [Psalm 85:11.]—so we feared not our opponents, knowing that we had both truth and righteousness on our side; that we had both the Father and the Son, because we had the doctrines of Christ, and abided in them; and therefore we continued to preach, and to give information to all who were willing to hear. [^35]

Confirmation of the First Miracle and Other Manifestations of God's Power

Newel Knight

Other Important Events in New YorkHC[Shortly after the first miracle occurred, Newel Knight was called to testify in court concerning this incident. Joseph Smith had been arrested in Colesville, New York, probably for disturbing the peace, and Newel Knight recorded in his autobiography his response to questions he was asked during this trial by one of the attorneys.]

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQuestion.—"Did the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., cast the devil out of you?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCAnswer.—"No, sir."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQuestion.—"Why, have you not had the devil cast out of you?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCA.—"Yes, sir."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQ.—"And had not Joseph Smith some hand in it being done?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCA.—"Yes, sir."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQ.—"And did he not cast him out of you?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCA.—"No, sir, it was done by the power of God, and Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of God on this occaion. He commanded him to come out of me in the name of Jesus Christ."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQ.—"And are you sure it was the devil?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCA.—"Yes, sir."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQ.—"Did you see him after he was cast out of you?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHCA.—"Yes, sir, I saw him."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCQ.—"Pray, what did he look like?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHC(Here one of the lawyers on the part of the defense told me I need not answer that question). I replied:

Other Important Events in New YorkHC"I believe, I need not answer you that question, but I will do it if I am allowed to ask you one, and you can answer it. Do you, Mr. Seymour, understand the things of the Spirit?"

Other Important Events in New YorkHC"No," answered Mr. Seymour, "I do not pretend to such big things. "

Other Important Events in New YorkHC"Well, then," I replied, "it will be of no use for me to tell you what the devil looked like, for it was a spiritual sight and spiritually discerned, and, of course, you would not understand it were I to tell you of it."

Other Important Events in New YorkHCThe lawyer dropped his head, while the loud laugh of the audience proclaimed his discomfiture. . . . [^36]

[The recipient of the first miracle, Newel Knight, received the priesthood shortly after being baptized and confirmed and after receiving this authority became an instrument in God's hand in performing miracles. [^37] The following selections by Newel Knight illustrate that the power which had been bestowed upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery was in turn bestowed upon others.]

After the close of the meeting [held on October 14, 1830] Brother Hyrum [Smith] and myself intended going to spend the night with one of the brethren who lived a short distance from my uncle's, but as were ready to start, the Spirit whispered to me that I should tarry there at my uncle's all night. I did so, and retired to bed, where I rested till midnight when my uncle came to my room and desired me to get up, saying he feared his wife [Electa Peck] was about to die. This surprised me, as she was quite well when I went to bed. I dressed myself, and having asked my Heavenly Father to give me wisdom, and power to rebuke the destroyer from the habitation, I went to the room where my aunt lay. She was in a most fearful condition; her eyes were closed, and she appeared to be in the last agonies of death. Presently she opened her eyes, and bade her husband and children farewell, telling them she must die for the redemption of this generation, as Jesus Christ had died for the generation in His day. Her whole frame shook, and she appeared to be racked with the most exquisite pain and torment; her hands and feet were cold, and the blood setled in her fingers; while her husband and children stood weeping around her bed. This was a scene new to me, and I felt she was suffering under the power of Satan—that was the same spirit that had bound and overpowered me at the time Joseph cast him out. I now cried unto the Lord for strength and wisdom that we might prevail over this wicked and delusive power. Just at this time my uncle cried aloud to me saying: "O, Brother Newel, cannot something be done?" I felt the Holy Spirit of the Lord rest upon me as he said this, and I immediately stepped forward, took her by the hand, and commanded Satan, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to depart. I told my aunt she would not die, but that she should live to see her children grown up; that Satan had deceived her, and put a lying spirit in her mouth; that Christ had made the only and last atonement for all who would believe on His name; and that there should be no more shedding of blood for sin. She believed and stretched forth her hand, and cried unto me, and Satan departed from her. . . . [^38]

[In April 1831, during a migration of Latter-day Saints from New York to Ohio] my aunt, Electa Peck, fell and broke her shoulder in a most shocking manner; a surgeon was called to relieve her sufferings, which were very great. My aunt dreamed that I returned and laid my hands upon her, prayed for her, and she was made whole, and pursued her journey with the company. She related this dream to the surgeon who replied, "If you are able to travel in many weeks it will be a miracle, and I will be a Mormon too."

I arrived at the place, where the company had stopped, late in the evening; but, on learning of the accident, I went to see my aunt, and immediately on my entering the room she said, "O, Brother Newel, if you will lay your hands upon me, I shall be well and able to go on the journey with you." I stepped up to the bed, and, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, rebuked the pain with which she was suffering, and commanded her to be made whole; and it was done; for the next morning she arose, dressed herself, and pursued the journey with us. [^39]

Summary

Diedrich Willers, German Reformed Minister of Fayette

Since last year [1830] all of the neighboring congregations have been frequently and earnestly warned to beware of this so-called Golden Book [Book of Mormon] and not to buy any. The above-named Smith, however, found his followers. . . . Already in this region more [copies of the Book of Mormon] have been sold than one would have expected. . . .The author has already been frequently challenged to demonstrate his inspiration, as did the Apostles, through genuine miracles. Naturally he cannot perform such. His followers, however, claim that through their preachers devils have been cast out recently. . . .

The effects of this book (Book of Mormon) already extend upon members of various Christian persuasions. Some members of the Lutheran, Reformed, Presbyterian, and Baptist congregations have given this book their approval, have been baptized by immersion, and formed their own sect. Because they baptize by immersion they are winning over many members of the Baptist Church (including General as well as Particular Baptists), first because of their teachings about the universal grace of God and lastly because of their agreement in attitude toward the proper subject of holy baptism.

This upstart sect calls itself The True Followers of Christ; however, because they believe in the Book of Mormon, they bear the name Mormonites. For the past several Sundays many people of both sexes have been immersed by them, and so many during the week that their numbers in the region hereabouts may amount to at least 100 persons. They have their own preachers whom I know, Oliver Cowdery by description and David Whitmer (the so-called Angel-viewer) personally. Their sect, however, numbers still other preachers, unknown to me. [^40]

Conclusions

Orson Pratt

In the year 1830, a large edition of the "Book of Mormon" first appeared in print. And, as some began to peruse its sacred pages, the spirit of the Lord bore record to them that it was true; and they were obedient to this requirements, by coming forth, humbly repenting before the Lord, and being immersed in water, for the remission of sins, after which, by the commandment of God hands were laid upon them in the name of the Lord, for the gift of the Holy Spirit.

And on the sixth of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty, the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" was organized in the town of Fayette, Seneca County, State of New York, North America. Some few were called and ordained by the spirit of revelation and prophecy, and began to preach and bear testimony, as the spirit gave them utterance; and, although they were the weak things of the earth, yet they were strengthened by the Holy Ghost, and gave forth their testimony in great power, by which means many were brought to repentance, and came forward with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and were immersed in water confessing their sins, and were filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; and saw visions and prophesied. Devils were cast out, and the sick were healed by the prayer of faith, and the laying on of hands. Thus was the word confirmed unto the faithful by the signs following. Thus the Lord raised up witnesses to bear testimony of his name, and lay the foundation of his kingdom in the last days. And thus the hearts of the saints were comforted and filled with great joy. [^41]

Lucy Smith

By searching the prophecies contained in the Old Testament we find . . . that God will set his hand the second time to recover his people the house of Israel. He has now commenced that work; he hath sent forth a revelation in these last days, and this revelation is called the Book of Mormon. It contains the fulness of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and is sent forth to show unto the remnant of the house of Israel what great things God hath done for their fathers; that they may know of the covenants of the Lord and that they are not cast off forever; and also of the convincing of both Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God and manifests himself unto all nations. . . .

There are many in these parts who profess to know God and to be his humble followers, but when this thing [the Book of Mormon] is offered them they say we have Bible enough and want no more; but such are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity and understand not the Bible which they love, for all the holy prophets spoke plainly of the gathering of the house of Israel and of the coming forth of this work, and God says he will give us line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; there are more nations than one and if God would not reveal himself alike unto all nations he would be partial. We need not suppose that we have all his words in our Bible, neither need we think that because he has spoken once he cannot speak again.

God, seeing our situation, had compassion upon us and has sent us this revelation that the stumbling block might be removed, that whosoever would might enter. He [has] now established his Church upon the earth as it was in the days of the Apostles. He is now sending forth his servants for to prune his vineyard for the last time . . . the work spreading very fast . . .

I must now now close my letter by entreating you [her brother, Solomon Mack] as one that feels for your soul, to seek an interest in Christ and when you have an opportunity to receive this work do not reject it, but read it and examine for yourselves. [^42]

* * * * * *

Eyewitness accounts of the restoration form a powerful array of evidence supporting the reliability of Joseph Smith's testimony concerning the restoration of the everlasting gospel. The Book of Mormon also is a unique witness of the restoration, and is available for careful examination and prayerful study. Although there are many external evidences of the divine calling of Joseph Smith and of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, evidences do not produce spiritual conversions.

The New Testament declares that "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Corinthians 12:3.) As Joseph Smith's sister, Katharine Salisbury, read the Book of Mormon she was convinced that without God's guidance her brother could not have brought forth such a work. Nevertheless, her genuine conversion occurred as she read that book with a prayerful heart. "I can testify to the fact of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon," she affirmed, "and also to its truth, and the truth of the everlasting gospel as contained therein . . . Many times when I have read its sacred pages, I have wept like a child, while the Spirit has borne witness with my spirit of its truth." [^43]

While living in Illinois in 1831, Charles C. Rich learned from one of his friends that a new book had been translated from plates of gold found in New York state "by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost", and that a new church had been organized under the direction of a latter-day Prophet. When he first learned about this new book, he said that a peculiar sensation penetrated his whole system and he was filled with joy. At the time he did not understand why he had received such an impression, but later said that he knew it was the "spirit of God testifying" to him "of the truth of the Prophet and the Book of Mormon." [^44] In August of that year, two Mormon missionaries preached in his neighborhood and gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon. Recalling some of his reflections while investigating the restored Church, Charles C. Rich declared:

In the first instructions we received from the Elders, we were told we must repent of our sins and be baptized, in order to receive the Holy Spirit, and that we had no claims upon the Lord for his Spirit, until we had complied with the requirements made of us. I remember very well my feelings upon this subject before I obeyed the Gospel. I studied carefully, anxiously, and prayerfully, that I might know if it were the Church of Jesus Christ. I did not want to run any risk in the matter, and remain in uncertainty. I was willing to do anything that would give me a knowledge of the truth. I was willing to receive it through the ministration of an angel, through direct revelation, or by any other way, but I did not want to be deceived. Every time I reflected carefully upon the subject, I came to this point—the conditions upon which the promises have been made are, repentance, baptism, and imposition of hands. The spirit would then whisper, you have not been baptized, you have not obeyed the Gospel; but when I had complied with the law, then I had a perfect claim to the blesings and the promises, and did receive them, and obtained a perfect knowledge of the truth, and could then bear a testimony of it to all the world. [^45]

On April 1, 1832, Charles C. Rich, along with his father, mother, and sixteen year old sister, Minerva, was baptized and confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^46]

On December 29, 1833, Wilford Woodruff, a farmer living in upstate New York, listened as two traveling missionaries unfolded to him the message of the restoration. "The spirit of the Lord rested upon me," he wrote and bore witness of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Immediately after securing a copy of this new witness for Christ he commenced reading, and as he studied the spirit again bore witness that the record which it contained was true." Two days after meeting the Mormon elders, he and his brother, Azmon, and two young ladies who had been healed the day before, stepped from a three foot bank of snow into a body of icy water and were baptized. [^47]

Another leader who was a close associate of the Prophet and was converted after reading the Book of Mormon, unfolded to others a key which would enable inquirers to gain a witness of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon and the divine calling of Joseph Smith. In a sermon delivered by Orson Pratt, this missionary, who probably baptized more individuals than any other Latter-day Saint, declared

[Although] God condescended to raise up . . . twelve witnesses . . . immediately before he organized this Church . . . there [are] other witnesses and evidences concerning the correctness and divinity of this book [Book of Mormon] that are far greater than those I have named. There is a promise to all the human family, that is far better than the ministrations of angels to others. . . .The very message itself in the book, and in the New Testament, and in the modern revelations that are given through the prophet, told me, told you, told all the people upon the face of this earth, how they also might obtain a knowledge of the truth of this Book of Mormon and of this work. How? . . . The Lord has promised that . . . if the people of all nations of the earth will repent, turn unto him and obey his commandments that they should receive the Holy Ghost. Will that give us a knowledge as clear, as definite, as pointed as could be revealed by the ministration of angels? Yes . . . If I would . . . exercise . . . faith, . . . would obey the commandments, would be obedient to the principles, and then I received for myself the testimony, I should . . . [not] be dependent upon David Whitmer, Martin Harris nor Oliver Cowdry, Joseph Smith, nor any of the twelve witnesses that saw the plates, nor any other man. . . . I could then say, . . . "Lord, . . . thou hast fulfilled thy promise" . . . [And] from that [time] forth, I could be a witness myself. [^48]
