Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

APPENDIX D

Letters of Charles Anthon

The first of these letters describing Martin Harris' conversation with Charles Anthon was published in E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unvailed (1834), pp. 270-72 and the second in John A. Clark's Gleanings by the Way (1842), pp. 233, 237-38. These letters are reproduced in this appendix in parallel columns to aid the reader in identifying their similarities and differences. Contradictory statements have been placed in italics.

Anthon's Letter to E. D. Howe Anthon's Letter to Rev. T. W. Coit February 17, 1834 April 3, 1841 Dear Sir: Rev. and Dear Sir: I receive this morning your favor I have often heard that the of the 9th instant, and lose no time Mormons claimed me for an in making a reply. The whole story auxiliary, but as no one, until the about my having pronounced the present time has ever requested Mormonite inscription to be from me a statement in writing, I "reformed Egyptian hieroglyphics" hve not deemed it worthwhile to is perfectly false. say anything publicly on the subject. What I do know of the sect relates to some of the early movements; and as the facts may amuse you, while they will furnish a satisfactory answer to the charge of my being a Mormon proselyte, I proceed to lay them before you in detail.

Some years ago, a plain, and Many years ago, the precise date I apparently simple-hearted farmer, do not now recollect, a plain called upon me with a note from looking countryman called upon Dr. Mitchell of our city, now me with a letter from Dr. Samuel deceased, requesting me to L. Mitchell requesting me to decypher, if possible, a paper, examine, and give my opinion which the farmer would hand me, upon, a certain paper, marked with and which Dr. M. confessed he had various characters which the been unable to understand. Upon Doctor confessed he could not examining the paper in question, I decypher, and which the bearer of soon came to the conclusion that it the note was very anxious to have was all a trick, perhaps a hoax. explained. A very brief examination of the paper convinced me that it was a mere hoax, and a very clumsy one, too. The characters were arranged in colunmns, like the Chinese mode of writing, and presented the most singular medley that I ever beheld. Greek, Hebrew, and all sorts of letters, more or less distorted, either through unskillfullness or from actual design, were intermingled with sundry delineations of half moons, stars, and other natural objects, and the whole ended in a rude representation of the Mexican zodiac. The conclusion was irresistible, that some cunning fellow had prepared the paper in question, for the purpose of imposing upon he who brought it, When I asked the person, who and I told the man so without any brought it, how he obtained the hesitation. He then proceeded to writing, he gave me, as far as I can give me a history of the whole now recollect, the following affair, which convinced me that he account: had fallen into the hands of some sharper, while it left me in great astonishment at his own simplicity.

A "gold book," consisting of a The countryman told me that a number of plates of gold, fastened gold book had been recently dug together in the shape of a book by up in the western or northern part wires of the same metal, had been (I forget which), of our state and dug up in the northern part of the he described this book as state of New York, consisting of many gold plates, like leaves, secured by a gold wire passing through the edge of each, just as the leaves of a book are sewed together, and presented in this way the appearance of a volume. Each plate, according to him, was inscribed with unknown characters, and the paper which he handed me, a transcript of one of these pages. On my asking him by whom the copy was made, he and along with the book an gravely stated, that along with the enormous pair of "gold golden book there had been dug up spectacles"! These spectacles were a very large pair of spectacles! so so large, that, if a person attempted large in fact that if a man were to to look through them, his two eyes hold them in front of his face, his would have to be turned towards two eyes would the remaining part one of the glasses merely, the of the spectacles would project a spectacles in question being considerable distance sideways! altogether too large for the breadth These spectacles possessed, it of the human face. Whoever seems a very valuable property, of examined the plates through the enabling any one who looked spectacles, was enabled not only to through them, (or rather through read them but to fully understand one of the lenses,) not only to their meaning. decypher the characters on the plates, but also to comprehend their exact meaning, and be able to translate them! My informant assured me that this curious property of the spectacles had been actually tested, and found to be true.

All this knowledge, however, was confined at that time to a young man, who had the trunk containing the book and spectacles in his sole possession. This young man was A young man, it seems, had been placed behind a curtain, in the placed in the garret of a farmhouse, garret of a farm house, and, being with a curtain before him, and thus concealed from view, put on having fastened the spectacles to the spectacles occasionally, or his head had read several pages in rather, looked through one of the the golden book, and glasses, decyphered the characters communicated their contents in in the book, and, having committed writing to certain persons stationed some of them to paper, handed on the outside of the curtain. copies from behind the curtain, to those who stood on the outside. Not a word, however, was said about the plates having been decyphered "by the gift of God." Every thing, in this way, was effected by the large pair of spectacles. He had also copied off one page of the book in the original character, which he had in like manner handed over to those who were separated from him by the curtain, and this copy was the paper which the countryman had brought with him. As the golden book was said The farmer added, that he had been to contain very great truths, and requested to contribute a sum of most important revelations of a money towards the publication of religious nature, a strong desire the "golden book," the contents of had been expressed by several which would, as he had been persons in the countryman's assured, produce an entire change neighborhood, to have the whole in the world and save it from ruin. work translated and published. A So urgent had been these proposition had accordingly been solicitations, that he intended made to my informant, to sell his selling his farm and handing over farm, and apply the proceeds to the the amount received to those who printing of the golden book, and wished to publish the plates. the golden plates were to be left with him as a security until he should be reimbursed by the sale of the work. To convince him more clearly that there was no risk

whatever in the matter, and that the work was actually what it claimed to be, he was told to take As a last precautionary step, the paper which purported to be a however, he had resolved to come copy of one of the pages of the to New York, and obtain the book, to the city of New York, and opinion of the learned about the submit it to the learned in that meaning of the paper which he quarter, who would soon dispel all brought with him, and which had his doubts, and satisfy him as to the been given him as a part of the perfect safety of the investment. contents of the book, although no translation had been furnished at that time by the young man with the spectacles. As Dr. Mitchell was our "Magnus Apollo" in those days, the man called first upon him: but the Doctor, evidently suspecting some trick, declined giving any opinion about the matter, and sent the countryman down to the college, to see, in all probability, what the "learned pundits" in that place would make of the affair. On hearing this odd story, I On my telling the bearer of the changed my opinion about the paper that an attempt had been paper, and, instead of viewing it made to impose on him, and any longer as a hoax upon the defraud him of his property, learned, I began to regard it as part of a scheme to cheat the farmer of his money, and I communicated my suspicions to him, warning him to beware of rogues. He requested an he requested me to give him my opinion from me in writing, which opinion in writing about the paper of course I declined giving, which he had shown to me. I did so without any hesitation, partly for the man's sake, and partly to let the individual "behind the curtain" see that his trick was discovered. The import of what I wrote was, as far as I can now recollect, simply this, that the marks in the paper appeared to be merely an imitation of various alphabetical characters, and had, in my opinion, no meaning at all connected with them.

and he then took his leave carrying The countrman then took his leave, the paper with him. with many thanks, and with the express declaration that he would in no shape part with his farm or embark in the speculation of printing the golden book. This paper was in fact a singular scrawl. It consisted of all kinds of crooked characters disposed in columns, and had evidently been prepared by some person who had before him at the time a book containing various alphabets. Greek and Hebrew letters, crosses and flourishes, Roman letters inverted or placed side-ways, were arranged in perpendicular columns, and the whole ended in a rude delineation of a circle divided into various compartments, decked with various strange marks, and evidently copied after the Mexican Calendar given by Humboldt, but copied in such a way as not to betray the source whence it was derived. I am thus particular as to the contents of the paper, inasmuch as I have frequently conversed with my friends on the subject, since the Mormonite excitement began, and well remember that the paper contained anything else but "Egyptian hieroglyphics."

The matter rested here for a considerable time, until one day, when I had ceased entirely to think of the countryman and his paper, this same individual, to my great Some time after, the same farmer surprise, paid me a second visit. He paid me a second visit. He brought now brought with him a with him the golden book in print, duodecimo volume, which he said and offered it to me for sale. I was a translation into English of declined purchasing. the "Golden Bible." He also stated, that notwithstanding his original determination not to sell his farm, he had been induced eventually to do so, and apply the money to the publication of the book, and had received the golden plates as a security for repayment. He begged He then asked permission to leave my acceptance of the volume, the book with me for examination. assuring me that it would be found to be extremely interesting, and that it was already "making a great noise" in the upper part of the state. Suspecting now that some serious trick was on foot, and that my plain looking visitor might be in fact a very cunning fellow I I declined receiving it, declined his present, and merely contended myself with a slight examination of the volume while he stood by. The more I declined although his manner became receiving it however, the more strangely urgent. urgent the man became in offering the book, until at last I told him plainly, that if he left the volume, as he said he intended to do, I should most assuredly throw it after him as he departed. I then I adverted once more to the asked him how he could be so roguery which had been in my foolish as to sell his farm and opinion practiced upon him, and engage in this affair; and requested asked him what had become of the him to tell me if the plates were plates. really of gold. In answer to this latter inquiry, he said that he had never seen the plates themselves, which were carefully locked up in a He informed me that they were in a trunk, but that he had the trunk in trunk with the large pair of his possession. spectacles.

I advised him by all means to open I advised him to go to a magistrate the trunk and examine its contents, and have the trunk examined. and if the plates proved to be of gold, which I did not believe at all, to sell them immediately. His reply He said the "curse of God" would was, that if he opened the trunk, come upon him should he do this. the "curse of heaven would On my pressing him, however, to descend upon him and his pursue the course which I had children." "However," added he, "I recommended, he told me that he will agree to open it, provided you would open the trunk if I would will take the 'curse of Heaven' take the "curse of God" upon upon yourself for having advised myself. I replied that I would do so me to the step." I told him I was with the greatest willingness, and perfectly willing to do so, and would incur every risk of that begged he would hasten home and nature, provided I could only examine the trunk, for he would extricate him from the grasp of find he had been cheated. He rogues. He then left me. promised to do as I recommended, and left me, taking his book with him. I have never seen him since. I have thus given you a full Such is a plain statement of all that statement of all that I know I know respecting the Mormons. respecting the origin of My impression now is, that the Mormonism, plain-looking countryman was none other than the prophet Smith himself, who assumed an appearance of great simplicity in order to entrap me, if possible, into some recommendation of his book. That the prophet aided me by his inspiration, in interpreting the volume, is only of the many amusing falsehoods which the Mormonites utter relative to my participation in their doctrines. Of these doctrines I know nothing whatever, nor have I ever heard a single discourse from any of their preachers, although I have often felt a strong curiosity to become an

auditor, since my friends tell me that they frequently name me in their sermons, and even go so far to say that I am alluded to in the prophecies of Scripture! and must beg of you, as a personal If what I have written shall prove favor, to publish this letter of any service in opening the eyes immediately, should you find my of some of their deluded followers name mentioned again by these to the real designs of those who wretched fanatics. profess to be the apostles of Mormonism, it will afford me satifisation, equalled, I have no doubt only by that which yourself will feel on this subject. Yours respectfully, I remain very respectfully and truly your friend, Signed CHAS. ANTHON Signed CHAS. ANTHON
