Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration ( 1983)

APPENDIX F

An Interview with David Whitmer

In 1881 David Whitmer was interviewed by a reporter of the Kansas City Journal. After an article was published in that paper, based on this interview, David Whitmer identified what he considered to be the major errors in the article and his corrections were published in a subsequent issue. In a letter written by Whitmer on November 18, 1881, Whitmer asserted that the article with the corrections was "substantially correct." The following are excerpts from that article as it was published on June 5, 1881. Corrections that appeared on June 19, 1981, and those noted in his letter of November 18 have been inserted in brackets. The importance of this selection, therefore, is that it was written by a competent non-Mormon reporter; and after David Whitmer had an opportunity to correct the major mistakes in the article, he verified the general accuracy of the report. See Kansas City Journal, June 5 1881; David Whitmer to S. T. Mouch, November 18, 1881, Whitmer Papers, typescript, RLDS Church Library Archives; MS (1881):421-23, 437-39.

MORMONISM.

Authentic Account of the Origin of This Sect from One of the Patriarchs.

Discovery of the Plates, And the Translation of the Book of Mormon—

I first heard of what is now termed Mormonism in the year 1828. I made a business trip to Palmyra, N. Y., and while there stopped with one Oliver Cowdery. A great many people in the neighborhood were talking about the finding of certain golden plates by one Joseph Smith, jr., a young man of that neighborhood. Cowdery and I, as well as others, talked about the matter, but at that time I paid but little attention to it, supposing it to be only the idle gossip of the neighborhood. Cowdery said he was acquainted with the Smith family, and he believed that there must be some truth in the story of the plates, and that he intended to investigate the matter. I had conversations with several young men who said that Joseph Smith had certainly golden plates and that before he attained them he had promised to share with them, but had not done so and they were very much incensed with him. Said I, 'how do you know that Joe Smith has the plates?' They replied, 'we saw the plates in the hill that he took them out of just as he described it to us before he obtained them.' [place (not the plates) from which the plates were taken just as he described them to us before he obtained them.] These parties were so positive in their statements that I began to believe there must be some foundation for the stories then in circulation all over that part of the country. I had never seen any of the Smith family up to that time, and I began to inquire of the people in regard to them, and learned that one night during the year 1827 Joseph Smith, jr., had a vision, and an angel of God appeared to him and told him where certain plates were to be found, and pointed out the spot to him, and that shortly afterward he went to that piece and found the plates which were still in his possession. After thinking over the matter for a long time, and talking with Cowdery, who also gave me a history of the finding of the plates, I went home, and after several months Cowdery told me he was going to Harmony, Pa.—whither Joseph Smith had gone with the plates on account of persecutions of his neighbors—and see him about the matter. He did go and on his way stopped at my father's house and told me that as soon as he found out anything either

TRUTH OR UNTRUTH

he would let me know. After he got there he became acquainted with Joseph Smith, and shortly after, wrote to me telling me that he was convinced that Smith had the records and that he (Smith) had told him that it was the will of heaven that he (Cowdery) should be his scribe to assist in the translation of the plates. He went on and Joseph translated from the plates and he wrote it down. Shortly after this Cowdery wrote me another letter in which he gave me a few lines of what they had translated, and he assured me that he knew of a certainty that he had a record of a people that inhabited this continent, and that the plates they were translating gave a complete history of these people. When Cowdery wrote me these things and told me that he had revealed knowledge concerning the truth of them I showed these letters to my parents, and brothers and sisters. Soon after I received another letter from Cowdery, telling me to come down to Pennsylvania and bring him and Joseph to my father's house, giving me a reason therefore that they had received a commandment from God to that effect. I went down to Harmony, and found everything just as they [Cowdery] had written me. The next day after I got there they packed up the plates [did not say "packed up the plates"] and we proceeded on our journey to my father's house where we arrived in due time, and the day after we [he, Smith] commenced upon the translation of the remainder of the plates. I, as well as all of my father's family, Smith's wife, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris were present during the translation. [I did not wish to be understood as saying that those referred to as being present were all the time in the immediate presence of the translator, but were at the place and saw how the translation was conducted.] [^1] . . .

When Joseph first received the plates he translated 116 pages of the book of 'Lehi,' with Martin Harris as scribe. When this had been completed they rested for a time, and Harris wanted to take the manuscript home with him to show to his family and friends. To this Joseph demurred, but finally

ASKED THE LORD

if Harris might be allowed to take it. The answer was 'no.' Harris teased Joseph for a long time and finally persuaded him to ask the Lord a second time, pledging himself to be responsible for its safe keeping. To this second inquiry the Lord told Joseph Harris he might take the manuscript, which he did, showing it to a great many people, but through some carelessness allowed it to be stolen from him. This incurred the Lord's displeasure, and he sent an angel to Joseph demanding the plates, and until Joseph had thoroughly repented of his transgressions would not allow him to have the use of them again. When Joseph was again allowed to resume the translation the plates were taken care of by a messenger of God, and when Joseph wanted to see the plates this messenger was always at hand. The 116 pages of the book of 'Lehi' which were stolen were never recovered nor would the Lord permit Joseph to make a second translation of it.

[It is my understanding that the seer stone referred to was furnished when he commenced translating again after losing the 116 pages. My statement was and now is that in translating he put the seer stone in his hat and putting his face in his hat so as to exclude the light and that then the light and characters appeared in the hat together with the interpretation which he uttered and was written by, the scribe and which was tested at the time as stated.]

"A few months after the translation was completed, that is, in the spring of 1830, Joseph had the book published and this (showing a well worn volume) is a copy of the first edition which I have had in my possession ever since it was printed."

"When did you see the plates?"

"It was in the latter part of June, 1829. Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and myself were together, and the angel showed them to us. We not only saw the plates of the book of Mormon, but he also showed us the brass plates of the book of Ether and many others. They were shown to us in this way. Joseph and Oliver and I were

SITTING ON A LOG

when we were overshadowed by a light more glorious than that of the sun. In the midst of this light but a few feet from us appeared a table upon which were many golden plates, also the sword of Laban and the directors. I saw them as plain as I see you now, and distinctly heard the voice of the Lord declaiming that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and the power of God."

"Who else saw the plates at this time?"

"No one. Martin Harris, the other witness, saw them the same day and the eight witnesses, Christian Whitmer, Hiram Page, Jacob Whitmer, Joseph Smith, sr., Peter Whitmer, jr., Hyram Smith, Jno. Whitmer and Samuel H. Smith saw them next day."

"Did you see the angel?"

"Yes, he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is absolutely true, just as it is written there."

"Can you describe the plates?"

"They appeared to be of gold, about six by nine inches in size, about as thick as parchment, a great many in number and bound together like the leaves of a book by massive rings passing through the back edges. The engraving upon them was very plain and of very curious appearance. Smith made facsimilies of some of the plates, and sent them by Martin Harris to Profs. Anson and Mitchell, of New York city, for examination. They pronounced the characters reformed Egyptian, but were unable to read them."

"Did Joseph Smith ever relate to you the circumstances of his

FINDING THE PLATES?"

"Yes; he told me that he first found the plates in the early spring of 1828; that during the fall of 1827 he had a vision, [^2] an angel appearing to him three times in one night and telling him that there was a record of an ancient people deposited in a hill near his fathers house called by the ancients 'Cumorah,' situated in the township of Manchester, Ontario county N. Y. The angel pointed out the exact spot and some time after he went and found the records or plates deposited in a stone box in the hill just as had been described to him by the angel. It was some little time, however, before the angel would allow Smith to remove the plates from their place of deposit."

"When was the church first established?"

"We had preaching during the time the book was being translated but our church was not regularly organized until after the book was printed in the winter of 1829-30. The first organization was in Seneca county, New York, under the name of 'The Church of Christ.' The first elders were Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, Hyrum Smith, Jno. Whitmer, Peter Whitmer and myself. On the 6th of April, 1830 the church was called together and the elders acknowledged according to the laws of New York. Our instructions from the Lord were to teach nothing except the old and new testaments and the Book of Mormon. From that time the church spread abroad and multiplied very rapidly. . . .

The reported copied the following certificate of the standing of Mr. Whitmer in the community, among his papers, and obtained his permission to use it. It shows the character of the man, and adds to the value of his statement given above.

We, the undersigned citizens of Richmond, Ray county, Mo, where David Whitmer, sr. has resided since the year A. D. 1838, certify that we have been long and intimately acquainted with him, and know him to be a man of the highest integrity, and of undoubted truth and veracity.

Given at Richmond, Mo, this March 19, A. D. 1881.

A. W. Doniphan

Geo. W. Dunn, judge of the Fifth Judicial circuit.

T. D. Woodson, president of Ray County Savings bank.

J. T. Child, editor of Conservator.

H. C. Garner, cashier of Ray County Savings bank.

W. A. Holman, county treasurer.

J. S. Hughes, banker, Richmond.

James Hughes, banker, Richmond.

D. P. Whitmer, attorney at law.

Jas. W. Black, attorney at law.

L. C. Cantwell, postmaster, Richmond.

Geo. I. Wasson, mayor.

Jas. A. Davis, county collector.

C. J. Hughes, probated judge and presiding justice of Ray county court.

Geo. W. Trigg, county clerk.

W. W. Mosby, M. D.

Thos. McGinnis, ex-sheriff Ray county.

J. P. Quensenberry, merchant.

W. R. Holman, furniture merchant.

Lewish Slaughter, recorded of deeds.

Geo. W. Buchanan, M. D.

A. K. Reyburn.

This ended the interview and after bidding the old man adieu and thanking him for his kindness the writer took his leave.

Preface

Boyhood of a Prophet

The Calling of a Prophet

Unfolding Cumorah's Hidden Treasure 1823-1827

A Sealed Book and a Lost Manuscript September 1827 to April 1829

Three Remarkable Months April 7-Early July 1829

Eleven Special Witnesses

The Prophet, The Book, and The Church July 1829-April 1830

An Interview with David Whitmer

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 36-39.
[^2] 2. Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 3:35-36; 1:2, 18-19 (hereafter cited as HC).
