Tell me the stories of Jesus

I love to hear,

Things I would ask him to tell me

if he were here.

Scenes by the wayside,

tales of the sea,

Stories of Jesus, tell them to me.

(Children’s Songbook, 57)

He walked dusty roads and sailed with fishermen. He read scriptures in the synagogue, gave a sermon on a hillside, and cleared the money changers from the temple. He healed the lame, fed the hungry, and raised the dead. In the end, he gave his life, then rose again.

Along the way, he taught and blessed and healed his people. And in teaching them, he teaches us. Both the stories he told and the stories the scriptures tell about him are filled with gospel principles.

The song “Tell Me the Stories of Jesus” expresses love for the teachings of the Savior. To celebrate Easter, we invite you to feel that same love again as, on the next few pages, youth from around the world share feelings and lessons they have learned from the stories of Jesus.

And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; …

To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.

And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.

And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn (Luke 2:4–7).

“Jesus Christ is always in my mind and heart. To gain my testimony of the Savior, I had to place my faith in him and to come to know him through studying the scriptures and through fasting and prayer. As we think about the Savior and his birth, we should open our hearts to him so that our lives can be filled with truth and happiness.”

Dalia Ybarra
Guayaquil, Ecuador

And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.

And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.

And they straightway left their nets, and followed him (Matt. 4:18–20).

“I questioned if I could or ought to go on a mission. I prayed to the Lord and began reading the scriptures. Everything I read in the New Testament told me that I should go. Heavenly Father answered me through the scriptures. He wants me to be a missionary, and I will not fail him.”

Roxana Margarita Galeano Sanabria
Quezaltepeque, El Salvador

And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him:

And he opened his mouth, and taught them (Matt. 5:1–2).

“I love the Sermon on the Mount. I am always uplifted when I read it, because the Lord promises that if we obey his commandments, heaven is there for us. He is the way, the truth, and the light.”

Maricha Sasing
Cebu, Philippines

“Jesus came to help us spiritually and physically. He performed miracles and preached the word of God. My heart has been changed through faith on his name and through his example. Jesus Christ is and was the teacher of all teachers, because he taught us how to live the gospel.”

Eniscar Barrios
Maturín, Venezuela

Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.

And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it (Matt. 7:24–27).

“Jesus Christ is the only sure rock upon which we can build. I know that if I strive to build upon his sure foundation, I will be able to have peace in this life and return to the presence of my Father in Heaven.”

María Cámara
Valdepeñas, Spain

And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full.

And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?

And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.

And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith? (Mark 4:37–40).

“I like the story about when the disciples were on the Sea of Galilee and Jesus was with them. Then this storm came, and Jesus was sleeping. They got worried, so they woke Jesus up so he could help them. Jesus told them that they should not worry and should feel safe. We learn from this that with Jesus we always feel safe and we should ask for his guidance.”

Shirley Hope Sebastian
Pasig, Philippines

And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water.

And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.

But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.

And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him (Matt. 14:28–31).

“When Peter went toward Jesus he was okay at first; then he went in the water. Jesus said Peter didn’t have enough faith. I was impressed with that statement. As we go through life, I know faith is very important for us. I know if we have faith, we can accomplish much.”

Dennis Dan Nunez
Cebu, Philippines

And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. …

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him,

And went to him, and bound up his wounds, … and brought him to an inn, and took care of him (Luke 10:30, 33–34).

“I like the parable of the good Samaritan because in that parable, even though the Jews despised the Samaritans and the Samaritans despised the Jews, this man came up and helped the man in need regardless of what his race or background was. The Samaritan did it because he knew it was the right thing to do. And I also know, just like the Samaritan, that this is also what I should do as a Latter-day Saint.”

Lennon Pacardo
Pasig, Philippines

And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow;

And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side. …

Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth. …

And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them:

But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.

He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful (Matt. 13:3–5, 7–8, 22).

“I am the only member of the Church in my school, and my classmates often try to lead me into temptation, especially when they tempt me to cheat. I always pray at night that I will not give in to the temptations. Hopefully at the judgment day I can be gathered with the wheat and live with my Father in Heaven.”

Rebecca Perez
Cebu, Philippines

A woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster box of ointment,

And stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she is a sinner.

And Jesus answering said …

Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.

And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven (Luke 7:37–40, 47–48).

“A while ago I committed a small sin—nothing serious—but I was embarrassed for my light-mindedness. My bishop assured me that the Lord had forgiven me of my small error. I felt tears in my eyes, and a feeling of peace told me that the Lord loved me.”

Leonarda Manzaro
Bari, Italy

And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.

Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you (Luke 22:19–20).

“When I partake of the sacrament, I remember the great pain that Jesus Christ suffered, and I know that his pain cannot be compared to that of any other person. I know that Christ lives, that he always answers our prayers if we ask in faith. I also know that the Lord is my light.”

Rodolfo Abinadí Vásquez Gutiérrez
Santa Cruz, Bolivia

“He riseth from supper, and … poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. …

So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?

Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.

If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another’s feet.

For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you (John 13:4–5, 12–15).

“I know that Jesus Christ came to earth to teach us to love and serve our neighbors and to teach us the divine law of the gospel. I know that Jesus Christ lives and that he loves us. We can progress spiritually through his teachings and his great example.”

Erika Yegues
Maturín, Venezuela

Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. …

And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt (Matt. 26:36, 39).

And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground (Luke 22:44).

“Every time fear comes into my life, discouragement surrounds me, sadness is with me, or pain comes, I think of Jesus Christ—that he suffered far more than I and that he did it to rescue me. I know Jesus Christ made everything possible. Because of this, my suffering will pass.”

J. Marleth Ayala T.
Maracay, Venezuela

“I know that Jesus Christ loves me because he suffered for me in the Garden of Gethsemane. I know that he is my Savior, and I know that he lives. I feel this when I need his help. He always comforts me when I feel lonely.”

Esther Cañas Merino
Ciudad Real, Spain

And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots. …

And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. …

And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying Eli lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? …

Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost (Matt. 27:35, 37, 46, 50).

“I love the Savior very much. I feel so grateful for his sacrifice, because when he died on the cross, he showed how much he loves us, and he gave us the opportunity to return to the Father.”

Janelle Caballero
Panama City, Panama

Why seek ye the living among the dead? (Luke 24:5).

And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.

He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.

And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead (Matt. 28:5–7).

“The Savior has opened a door to offer me mercy and a greater life. I believe in the Resurrection. It is real to me, not just a story or a symbol.”

Thibault Crucy
Gonches/Gondoire, France

“Jesus Christ lives. I can feel it when I read the scriptures and when I sing the hymns. I feel it deep within my heart. I know that through obedience and faith in him, I have received and will receive great blessings. I am more than grateful for all that he did and still does for me.”

Flavia Casco
Rosario, Argentina

There are many marvelous stories of Jesus yet to be written, as we record in our lives and in our journals what we learn from him. During this Easter season, we encourage you to make the Lord Jesus Christ the center of your celebration.

As you do, you will come to know that he lives and loves you and that by obedience and faith you can prepare to be included in another story—his triumphal Second Coming and life with those who are worthy of a place in the kingdom of his Father.
