Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

FOREWORD

President David O. McKay has brought light and hope to a world that is searching for truth. Headlines have emblazoned his arrival in many countries of Europe, South Africa, South America, and the South Seas, as well as the little-known countries of the Orient. Important as this recognition has been, Clare Middlemiss, Secretary to the President since the spring of 1935, has gathered some of the little-heralded, faith-promoting incidents from President McKay's life which have blessed Latter-day Saints "at home and abroad." These Cherished Experiences have etched the President's name on the hearts of people wherever he has passed.

The selections in this volume have been wisely garnered by Clare Middlemiss, who has painstakingly maintained the files which have made this volume possible. Over and beyond the call of duty she has collected everything pertaining to this great leader: telegrams, letters, newspaper and magazine clippings, together with his personal letters, editorials, articles, and addresses. As a testimonial to the unflagging diligence of Clare Middlemiss, there are to date sixty large volumes of source material, twenty-four file cabinets of President McKay's addresses, correspondence, several loose-leaf notebooks of his favorite poems and quotations, as well as a double set of indexes for President McKay's addresses, making possible ready reference to this great wealth of material.

Clare Middlemiss indicates the manner in which President McKay has welded the Church of Jesus Christ into one united body: from the northern countries to the southern and from the eastern outposts to the western.

Cherished Experiences will increase the testimony and build faith among all who read it. They will gain insight into the truth that motivates the President—the truth of our Lord and Savior — whom President McKay emulates as leader and servant of his fellow men.

MARBA C. JOSEPHSON
