Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

SECTION I

MEMORABLE TESTIMONIES

INTRODUCTION

"Great men taken up in any way, are profitable company. We cannot look however imperfectly upon a great man without gaining something by him. He is the living light-fountain, which it is good and pleasant to be near. The light which enlightens, which has enlightened the world; and this not as a kindled lamp only, but rather as a natural luminary shining by the gift of heaven; a flowing light-fountain, as I say, of native original insight, of manhood and heroic nobleness; in whose radiance all souls feel that it is well with them." (Carlyle.)

SINCE THE SPRING OF 1935, it has been my joyful privilege to act as secretary to President David O. McKay. During this long and close association I have been singularly blessed. I have been in the presence of a man of God, a great and inspired leader; a man who believes in the sacredness and dignity of the individual, and whose purpose in life is to bring salvation and happiness to his fellow men.

In gathering together and preserving in scrapbooks a vast store of clippings, speeches, editorials, special letters, and notes concerning the activities of President McKay, I have been profoundly impressed with the magnitude of the work accomplished and the service rendered by him throughout fifty-eight years of complete devotion to the Church and to the welfare of mankind.

Since becoming President of the Church in 1951 President McKay has personally interviewed over six hundred important and distinguished men and women from all over the world. Included in this group are: Her Majesty Juliana, Queen of the Netherlands, at her summer palace at Soestdijk, Holland; His Excellency, Juho K. Paasikivi, President of Finland, at the presidential summer residence Kultaranta just outside of Helsinki, Finland; His Excellency Juan D. Peron, President of Argentina, at his government offices Casa Rosada or "Pink House," Buenos Aires, Argentina; Crown Prince Tungi of Tonga at his palace in Nukualofa, Tonga, and at Salt Lake City, Utah; King Tamasese, King Malietoa, and King Mata'afa at Apia, Samoa; foreign ambassadors, consuls, and other representatives of foreign countries; religious leaders from such far-flung places as China, Japan, Korea, India, Thailand, and the countries of Europe. And here in our own country—President Dwight D. Eisenhower, Vice-President Richard M. Nixon; President and Mrs. Harry S. Truman; Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio; Governor Adlai E. Stevenson; leading bankers, educators, economists, renowned medical men, journalists, etc.

During his Presidency of the Church, President and Sister McKay have traveled approximately 150,000 miles by air throughout England, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Scandinavia, Holland, France, South Africa, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Guatemala, Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, and the Islands of the South Pacific. It would be impossible to give the number of miles traveled by President McKay during nearly fifty years in visiting as one of the General Authorities the stakes and missions of the Church throughout the world. On his world tour alone in 1921, in making an official visit to all the missions of the Church, he traveled 62,500 miles by land and sea at a time when the comforts of travel that now exist were unknown.

The Honorable John Foster Dulles, United States Secretary of State, in a personal letter to President McKay, dated March 31, 1954, commended President and Mrs. McKay for their "notable service in their travels as unofficial ambassadors of good will." Recently this interesting comment was made about President McKay: "He is a man who seems to feel the heartbeat of the world. With a dedicated sense of vision he has endeavored with unique success to build everywhere a community of good will, sympathetic tolerance, and creative humanitarianism." [^1] Many other tributes have come from distinguished men and women throughout the world who have been impressed with his dignity, outstanding personality, and spirituality.

President McKay is a great missionary of the Church. No one person has had so much to do with the missionary work of the Church as has he. He holds the record for having traveled the greatest number of miles and for having visited the greatest number of missions in the Church. The purpose and objective of all this extensive travel is stated in President McKay's own words upon his arrival in Papeete, Tahiti, January 18, 1955: "Sister McKay and I are flying by land and sea, telling the story, first, of the glories of the Restored Gospel, and second, assuring our members of the Church in all lands that we are all one — members of the divine Church — children of our Father in heaven."

Since his appointment to the First Presidency of the Church, President McKay has delivered one thousand, one hundred and fifty major addresses, and four hundred since he became President. This is in addition to the heavy responsibilities associated with the general jurisdiction of the Church.

Throughout all this unselfish service, individual members of the Church have not been neglected — thousands have been the recipients of his counsel, advice, and administration. His understanding of the human heart and his incomparable tenderness have drawn people close to him, and his deep interest and concern in their welfare have won for him the loyalty, love, and respect of countless thousands of members of the Church.

In my day-by-day service I have particularly observed and otherwise known of many faith-promoting and inspiring incidents in the life of this great and noble man brought about by sublime faith in God, by prayer, and through service. It has been a fervent hope throughout the years that others might share these "heart petals" associated with the life of President McKay.

The following faith-promoting experiences, and other treasured materials, which I have gleaned from the countless manuscripts of speeches and articles, and from the personal scrapbooks of our revered Prophet and Seer, are but a few of those that have been recorded. They are given with the prayerful hope that consolation, encouragement, and increased faith may be gained by all who read what is herein compiled.

Clare Middlemiss

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. From a talk given by Dr. Henry Beatty on "McKay Day," Ogden, Utah, July 16, 1954.
