Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

WHAT MY FAITH MEANS TO ME

September 24, 1948

IN THE GOSPEL PLAN, human life is divided into three periods or existences; viz., the pre-existent state, the mortal state, and the after-mortal state. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the true philosophy of these three states of being. It explains the Past, is a guide to the Present, unveils the Future.

My faith gives me an assurance that God is indeed my Father, and that therefore I must have inherited his immortality. This explanation of my being is an anchor to my soul amidst the unsettled, never-resting theories given in attempted explanations of the origin of man. So far as man's ante-mortal state is concerned, I rejoice in the revealed word that man was in the beginning with the Father. This is the truth glimpsed by the poet when he wrote:

"The Soul that rises with us, Our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar; Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home." (Wordsworth.)

My faith means an unfailing guide through this present existence, a final solution to life's perplexing problems. It gives to earth-life a definite purpose. It teaches me that only through individual effort and divine guidance may true success and happiness be obtained. There is no blessing based upon another's achievement. Everyone must work out his own salvation. Life is a garden in which each person gathers the flowers and fruits from the seeds he plants. An abundant harvest is the result only of painstaking, intelligent effort.

The gospel includes all the conditions necessary for the physical, intellectual, moral, and spiritual development of human life. Obedience to the gospel means merely compliance with the laws of health and happiness. It means keeping the body undefiled and the spirit in tune with the infinite.

The dearest possession a man has is his family. In the divine assurance that family ties may transcend the boundaries of death, and may continue throughout endless ages of eternity, I find supreme consolation and inspiration. When the union of loved ones bears the seal of the Holy Priesthood, it is as eternal as love, as everlasting as spirit. Such a union is based on the doctrine of immortality and the eternal progress of man.

The Church of Jesus Christ was established by the authority and through the personal administration of the Savior, who revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the true relationship of man to his Maker. Man is in spirit literally the offspring of Deity and as such has inherited the divine characteristics of the Father. Those traits are developed by obedience to the laws of life and being as revealed through the gospel of Jesus Christ.
