Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

TRUE APPRECIATION

The first thing you will observe in that "sacred chamber" is a true sense of appreciation for the trust imposed in me by my close associates and by the Lord. Such confidence thus given is at once a sacred obligation. It implies loyalty and service to friends and to God. In turn I place my implicit trust in my Heavenly Father who can substitute for weakness increased strength.

To give you a more intimate glimpse, however, I must tell you that recent events have given me a yearning to meet again my father and mother, just to tell them what their lives, their daily example, and willing sacrifices for their children have meant to me. I want to acknowledge to them my unpayable debt of eternal gratitude. I should like to see the expression on Mother's countenance as she would recall the following incident when I was a bouncing, boisterous baby. As related to me by her brother, my uncle, it is as follows:

"One day as I watched you toddling around on the floor, I teasingly made a deprecating remark about you. I remember your mother picked you up and said as she cuddled you to her cheek, 'You do not know, he may be an Apostle some day.' "

Of course, it may have been, and undoubtedly was, just an expression of an ardent wish of a fond mother. All mothers hope for great things for their boys; but, oh, in my heart I have wished she might have lived to see her hopes fulfilled. However, I feel sure she knows, and it is quite possible she realizes now whether she expressed the wish of a hopeful mother or whether there was not with those hopes a flash of inspiration.

Another incident, however, seems to have carried deeper significance of inspiration. I was on my first mission, president, at the time, of the Scottish conference in the year 1899. Presiding over the European Mission were Elders Platt D. Lyman, Henry W. Naisbitt, and James L. McMurrin. President McMurrin represented the European Mission presidency at a conference held in Glasgow, Scotland. Following a series of meetings, we held a most remarkable priesthood meeting — one that will never be forgotten by any who was present.
