Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A TESTIMONY

Address, delivered at general priesthood meeting, Salt Lake Tabernacle, October 6, 1951.

I WISH TO BEAR YOU A TESTIMONY which I think I have never before given in public. Since childhood it has been very easy for me to believe in the reality of the visions of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This may seem very simple to you, but I give it as a heart petal.

When a very young child in the home of my youth, I was fearful at night. I traced it back to a vivid dream when two Indians — some Indians used to come up there — came into the yard. I ran to the house for protection, and one of them shot an arrow and hit me in the back. Only a dream, but I felt that blow, and I was very much frightened, for in the dream they entered, one a tall one, and a smaller one, and sneered and frightened Mother.

I never got over it. Added to that were the fears of Mother, for when Father was away with the herd or on some mission, Mother would never retire without looking under the bed; so burglars were real to me, or wicked men who would come in and attempt to injure Mother and the young children.

Whatever the conditions, I was very fearful. One night I could not sleep. I was only a boy, and I fancied I heard noises around the house. Mother was away in another room. Thomas E. by my side was sleeping soundly. I could not sleep, and I became terribly fearful, and I decided that I would do as my parents had taught me to do — pray. I thought I could not pray without getting out of bed and kneeling, and that was a terrible test. But I finally did bring myself to get out of bed and kneel and pray to God to protect Mother and the family. And a voice as clearly to me as mine is to you said, "Don't be afraid. Nothing will hurt you." Where it came from, what it was, I am not saying. You may judge. To me it was a direct answer, and there came an assurance that I should never be hurt in bed at night.

I say it has been easy for me to understand and believe the reality of the visions of the Prophet Joseph. It was as easy for me in youth to accept his vision — the appearance of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, to the boy praying. I could not think otherwise — the vision is a reality. It was easy for me to believe that Moroni came to him there in his room. Heavenly beings were real from my babyhood on, and as years came those impressions were strengthened by reason and strengthened by the inspiration of God directly to my soul.

I know that those visions were real, and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God. This being true, it follows that Jesus Christ lives and is our Redeemer; that this is his Church. We are merely his representatives, and when we acknowledge that this is his Church, the reality of God the Father, the Father of our spirits, is very easy to accept.

These things being real, we cannot do anything else but try to our utmost to do what Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, asks us to do, for he has given us the gospel that bears his name, and in the words of Peter, "There is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)
