Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

PEACE THROUGH THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST

"Testify that Joseph Smith is a Prophet"

In 1881, President David O. McKay's father, Bishop David McKay, was called to serve as a missionary in Scotland, his native land. He was appointed president of the Glasgow District, and during this period of his life he had many interesting and faith-promoting experiences. One of these experiences relating to his testimony regarding the revelation that came to him of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith is told by President McKay in the following address delivered at a fast meeting held September 28, 1919.

IT IS INDEED A PRIVILEGE to meet and to commune not only with one another, but also with God our Eternal Father, being shut out from all the unrest and turmoil of the world. I think never before in my life have I seen such a contrast between the peace and contentment and assurance of the Latterday Saints and the unrest, the strife, envy, and bitterness of the world. In the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants you will remember that the Lord refers to the tendency of the world to have different gods. They set up unto themselves their gods which are after the fashion of the world. Has there ever been a time in the history of the world when men worshiped so many different gods after the fashion of the world — the god of greed, of selfishness, the god of sensuality? Why, it seems to me that every form of idol is now worshiped in preference to God, the Eternal Father, and men sacrifice everything for their earthly deities.

I testify to you, in all soberness, that God our Heavenly Father lives, that he communicates with his servants, that he has established in this dispensation of the world his great work, the only plan of salvation whereby mankind may be saved, the only means by which peace may be established in the world. Peace can come only when men will acknowledge God as their Creator, as their Father, and when they will obey the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, when they will have in their souls individual righteousness, a desire to reverence God, a desire to serve their fellow men, a desire to bless the other man instead of bringing, at the expense of the other man, some benefit to themselves. The lines between truth and error are being more sharply drawn every day of our lives as never before. Any careful thinker may observe the present world turmoil and know for a surety the distinction between the peace of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the conflict and envy resulting from selfishness and strife. We must preach repentance, as the Prophet Joseph through inspiration declares in so many of his revelations, and declare also the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I said to you that I know that the Lord communicates with his servants. I have not doubted this as a fact since I was a boy and heard the testimony of my father regarding the revelation that came to him of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph. I feel impressed to relate that circumstance and add his testimony to the one that I am now giving. He accepted a call to a mission in 1881. When he began preaching in his native land, and bore testimony of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, he noticed that the people turned away from him. They were bitter in their hearts against anything Mormon, and the name of Joseph Smith seemed to arouse antagonism in their hearts. One day he concluded that the best way to reach these people would be to preach just the simple principles, the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, the first principles of the gospel, and not bear testimony of the restoration. In a month or so he became oppressed with a gloomy, downcast feeling and he could not enter into the spirit of his work. He did not really know what was the matter; but his mind became obstructed; his spirit became depressed; he was oppressed and hampered; and that feeling of depression continued until it weighed him down with such heaviness that he went to the Lord and said: "Unless I can get this feeling removed, I shall have to go home. I can't continue my work thus hampered."

The discouragement continued for some time after that, when, one morning, before daylight, following a sleepless night, he decided to retire to a cave, near the ocean, where he knew he would be shut off from the world entirely, and there pour out his soul to God and ask why he was oppressed with this feeling, what he had done, and what he could do to throw it off and continue his work. He started out in the dark towards the cave. He became so eager to get to it that he started to run. As he was leaving the town, he was hailed by an officer who wanted to know what was the matter. He gave some noncommittal but satisfying reply and was permitted to go on. Something just seemed to drive him; he had to get relief. He entered the cave or sheltered opening, and said: "Oh, Father, what can I do to have this feeling removed? I must have it lifted or I cannot continue in this work"; and he heard a voice, as distinct as the tone I am now uttering, say: "Testify that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God." Remembering then, what he tacitly had decided six weeks or more before, and becoming overwhelmed with the thought, the whole thing came to him in a realization that he was there for a special mission, and he had not given that special mission the attention which it deserved. Then he cried in his heart, "Lord, it is enough," and went out from the cave.

You who know him know the mission he performed. As a boy, I sat and heard that testimony from one whom I treasured and honored as you know I treasured no other man in the world, and that assurance was instilled in my youthful soul. The inspiration and the testimony of God has come since, and today I testify to you that God lives, and that he is guiding this Church, that he has inspired those at the head, and that he will continue to inspire them and lead them through the turmoil and unrest in the world, caused by unrighteousness, wickedness, and lack of faith in God. Many people of the world do not believe in God; they do not believe in his principles; they have not applied his principles in the world. They confess him with their lips, but their hearts have not been with God.

Let us thank our Heavenly Father for the testimony that the Lord Jesus Christ has placed in our souls. May we be true to that testimony, not only in words but also in acts, and show the world that we have the principles, obedience to which will establish peace on earth and good will among men. This is my prayer for all of us, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
