Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A ROOM IN WALES

Excerpts from an address given August 24, 1952, at the dedication of the Brigham City Seventh Ward chapel, North Box Elder.

A SHORT TIME AGO — it does not seem possible that just a month ago, I stood in a little room in Wales, in which my mother was born one hundred and two years ago, the room so small that the six-foot bed covers the entire width, and in length barely two feet longer than it is wide, and the old rafters just two feet above my head, so about eight feet high. But my thoughts on that occasion have been sacred to me. I shall share one or two with you.

I thought, as Sister McKay and I stood in that small bedroom, how different life would be now if two humble elders had not knocked at that door a hundred years ago! And how different life would be if my mother's father and mother had not accepted that message! I looked around the village and found descendants of others who heard it at that time, descendants of some who ridiculed my grandfather and grandmother for having accepted the truth; who made light of their religion, scoffed at them, and ostracized them for having accepted Mormonism. I realized how unenlightened those neighbors were when they condemned my grandparents.

I recalled, as we stood there, what my grandmother said to me in Ogden, when she told me as a student in my teens, about the experience she had when she left Cefn Coed. My mother's sister, Aunt Lizzie, the youngest of the children, had just been born, when the eldest son was called away by death. My grandmother living in Ogden said: "I condemned the Lord in my heart for having taken away the one main help on the journey ahead of us, and I said, in my heart, 'Lord, if you had to take any of my children, why didn't you take this little helpless baby and leave us the oldest son to help us on the journey across the ocean and across the plains?' " When she told me that, she said, "I was wrong in my judgment. God knew best, and I should have trusted him. You see today how blessed I am living here with Lizzie, my youngest child, now the mother of three boys, and my comfort in my old age. God looked farther into the future than I could."

I remembered that statement, as I fancied I could hear the cry of my mother, born one hundred and two years before. Incidentally, acceptance of that gospel meant much to me — indeed, I should not have been; but that is a mere personal matter. Really, I should not have been born, because that was in Wales, and Father's folk were way up in the north of Scotland. It was only through the gospel that Father and Mother met. So I expressed gratitude, as I sensed it probably never so keenly before, as we stood in that little room, six by eight.

But on that occasion and following, I have thought of how many changes have taken place since August, 1850. I believe that Edison was born three years earlier — he was born in 1847! So all of his inventions have happened since then. There was no incandescent light; there was no phonograph. They had only the candle, probably the wick in grease, no bicycle, no automobiles, no airplanes — people had not even dreamed of them. They mowed their grass with the scythe, the grain with the "cradle" — no atom bomb, no steamships. When mother, a young girl six years of age, crossed the ocean, it took thirty-nine days! Just recently we crossed the ocean, from Scotland to Newfoundland, in nine hours, fourteen hours from Glasgow to New York. Hours! Thirty-nine days then!
