Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

THE PRAYER OF A CHILD

Dictated by President McKay

August, 1940

"LORD, TEACH US HOW TO PRAY" was the reverent plea of the disciples of the Master. Humble as children they sought proper guidance, and their appeal was not in vain.

Just as keenly as did the disciples, so at times may children sense the need of divine guidance and comfort, yet not express their yearning in spoken request. Hence the Lord has placed upon parents the duty to "teach their children to pray."

Worries, perplexities, and sorrows are as real in the life of a little child as in the adult world, and children are entitled to the comfort, consolation, and guidance obtained from God through prayer.

Not only that, but from the standpoint of faith, sincerity, and abiding trust, the prayer of an innocent child will surely receive most ready response from a loving Father. Here is a true story of one such instance that brought almost immediate results.

William (not the boy's true name) was a lad who had been taught to pray. When he was about ten year old, his father was nearly killed in an automobile accident. It happened early in the morning, and so grief-stricken were the mother and children, including William, that none could eat a meal or cared to.

However, later in the day, after the doctors had sewed up the lacerations, repaired the broken bones, and given assurances that "daddy" was not fatally injured, the loved ones calmed their fears and began to resume the regular family routine.

As was the practice in that Mormon home, before the evening meal, all knelt in prayer. Following it, William started away from the table. Seeing this his mother said: "Come, Will, sit down and eat your dinner."

"No, Mother," replied the lad, "I am not hungry."

"You must!" insisted the mother, "you haven't eaten all day. Don't worry any longer, Daddy will be all right."

"Please excuse me, Mother, I am fasting and want to go up to my room."

He did go to his room, and there knelt in earnest prayer for his father's speedy and complete recovery.

Rising from his knees, he put on his hat, picked from his little garden the few first violets of springtime, walked to the hospital, and placed the flowers in his injured father's hand. As the father received them, he recognized in the lad's face an expression that reflected the yearning of his little soul for his father's recovery. There was no need for words. Father and son understood each other, and the Lord comforted both — the boy in the consolation, the father in the assurance that the Lord would answer the lad's prayer.

And he did in a miraculously speedy and permanent recovery.

"They never sought in vain

That sought the Lord aright."

The incident related above is a true story of the automobile accident in which President McKay was injured, and the child William, who prayed for his father, is President McKay's own son.
