Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

SECTION II

FAITH-PROMOTING INCIDENTS

THE PROTECTION OF THE PRESIDENT IN HIS TRAVELS

"If ye are faithful ye shall be laden with many sheaves."

(D. & C. 75:5.)

FROM THAT DAY in December 1920, when Presidents Heber J. Grant, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose, and several of the Apostles laid their hands upon President McKay's head and blessed him and set him apart as "a missionary to travel around the world" and promised him that he should be "warned of dangers seen and unseen, and be given wisdom and inspiration from God to avoid all the snares and the pitfalls that may be laid for his feet"; that he should also "go forth in peace, in pleasure and happiness and to return in safety to his loved ones and to the body of the Church," he has experienced the protecting care of our Heavenly Father in all his global ministry. In referring to the above blessing, he said in a report to the First Presidency in December 1921, "As promised by President Grant, we have traveled in peace, in pleasure and happiness and have returned in safety to our loved ones and to the body of the Church. His blessing that I should have power over disease, not only in my own person but also through the power of the Almighty upon the sick and afflicted in the various missions, has been wonderfully, I might say miraculously, realized. We have truly been warned of dangers, and through inspiration, have avoided snares that would have proved at least discomforting, if not injurious."

Upon his return from the epoch-making tour of the European Missions from May 29, to July 26, 1952, President McKay said; "We are grateful, first, for the protecting care, guiding hand, and divine inspiration of our Heavenly Father."

In 1953 when he returned to Europe for the purpose of dedicating the sites for the temples in England and Switzerland, President McKay again acknowledged the guidance and protecting care of the Lord.

In 1955 when President McKay returned from his visit to the missions of the South Pacific, he reported that he recognized the overruling Providence in regard to their health; that it was significant that Sister McKay and he had made that trip, taking boats, seaplanes, airplanes, being entertained at various places, going without the necessary sleep, and through it all had returned home without any illness or distress. He said that the prayers of the brethren and the members of the Church were literally answered in their behalf.

He further said that not once did any of their planned meetings or entertainments have to be dispensed with because of storm, though when they were in Suva at the hotel it rained four inches in one night, and that it also rained in other places.

On many other occasions the elements have been tempered in order that assignments might be carried out and destinations reached.

In Bern, Switzerland, in 1953, it had been raining six weeks prior to the date of the dedication of the temple site. After prayer and fasting by the missionaries and Saints, on the day of the dedication, Wednesday, August 5, 1953, the sun came out; the clouds disappeared, and there was a beautiful day for the open-air meeting. However, that night it started to rain again, and it rained all day the following day. "Surely," said President McKay, "the prayers for good weather during the dedicatory services were answered." In London there was a similar experience. When it came time to dedicate the London Temple site, although it had rained steadily previous to the date of the dedication, bright, clear weather prevailed throughout the dedicatory services held on August 10, 1953.

Following his 35,000-mile journey in 1954 to the British Isles, Switzerland, South Africa, South America, Central America, and Mexico, President McKay expressed gratitude for their safe return from their travels, during which they had encountered electrical storms in mid-air, and other incidents wherein they felt divine intervention in their behalf.

Elder Franklin J. Murdock in his day-by-day journal of President and Mrs. McKay's 45,000-mile-journey by air to Australia, New Zealand, and the Islands of the South Pacific said: "How fortunate we have been all along the way! It just seems that a protecting hand has gone ahead and directed the hurricanes in another direction as we needed to land, and even though we are in the rainy season, the weather for all occasions has been clear and warm, and not one meeting has had to be changed or broken up because of inclement weather. Good weather has been where we needed it to carry out the assignments, and the members have marveled at the sudden changes in the weather as each meeting or assignment has started. Surely the Lord is with us and has blessed us with good health, good spirits, and good protection! (January 15, 1955.)

"On January 15, 1955, the day of the dedication of the Church edifice at Sauniatu, Samoa, and the open-air services held at the David O. McKay Monuument, although it had been raining previously, we encountered beautiful weather. As we bade farewell to the happy faces at Sauniatu, and took a last glance at the monument, the rains started; but the meetings were completed, and we were safely in the automobile ready to drive back to Apia."

Elder Howard B. Stone, president of the Samoan Mission, reported the following concerning President and Mrs. McKay's visit to Samoa:

"The night before we landed at Aitutaki in the Cook Island group, January 18, 1955, Elders Bushoff and Johnson, with sixty-six Saints and eighty-five non-members had traveled a distance of ten miles in three whaleboats and had slept under the stars and palm trees so that they could meet with President McKay and his party the next day for one short hour while the seaplane was refueling prior to its departure for Tahiti. We held a meeting in the grove of palm trees on that little island, after which all of the natives, who incidentally, were very shy, quietly walked by in single file to shake hands with the Prophet of God and other members of the party. We were threatened with rain for the second time in a week, but in each instance, after a prayer in our hearts, a rainbow appeared in the horizon, and the rainstorm passed over us. The weather has been perfect during the entire trip, even though there have been hurricanes and tropical squalls on all sides of us."

On Saturday, February 10, 1955, ground-breaking ceremonies were held for the Church college of Hawaii at Laie where the junior college will be built. All the Saints and missionaries had fasted and prayed that they would have good weather for this important occasion. Brother Murdock in his report said: "There was a steady downpour of rain as we drove up to the property where the new Church junior college is to be built. I looked out from the car window, and said: 'President McKay, you're not going out in this downpour, are you?' President McKay answered unhesitatingly, 'Come on; where is your faith?' Then he opened the car door and stepped out. As he did so, the rains ceased and the sun came out. It is truly remarkable how the weather cooperates with us.' "

On January 31, 1955, just before President McKay and his traveling companions left Sydney, Australia, by plane for Brisbane, Australia, one of the missionaries, a member of the party, offered a prayer at the airport asking for God's protection on their journey.

How well that prayer was answered is indicated in the following report by Elder Murdock:

"The trip from Sydney to Brisbane was made in a DC-4. The journey was smooth and without incident until we had been going for about an hour and a half. We were traveling at about 250 miles an hour. President Waters, a counselor in the mission presidency, had gone up into the cockpit with the pilot who had agreed to circle over Brisbane in order that we could get a look at the city lighted up at night.

"Suddenly the pilot noticed a heavy rain and lightning storm in our pathway and seemed greatly concerned as to what the consequences might be. As the plane neared the storm area, the lights in the plane suddenly went out and then on, and the storm had disappeared. The pilot could not understand what had happened nor where the storm had gone, but it had vanished, and the plane went on its course without further incident."

Thus this world-wide missionary, our President, who constantly seeks the Lord with all his soul, who is deeply conscious of his dependence upon him for guidance and assistance, has had and is still having the protecting care of our Heavenly Father throughout all his travels.

"Behold . . . it is my will that you should go forth and not tarry, neither be idle but labor with your might—lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, proclaiming the truth according to the revelations and commandments which I have given you.

"And thus, if ye are faithful ye shall be laden with many sheaves, and crowned with honor, and glory, and immortality, and eternal life." (D.&C. 75:3-5.)

Clare Middlemiss
