Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

DELAY OF HURRICANE CAUSED MEETING

Then President McKay stood up to talk to them, He pointed out that the meeting being held that day was very significant and of historical importance. There had been no intention of remaining in Suva over Sunday because the planned schedule of travel called for the McKay party to be somewhere between Suva and Tonga, but because of hurricane warnings, they were delayed a whole day. They were not aware that there were members of the Church in Suva. President McKay pointed out that thirty-four years ago Elder Hugh J. Cannon and he had stopped at Suva on the SS Tofua, but had decided that the time was not ripe for the preaching of the gospel to the people of Fiji. But on this day, Sunday, January 9, 1955, because of a change in their schedule which came about by reason of the hurricane warnings, they were here to preach the gospel in Suva, and to commence the building up of the kingdom of God. President McKay then said: "Surely God has had a hand in changing our schedule so that we can be with you, the members of the Church here on this island." He told them that the eyes of the people of the island would be upon them, and that they must have good thoughts and render good deeds. He said that every member should be a missionary and urged all to work together for the acquiring of land upon which to build a chapel. He promised that if they would be faithful, they would have peace of mind, that their faith would be increased, and their testimonies strengthened. He blessed them that peace might be in their hearts and in their homes with their families, and urged them all to work unitedly for the spreading of the gospel.

Following the meeting a dinner of native dishes was served to all the members. As they were gathered around the table, it was brought to their attention that one of the boys, now a grown man, and a woman, then a girl, had been on the ship with President McKay and Elder Hugh J. Cannon thirty-four years ago from Tonga to Hapaai where they had encountered a very severe storm. They described how high the waves were and how rough the sea, and that they had appealed to Apostle McKay, and he had offered a word of prayer, following which not only the waves had subsided, but also the sea had become calm.
