Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A FAITH-PROMOTING INCIDENT ON THE HILLSIDE OF HALEAKALA

On Thursday, February 10, 1955, from 3:30 to 4:30 p.m., an informal meeting was held at Pulehu, Maui (Hawaii) on the site of the monument commemorating the place where the first baptisms occurred, and the first branch of the Church in the Hawaiian Islands was organized August 6, 1851. Forty-four persons were present on the latter occasion, including President David O. McKay, Sister Emma Ray McKay, Elder Clifford E. Young, President Franklin J. Murdock, Church officials of the Oahu Stake and Hawaii Mission, and Saints in Hawaii. President McKay in company with Elder Hugh J. Cannon, visited this site at the time of his world tour of missions in 1921, at which time an interesting and sacred event occurred. On this date (February 10, 1955) President McKay, standing on the former location of a pepper tree (which tree was blown down in a windstorm some years ago), related the following:

BROTHER HUGH J. CANNON had heard his father, President George Q. Cannon, tell of his visit to Wailuku, and of the remarkable manner in which he met Judge J. H. Napela. It was during a very wet season that he told the people that he was making a tour of the Island of Maui. They thought it a great undertaking and tried to persuade him not to go. However, he insisted upon going, and passed through a number of villages, over very rough, hilly country. Late one night he reached the town of Wailuku. Up to this time he had not met with the persons whom he had been led to expect, by the manifestations of the Spirit, who would receive his testimony concerning the gospel.

The main part of the town of Wailuku was on the other side of a stream, in attempting to cross which, he became wet.

There were some missionaries of other churches living at this place, and Brother Cannon hoped that he would get an opportunity to be introduced to them, for he had made it a rule not to pass a missionary without bearing testimony to him regarding his mission, but he was dusty and toil-worn, and felt some diffidence about introducing himself.

By this time he had partly come to the conclusion that, as the weather was so unfavorable, he would return to Lahaina; and in passing through Wailuku he took a road which he thought led in that direction. He had scarcely got out of the town when he felt impressed to return, the Spirit telling him that if he would do so he would get an opportunity of being introduced to the missionary who resided there.

As he passed the church yard two women emerged from a house nearby and when they saw Brother Cannon, they called to some men who were in the house, "Eia ka haole;" which means "Oh, the white man!" This they repeated two or three times, calling at the same time one of the men by name.

Elder George Q. Cannon, in recording this incident wrote: "I was led to expect, before I left Lahaina, that I would find those who would receive me. Up to the time I reached Wailuku, I had not found them, and then when I thought it best to go back by another road, and through other villages, to Lahaina, I was told if I would return to Wailuku that I should obtain my desire in getting an interview with the missionary.

"The half-white women who saw me were Napela's wife and her sister. There was something very remarkable in their crying out as they did to him and his companions in the house when they saw me. They met whites very frequently, and it was nothing strange for them to pass as I did. This was often alluded to in conversations which we had afterwards, and they wondered why they should have done so. I know that it was the Lord's doings; for if they had not called out, I should have passed unnoticed and missed them. To my sight, the Lord's hand was plainly visible in it all, and I thanked him for his mercy and goodness."

(My First Mission by George Q. Cannon.)

As Brother Cannon walked to the picket fence, three men came out of the house and stepped up towards the gate. When Brother Cannon got opposite them, he saluted them, being greeted by them in return.

The leader of the men invited Brother Cannon to stay with them until Monday. When he learned that he was a missionary, his desire to have him stay was increased.

The moment Brother Cannon entered into the house of this native and saw him and his two friends, he felt convinced that he had met the men for whom he had been looking.

The man who owned the house was a judge, and a leading man in that section. His name was Jonatana H. Napela.

Judge Napela was very anxious to know Brother Cannon's belief, and wherein the doctrines of the Church differed from those taught by the missionaries who were in their midst.

The opposition of the missionaries was very severe at first, but the judge stood up and defended them on every occasion.

About the middle of June 1851, a native house was built in the Kula country by Napela and his friends in which Elder Cannon held meetings. Elder Cannon held a meeting on July 23, 1851, after which 129 people were baptized.

Brother George Q. Cannon had told this story to Hugh J. Cannon, and when we visited Maui, Brother Hugh J. Cannon said, "I should like to go up to Pulehu." I said, "So should I." That was thirty-four years and two days ago! So we came up here, and this is where I was (pointing to a spot where the pepper tree had been), and as we looked at an old frame house that stood here then, he said, "That is probably the old chapel." It seemed to me it was over in the distance. Nothing else was here. We said, "Well, probably that is the place. We are probably standing on the spot upon which your father, George Q. Cannon, and Judge Napela addressed those people." We became very much impressed with the surroundings, association, and spiritual significance of the occasion; as we had also been with the manifestations we had had on our trip to the Orient and thus far in Hawaii, so I said, "I think we should have a word of prayer." It was a hot day, and the sun was shining, so we retired to the shade of a pepper tree that stood right on this spot. I should like to show you just how we stood. (President McKay had lined up some of the brethren present as follows, reading from right to left, President Franklin J. Murdock, representing David Keola Kailimai, Elder Clifford E. Young as E. Wesley Smith, President McKay as himself, J. Pia Cockett as Hugh J. Cannon, and Dr. Reuben D. Law as Samuel Hurst.)

I offered the prayer. We all had our eyes closed, and it was a very inspirational gathering. As we started to walk away at the conclusion of the prayer, Brother Keola Kailimai took Brother E. Wesley Smith to the side and very earnestly began talking to him in Hawaiian. As we walked along, the rest of us dropped back. They continued walking, and Brother Kailimai very seriously told in Hawaiian what he had seen during that prayer. They stopped right over there (pointing a short distance away) and Brother E. Wesley Smith said, "Brother McKay, do you know what Brother Kailimai has told me?" I answered, "No." "Brother Kailimai said that while you were praying, and we all had our eyes closed, he saw two men who he thought were Hugh J. Cannon and E. Wesley Smith step out of line in front of us and shake hands with someone, and he wondered why Brother Cannon and Brother Smith were shaking hands while we were praying. He opened his eyes, and there stood those two men still in line, with their eyes closed just as they had been. He quickly closed his eyes because he knew he had seen a vision."

Now Brother Hugh J. Cannon greatly resembled Brother George Q. Cannon, his father. I spoke during our trip of his resemblance; of course, E. Wesley Smith has the Smith attribute just as President Joseph Fielding Smith has it. Naturally, Brother Keola Kailimai would think that these two men were there. I said, "I think it was George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, two former missionaries to Hawaii, whom that spiritual-minded man saw."

We walked a few steps farther, and I said, "Brother Kailimai, I do not understand the significance of your vision, but I do know that the veil between us and those former missionaries was very thin." Brother Hugh J. Cannon who was by my side, with tears rolling down his cheeks, said, "Brother McKay, there was no veil."

There you have it. I am happy to be on this spot again.

The Lord is pleased with what the missionaries have done, and I am grateful for the response of the Hawaiian people and others of these lovely islands. I am glad to see this choice group of elders and members here assembled, for this truly is a sacred spot. May we who will now have increased responsibility from this moment on be true to the trust that the Lord has in us!
