Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

AN UNFORGETTABLE EXPERIENCE

Thursday, February 10, 1921

Following a most inspirational meeting at Hilo, Hawaii, President David O. McKay recorded in his world tour diary the following incident of a trip to "Kilauea," the largest active volcano in the world:

IT WAS ELEVEN O'CLOCK P.M. when nine of us in two automobiles left Hilo for a thirty-seven mile drive to the crater. The entire distance, the roadway is lined with Ohia trees, ferns, and the Lehua, the island flower. As the headlight flashed on this tropical foliage and brought out in bold relief the beautiful flowers in full bloom, I thought I had never before taken a night ride to equal this midnight auto drive.

When yet within six miles or more of the volcano, we could see its lurid light shooting up toward the clear sky. Unfortunately, just at the rim of the crater, which, by the way, is about ten miles in circumference, one of our autos balked—David Kalani's; but we drove the distance twice, and thus all nine of us arrived without much delay.

After going as near as possible with the autos, we began our ascent to the steam-cauldron that was filling the air with sulphurous vapor.

The first distinct sound I heard was like a blacksmith's bellows raised to the nth power. Then, as we ascended the top of the crater, what I beheld will never be forgotten. Rivers of molten lava flowing in a sea of fire and brimstone, bubbling and spurting from 10,000 cauldrons! A miniature volcano just below us blowing an acetylene flame, with the noise of a thousand blowers, and shooting red hot lava sparks a hundred feet in the air! Grotesquely shaped animal-like figures projecting from the sides of the crater! Dinosaurs and plesiosaurs, half-hidden by the smoky vapors that arose from everywhere and floated out into the blackness of the night toward the top of Mauna Loa! Great, black, whale-like spots floating and writhing on top of the lurid red surface of the fiery furnace, until a burst of gases dissipated it into a dozen shattered remnants. A molten stream flowing to the right, another flowing to the left in the same lake, each seemingly stirred by a thousand demons, urging it to the onslaught! When these two forces met, there was seething and spurting, and twisting and writhing, then they sank to some underground cavern flamed once again with the fires of Hades!

But it is vain to attempt to describe the indescribable or to picture the unpicturable! Kilauea to be appreciated or abhorred must be seen in nature's setting, not puny man's.

We arrived at the crater's edge at two a.m. and walked around over the sharp and broken lava, watched the ever-changing surface of the cauldron, or dozed upon the rocks until sunrise of Friday, February 11, 1921.

Brother Cannon, Brother Smith, Sister Budd, Elders Cox, Davis, Swain, David Kalani, and I then stood on the brink while the kodaks clicked, after which we returned to Hilo, enjoying the morning ride, notwithstanding the sleepless night.

During this eventful night, members of the party were witnesses to an inspirational event. Sister Virginia Budd (Jacobsen,) a member of the party, who at the time was serving as a missionary in Hawaii, has written the following account of what took place on that occasion:

The question is often asked, "Do we really have revelation today?" A very impressive incident which happened while I was filling a mission in Hawaii is an answer to this question, and is told with the permission of President David O. McKay, since it concerns him.

It happened in 1921, while President McKay and Elder Hugh Cannon were making a tour of the missions of the world. After a day of inspiring conference meetings in Hilo, Hawaii, a night trip to the Kilauea volcano was arranged for the visiting brethren and some of the missionaries. About nine o'clock that evening, two carloads, about ten of us, took off for the then very active volcano.

We stood on the rim of that fiery pit watching Pele in her satanic antics, our backs chilled by the cold winds sweeping down from snowcapped Mauna Loa, and our faces almost blistered by the heat of the molten lava. Tiring of the cold, one of the elders discovered a volcanic balcony about four feet down inside the crater where observers could watch the display without being chilled by the wind. It seemed perfectly sound, and the "railing" on the open side of it formed a fine protection from the intense heat, making it an excellent place to view the spectacular display.

After first testing its safety, Brother McKay and three of the elders climbed down into the hanging balcony. As they stood there warm and comfortable, they teased the others of us more timid ones who had hesitated to take advantage of the protection they had found. For quite some time we all watched the everchanging sight as we alternately chilled and roasted.

After being down there in their protected spot for some time, suddenly Brother McKay said to those with him, "Brethren, I feel impressed that we should get out of here."

With that he assisted the elders to climb out, and then they in turn helped him up to the wind-swept rim. It seems incredible, but almost immediately the whole balcony crumbled and fell with a roar into the molten lava a hundred feet or so below.

It is easy to visualize the feelings of those who witnessed this terrifying experience. Not a word was said . . . the whole thing was too awful, with all that word means. The only sound was the hiss and roar of Pele, the Fire Goddess of old Hawaii, screaming her disappointment.

None of us, who were witnesses to this experience could ever doubt the reality of "revelation in our day!" Some might say it was merely inspiration, but to us, it was a direct revelation given to a worthy man.
