Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A MEMORABLE APOSTOLIC VISIT TO THE ISLANDS OF SAMOA

May 31, 1921

Among the sacred and never-to-be-forgotten incidents experienced by President David O. McKay during his world-tour of missions of the Church was that of the singular and soul-stirring farewell to the Saints and friends of the Islands of Samoa which took place at Sauniatu, Samoa, May 31, 1921.

Elder John Q. Adams, who at the time was the president of the Samoan Mission, gives a vivid word picture of events leading up to this incident as follows:

Samoa's big day, for months heralded and anticipated by Saint and stranger alike, the day when for the first time since the dawn of human life in the isles, a real, live Apostle was to set foot upon these tropic shores, is fast drawing to an all-too-rapid conclusion, for the hours of such occasions race by on the wings of moments.

We had scarcely one week after the receipt of Brother McKay's wireless from New Zealand in which to scatter the news about Upolu and Savaii, the two British Islands upon which he and Brother Cannon were first to land. In Upolu this was not a difficult feat, as there are fair trails, and our headquarters are on this island, so we had couriers going to the two ends the day the word came. Getting to Savaii might ordinarily have been quite a proposition on such short notice, but not in this case, for the Lord came to the rescue, and we learned of a boat going to Palauli, the very place we had hoped to reach early the next morning. Not trusting to mail, we had a Samoan missionary make a special trip. Within two hours after he landed there, so he afterward said, a messenger had been sent and reached the conference president a dozen miles down the rough trail, and that night away went one elder one way, and another left down the opposite side of the island, a distance of two hundred miles staring them in the face, and a whole island to notify. So went news in olden time before the age of more perfect communication, and so went our heralds, for Samoa is yet primitive in her outer isles, from necessity in Savaii, owing to the big stretches of bad lava lands.

On the morning of May 10 definite word came from the S. S. Tofua by wireless that she would make Apia in the early evening. Choir practice in the Pesega Church was on, a council circle of church chiefs sat across the way on Apia's big house considering problems of the near arrival, and we missionaries were kneeling at early evening prayer, when a breathless messenger spread consternation in our midst with the announcement that the S. S. Tofua was in port. The hurry and scurry of the succeeding few minutes may only partly be imagined. Suffice it to add that all the Saints, including the band, chiefs, schools, and members in general were at the wharf within half an hour. The request of the Saints that Elders McKay and Cannon remain aboard ship until morning in order that a fitting reception, the fruits of months of preparation, be accorded, Elder McKay graciously acceded to President Adams and a number of elders who went out to the ship anchored in the bay for that purpose.

At nine o'clock on the eleventh President and Sister Adams and Elder and Sister Griffiths went out to the ship in two great long rowboats all decorated with garlands of vines and flowers, and the Apostle and his companions were escorted back to the wharf. One of the crews rowed with the old-fashioned paddles used in native canoes, and as they paddled joyously along to the accompaniment of typical Samoan boat songs, punctuated by occasional yells of accentuation, it pleased them immensely to have Brother McKay join in their whoops in sheer boyish glee.

As soon as greetings with the dozen and a half elders were over with, the British custom officials courteously dispensed with regulations in which they are invariably strict and allowed us to go directly to the throng who were awaiting us in front of the building. Grouped separately were the chiefs, missionaries, Relief Societies, schools, and band, with many strangers, interested onlookers. They had all heard often in sermons and otherwise for years of the existence of prophets and Apostles nowadays as formerly, and now was come their opportunity to see a real one. All work of government employees at the waterfront stopped for the same reason. From group to group went Brother McKay and Elder Cannon, greeting warmly the various persons, and in turn receiving veritable homage and reverence. The spirit on this occasion was wonderful.

Then all formed in line, and down Apia's one thoroughfare went the procession headed by the famous Mormon band from Sauniatu. After them came a car or so and then the schools and missionaries and others. At the doors of all business establishments persons crowded. Business was at a standstill.

Perhaps thirty high chiefs, in the Church and out of it, entertained in an august council circle in which the usual eloquent Samoan welcoming speeches were delivered and replied to by the visitors, and the proverbial bowl of kava or native drink of respect passed with becoming ceremony and dignity. As a distinct mark of respect, Brother McKay was presented with one of the largest pieces of kava root ever seen in these parts to take home as a keepsake.

At three p.m., a great feast, spread under a coconut leaf canopy was partaken of by hundreds. At this, as well as the events of the remainder of the day, were many of the highest officials and chiefs of the government and of the islands. It was a day to be remembered, and a historical one for Samoa in general, and our Church here in particular.

The next four days were filled with conference meetings. At times there were as high as 1,510 persons present at the meetings and on the lawns surrounding the scene of action. At these sessions President McKay and Brother Cannon occupied most of the time, and the spiritual feasts were memorable ones.

Frequently there would be many in the audience weeping, and we knew that some of them could not understand English, in which language the talks were first given and then interpreted by Su'a Kippen. The Holy Spirit was so strong and convincing that before the Samoan translation had been given, tears were shed, and the principles discussed were all applicable to the occasion and the needs of the islands.

During the week baptismal services were held, a missionary testimony meeting was held, and a concert by the Sauniatu band and school presented. All in all, the week was a perfect success from every standpoint and will ever stand out in mind as one of the rare occasions of life, and as for the work here in the islands it may well be justly considered an historical event, for never before has any General Church Authority been in Samoa. The warm welcome of the outside chiefs, a very remarkable transformation of the bitter sentiment of bygone years, was no inconsiderable element of contributary satisfaction.

Visits were made to Pago Pago, and to Tutuila under very trying circumstances in a small gasoline boat. Elders McKay and Cannon also took a twelve-mile walk up the coast from Pago Pago to Mapusaga where a Church school is located.

On this occasion, and at frequent other times, they were forced to undergo what we more experienced people in island conditions would call real privations, yet they held up splendidly without complaint, with no serious after-affects, which is a source of wonder, for they are not acclimated, are not as young as the elders who ordinarily rough it here, and are not used to the native food, of which they have eaten quite freely. The Lord's blessings are with them in a physical way, as he is spiritually, and despite the strenuous experiences that no doubt await them in the coming months, when they will have been in all climes from torrid to frigid, they will assuredly be taken care of by our Heavenly Father. This much we feel we should say at this particular point in our narrative, for they have had some exertions since landing here—in fact, it has pretty well been one continuous period of action.

We might go on and on and still have quite sufficient material left to compose many a page of description of this most wonderful of visits during the past three weeks spent in the company of Elders McKay and Cannon, in which their inspiring discourses and daily walk and talk have been of a character and faith-building nature; and we might also go to tempting and disproportionate lengths as to the part played by Samoa and her Saints and people at large in all the multitude of activities, but we shall close with the briefest of reference to a most magnificent example of the attitude of the Saints and people toward our brethren and how it has been regarded, namely, the farewell that Sauniatu spontaneously provided.

One of the noteworthy features of the whole visit has been the great number of sick and afflicted that came or were brought to them for administration. We had been busy all morning with the brethren inspecting the school at Sauniatu, one of the most important phases of their visit, in which Brother McKay declared to the children that from now on Sauniatu would be numbered among the schools of the Church system of education. From there we repaired to the mission home and administered to a number of sick, at the conclusion of which we stepped out into the front room ready to spring into the saddle for the return. But no! The good Saints of the village had a farewell handshake to claim. The Relief Society sisters were lined across the room in a double column, and on out onto the porch and around to one side the lines stretched. The plaintive farewell song "Tofa, My Feleni" was struck up and from one to the other we went with warm handclasps and fervent words. Tears were in evidence from the beginning.

Of this touching farewell, President McKay has recorded the following in his personal world tour diary:

IN SAMOA — TUESDAY, MAY 31, 1921

Following the Alofa and the presentation of the Au Tonga to Brother Hugh J. Cannon and me, the fathers and mothers came for blessings for themselves as well as for their children, and we received them all even up to an hour past the appointed time to leave. Healthy, robust babies, as well as those who were ill and threatened with blindness, were blessed as sincerely and prayerfully as our souls could bless.

As we came out of our room, we found the people standing in double column from our door out across the lawn to the street, the mothers nearest, then the fathers, and last the youth and children.

They had been informed that we should not have time to shake their hands, so they had prepared a farewell song for the occasion. This they began to sing as we came out. Brother and Sister Adams led, followed by Brother Cannon, and I came last, shaking hands with everyone. When those kindhearted sisters began to kiss my hand and cry, I felt a pretty tender feeling take possession of me, which was well defined when their sobbing interrupted their singing.

When at length, I came to old Brother Sai Masina, whose one last wish, as he had said, had now been gratified, I put my arms around him, and let the tears spring to my eyes as he sobbed against my breast. By this time the entire assembly were in tears. Staunch old Opapo, the head man of the village, sobbed like a child, and clung to us as though we were his sons. Kippen, too, threw himself on my neck and cried aloud.

Finally, the last little boy crowding around had pressed our hands, so with tear-bedimmed eyes, we walked slowly toward the stream beyond which our horses were waiting. The band on the porch played "Tofa, my Feleni," and the people stood waving their fond farewell. As a turn in the road obstructed them from view, I thought I had seldom experienced a more impressive farewell.

Just as we had mounted our horses, we looked toward the turn at the bridge, and saw the crowd headed by the band coming toward us. Before we were ready to start, they gathered around us again, eager to have one more handshake. It was touching indeed to see the old patriarch Sai Masina crowd his way through to reach my outstretched hand.

From that spot to the dugway leading down to the ocean, there is a straight, grassy roadway, lined with tall native trees and tropical vines. As we rode slowly up the gentle incline, the band leading, the people followed as if they just would not or could not yield to parting. We had gained, perhaps, a quarter of a mile ahead of them, when I felt impressed to say: "I think we should return and leave our blessing with them here in this beautiful grove."

"I think that's inspiration," said Brother Adams.

As we approached the sobbing crowd, I could not help thrilling with the picturesqueness of the scene! The green avenue, lined with stately trees whose inter-twining branches formed a vista ending only at the village, the white dresses of the women, and the red turban of the band boys' uniforms stood out in beautiful contrast to the various shades of green surrounding them. It was a setting and an occasion worthy of the best efforts of the most gifted artist!

Hanging my folded umbrella on an overhanging limb, I dismounted, and Kippen told them why we had come back. Their sobs were louder than my voice when I began the prayer, but they became more subdued as I continued and their "Amene" was distinct and impressive at the close.

At this point I shall record what happened later in the day, but which was not reported to us until the arrival of two of the elders on the following afternoon. After they had watched us until we were beyond their sight, they returned solemnly to the village and separated to their huts. Kippen, who had been our interpreter, immediately sat down and wrote the prayer as he remembered it. He and some others then conceived the idea of burying a copy of it on the spot where I had stood and erecting a pile of stones as a marking place. The suggestion it seems was no sooner made than acted upon. The town bell was rung, the people assembled, the plan presented and approved, and the crowd once more walked to the place of parting.

Here the prayer was read, a hole dug, and the bottle in which a copy had been sealed, together with an account of the entire proceedings, buried underneath a pile of stones, each of the heads of families throwing a handful or two of soil to assist in the covering. The branch on which my umbrella had been hung was taken to the village to be kept as a souvenir, and steps were taken to erect a small monument of what seemed to them and to us to be a sacred spot.

Though it began to rain just as we left the conference house, it stopped within two minutes, and we rode the twenty miles to Pesega without getting wet. This was truly significant, for it rained hard during the afternoon at Sauniatu and poured at Pesega. Fifteen minutes after we entered the mission house, it rained in good old torrential fashion.

We retired feeling happy and thankful for the associations and experiences of one of the most memorable days of our tour, indeed of our lives! "Oh, I never will forget you, Samoa e le galo atu."

Elder Adams in his report of this event on May 31, 1921 said,

Thither had followed the weeping throng of Saints, reluctant to sever the intimate and affectionate association of the immediate past. Still on and on they traversed the beautiful tropical trail that bisects the adjacent rubber plantation for a mile, a reverent group of two hundred, headed by the band, to whose strains of the pathetic native farewell melody "Good-bye, my Feleni," they slowly and solemnly marched. Elder McKay far in advance, with his party of four horsemen, looking back with tears in his eyes, could bear it no longer—the scene and the spirit and influence of it all were altogether too affecting and remarkable. In shaking voice he bade us return with him for the third ordeal of the final farewell, a moment and an occasion of a lifetime or of centuries!

There the now silent and expectant groups were standing disconsolate as Israel of old bereft of their Moses; he dismounted in the trial and raising aloft his hands as a patriarch of the past, he pronounced a remarkable and soul-stirring benediction, all clear and now partly fulfilled.

It is the testimony of some who cast their eyes upward momentarily as inspired words flowed in great power from Elder McKay's lips that a halo of brightness rested upon him like a shaft of white light, and certain it is that the borderland of heaven and earth rested in close proximity to the spot where was given this wonderful manifestation and blessing. Each listener's soul throbbed with the conviction of the truth.

Immediately after the final farewell, we left the meditating group of Saints still standing silent in the foreground, stunned at eventually losing sight of the receding figures, albeit in apparent enthralment. We afterward learned that they at once set about perpetuating the day's great event. A hole was dug at the exact spot where had stood Brother McKay when blessing them, and into this was consigned a hermetically sealed bottle, containing a record of the occasion, including a copy of the prayer as well as Kippen Su'a could recollect it there and then. Hymns were sung, discourses delivered, and explanations again made in detail of the significance of the great day.

Several other events have occurred since, but we shall say nothing of any of these, for they all sink into insignificance before the simple splendor and ineffaceable recollection of that sacred hour on that trail when the hearts of a whole village became as one in throbbing to the inspiration of a single thought and hope—the full realization by a whole-souled race that they had been favored by an apostolic visit and could only reciprocate by revealing the appreciation and gratitude with which their great warm souls glowed.

A year later, on May 31, 1922, one could have glimpsed a similar scene reenacted, only on a larger scale. On that day a monument was unveiled and dedicated. It was erected in commemoration of the visit of Elders David O. McKay and Hugh J. Cannon and of the remarkable parting benediction uttered on the spot by Elder McKay. The monument measures six feet square at the base and is thirteen feet high. On the face of the four-foot square section of the shaft is a beautiful bronze plate, twelve by thirty inches in dimension, on which is etched in conspicuous lettering the following legend of the visit:

"Today, Tuesday, May 31, 1921 Apostle David O. McKay Stood Just Across the River And Pronounced a Memorable Apostolic Blessing Upon the Assembled Sauniatu Saints A Fitting Climax to a Perfect Visit Samoa's Love Is Told Thus Mizpa O Le Faailoga Lenci O Le Alofa Atoatoa O Samoa Mo Misi Makei Ma Misi Kanona. Mesepa."

The dedicatory exercises, attended by hundreds of people, dressed in white, and by forty missionaries, consisted of a very impressive and appropriate program of songs, speeches, the dedicatory prayer by President John Q. Adams, and music by a new brass band of thirty pieces, known as "Brother McKay's Brass Band." As the shaft was unveiled, the band broke out with the national anthem, and up stepped scores of school children, dressed in white, with armsful of wreaths and bouquets of tropical flowers, fairly burying the base of the structure with the fragrance and the riot of color of the islands. Tears of happiness and emotion were shed. Into every inch of the monument had gone Samoa's love and affection—in it is crystallized all the appreciation and estimation of which this wholesouled island race is capable of for their Makei and Kanona.

More fitting and prophetic was the scriptural analogy raised by Elder McKay in the last discourse delivered by him in Samoa prior to departure from these shores into the great expanse of ocean stretching to the westward, when he quoted and explained as a parting thought Genesis 51:49Genesis 51:49. Mizpah (watch tower) is but one word but expresses a wealth of significance: "The Lord watch between us in our separation!"

The farewell given to President McKay and Elder Hugh J. Cannon by the Saints of Samoa will remain forever as one of the sublimest and sweetest memories of all who witnessed it.

President David O. McKay Returns to Sauniatu, Samoa.

On January 15, 1955, President David O. McKay, in company with Sister McKay, returned to Sauniatu, Samoa, and visited the spot on which the monument had been erected in honor of his visit thirty-four years before. The following is recorded in the day-by-day journal of President McKay's diary to the South Sea Island missions by Elder Franklin J. Murdock:

Following the King's kava ceremonies held in the Pesega Samoan Council House, during which President McKay and his party met all the high chiefs, we took a beautiful drive to Sauniatu to dedicate the new school and other buildings established there. As we neared the valley, which is about a twenty-two mile drive from Apia, the country takes on a mountainous terrain, resembling the Yellowstone Park area. Tall mountain peaks, heavily wooded, with acres of coconut trees and rushing mountain streams are thrilling to see. This is the most beautiful spot we have as yet seen. This place is very dear to President McKay's heart because of events that transpired thirty-four years ago.

As we crossed the bridge and looked up at the beautiful white monument which the people of Sauniatu erected in memory of President McKay's visit, we could feel the spirit of welcome, progress, and beauty. We received the impression that here is where the "pure in heart" dwell. All the homes are clean, beautiful landscaped, and orderly. Being elevated, it could well be a perfect setting for people who live the gospel.

A fifty-voice choir stood by the monument, and as the Prophet approached they sang, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." We all wept tears of joy and thanksgiving to be at this spot on this day.

It had rained all week, but this day must be beautiful, and it was, with blue skies and warm sunshine!

We all walked slowly to the meeting, and for the next two hours one of the most beautiful services I have ever attended was conducted. President McKay rose to the occasion, and brought such a rich spirit of thankfulness and appreciation to the people that they all listened intently to every word. We could have gone on in such a spirit all day, but we had to leave for Apia where the people were waiting to hold a meeting that evening.

President Howard B. Stone, president of the Samoan Mission at the time of President McKay's 1955 visit, gives the following report concerning the services held at the monument and at the dedicatory services of the new Sauniatu Church building:

We paused briefly at the stone which was erected about one-half mile out of the village of Sauniatu which bore the date 1921, representing the year that David O. McKay hung his umbrella on the kapoc tree nearby, and dismounted from his horse to give the Saints and village a memorable apostolic blessing. This concrete monument was partially surrounded by a hedge, beautifully decorated with an assortment of tropical flowers.

We continued to the Sauniatu River and parked our cars. There were several carloads of Saints, six busses filled with visiting Saints, and a large number of others already waiting for us in the village. As we crossed the bridge, we beheld the beautiful David O. McKay Monument, freshly painted in white, showing a beautiful gold plaque. It was surrounded by flowers and low hedges, spelling out the name of Sauniatu. It was indeed a beautiful sight to behold.

As we continued up the incline and walked to the "Welcome Arch," we passed through two lines of Saints all clothed in white. We proceeded to the top of the incline, and stood at the end of the village looking toward the chapel. We could see many beautiful red tinroofed buildings on both sides of the road.

Hedges were trimmed and decorated with hibiscus flowers; lawns were freshly cut; and clusters of tropical blooms were growing profusely and abundantly in wellkept gardens—truly a Garden of Eden! As we stood there, President McKay choked up, and tears came to his eyes as he whispered, "Truly, this is the most beautiful place I have ever seen!"

We walked down to the end of the village to attend dedicatory services of the new Sauniatu Church edifice. The Saints followed us, and within a few minutes the new chapel was packed with Saints and investigators. In fact, the building was overflowing and could not begin to accommodate the large crowd of people.

A two-hour meeting was held. Speakers were President Howard B. Stone, President D'Monte Coombs, President Franklin J. Murdock, Sister David O. McKay, and President McKay. At the conclusion of President McKay's soul-stirring and inspirational address, he delivered the dedicatory prayer.

More than six hundred Saints were in attendance. More beautiful songs were sung by the congregation and the Sauniatu District Choir. Following this most impressive service, we all returned to Pesega.
