Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

GIFT OF INTERPRETATION OF TONGUES BESTOWED

April 23, 1921

ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT events on my world tour of the missions of the Church was the gift of interpretation of the English tongue to the Saints of New Zealand, at a session of their conference, held on the 23rd day of April, 1921, at Puke Tapu Branch, Waikato District, Huntly, New Zealand.

The service was held in a large tent, beneath the shade of which hundreds of earnest men and women gathered in anxious anticipation of seeing and hearing an Apostle of the Church, the first one to visit that land.

When I looked over that vast assemblage and contemplated the great expectations that filled the hearts of all who had met together, I realized how inadequately I might satisfy the ardent desires of their souls, and I yearned, most earnestly, for the gift of tongues that I might be able to speak to them in their native language.

Until that moment I had not given much serious thought to the gift of tongues, but on that occasion, I wished with all my heart, that I might be worthy of that divine power.

In other missions I had spoken through an interpreter but, able as all interpreters are, I nevertheless felt hampered, in fact, somewhat inhibited, in presenting my message.

Now, I faced an audience that had assembled with unusual expectations, and I then realized, as never before, the great responsibility of my office. From the depth of my soul, I prayed for divine assistance.

When I arose to give my address, I said to Brother Stuart Meha, our interpreter, that I would speak without his translating, sentence by sentence, what I said, and then to the audience I continued:

"I wish, oh, how I wish I had the power to speak to you in your own tongue, that I might tell you what is in my heart; but since I have not the gift, I pray, and I ask you to pray, that you might have the spirit of interpretation, of discernment, that you may understand at least the spirit while I am speaking, and then you will get the words and the thought when Brother Meha interprets."

My sermon lasted forty minutes, and I have never addressed a more attentive, a more respectful audience. My listeners were in perfect rapport—this I knew when I saw tears in their eyes. Some of them at least, perhaps most of them, who did not understand English, had the gift of interpretation.

Brother Sidney Christy, a native New Zealander, who had been a student at Brigham Young University, at the close of my address, whispered to me, "Brother McKay, they got your message!"

"Yes," I replied, "I think so, but for the benefit of some who may not have understood, we shall have Brother Meha give a synopsis of it in Maori."

During the translation, some of the Maoris corrected him on some points, showing that they had a clear conception of what had been said in English.

Two subsequent experiences, one of which occurred on that memorable world tour, enabled me to realize more clearly how the spirit of interpretation may come.

On one occasion when I was addressing an audience at Aintab, Syria, I realized that Elder J. Wilford Booth, who was translating into the Turkish language, had interpreted incorrectly a thought I had expressed and, although I did not then—and do not now—understand a word of Turkish, I stopped Brother Booth in his translation and said, "That was the wrong interpretation, Brother Booth." I then repeated my sentence.

"How did you know, Brother McKay?" he asked.

"I gave the opposite meaning."

Later, when I was called to preside over the European Mission, I was one day addressing an audience at Rotterdam. Brother Cornelius Zappey was interpreting, and, on that occasion, I had an experience identical to that which occurred with Brother Booth. When I called Brother Zappey's attention to what I felt was not the correct interpretation, he laughingly said to the audience, before making the correction, "There is no need of my interpreting, Brother McKay understands Dutch."

I cite these two incidents merely to emphasize the fact that, although I did not realize when I was in New Zealand how the spirit of interpretation operated on others, yet I accepted it as a fact, as a truth, that later was demonstrated to me by the Spirit of the Lord.

Another lesson that these incidents have taught me is this: that none of us should be too prone to condemn things which we do not fully understand.

"For what man knoweth the things of man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (I Cor. 2:11.)

My experience has taught me that the safe anchor of the soul, and indeed, the security and happiness in life, are founded upon a faith in God, upon a faith in the divinity of Jesus Christ and in his gospel of peace and life, upon a faith in the efficacy of prayer, and in the power of the priesthood as bestowed upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and through him conferred upon others who have been and are worthy to receive this blessed possession.

Such a faith becomes as fixed and constant in its guidance as the Polar Star. It enables one to overcome trials and discouragements, to face life with courage, to meet disaster with fortitude, and, when the final event comes, to face death without fear.

(Dated February 1, 1935 and signed by President David O. McKay.)

Note: In the Church Historian's office, in Blue Book 4, 081. 6-8935, following an account of the gift of interpretation of the English tongue to the Saints of New Zealand, are testimonies as to the actuality of the occurrence by Wi Smith, Sidney Christy, Stuart Meha, and Karena W. Takoro. These testimonies were prepared in 1934 at the request of President Rufus K. Hardy. Original, handwritten letters from natives who were present on this occasion, testifying that they received the gift of interpretation while President McKay was speaking, are also preserved in President McKay's scrapbooks.

Of this inspirational event, Brother Wi Smith, in a letter dated May 14, 1934, said:

This is to certify that I, Wi Smith, president of the Mahia District, do hereby state and declare that, at the Mormon Hui Tau held at Huntly on April 23, 1921, I did personally witness and hear Apostle David O. McKay offer up a prayer asking the Lord to enlighten the Maori congregation during his sermon without the help of a Maori interpreter.

And I testify that this eventually happened; all the Maoris young and old enjoyed his sermon.

Brother Sidney Christy in a letter dated May 18, 1934, had this to say:

At the opening session of this conference (Hui Tau, April 23, 1921), Apostle David O. McKay was one of the speakers. He opened his speech by saying, "Although I know there are two very competent interpreters present in Brother Sidney Christy and Brother Stewart Meha, I pray that the Spirit which emanates from our Heavenly Father may permeate throughout this gathering so that whatever I say may be understood by everyone present without the aid of an interpreter."

Here, I Sidney Christy, do testify that after he had spoken but a few minutes the Apostle had the whole congregation in tears, and when the old Maori people who did not understand English were approached after the service, they stated that they knew every word uttered by the Apostle.

During this conference there were two Josephites who were doing their level best to make trouble. After one of the meetings in which they interrupted the speakers several times, one of them approached Elder McKay, and in a sarcastic manner said to him, "I would like to shake hands with an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for I have never seen one before." He then extended his hand and as soon as it came in contact with the Apostle's, he shivered with an ague and collapsed at the Apostle's feet and sobbed. The Apostle thereupon lifted him up by the hand and said, "Brother, let me give you some advice: Never tear another man's house down. If you wish to use a hammer, use it in building a house of your own." The other Josephite then came and took his friend away.

This was witnessed by scores of people, and it is common knowledge throughout the New Zealand Mission.
