Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A REMARKABLE MEETING

A sacred experience in the Turkish Mission during world tour of missions in 1921, for the Deseret News, November 26, 1932.

ON DECEMBER 2, 1920, the late President Hugh J. Cannon and I were set apart for a special mission, to visit a number of the Latter-day Saint missions in distant parts of the world.

Among these was the Turkish Mission, of which Armenian Saints composed the principal part. It was then in a disorganized state, and the members of the Church who had not been killed during the Great World War or massacred by the Turks were so scattered that it was difficult even to know where they were situated.

December 4, we started on our mission.

In March, 1921, we learned that on a special fast day, contributions in the amount of several thousand dollars had been made for relief of the destitute in Europe and the suffering Armenians in Asia. We learned, too, that the First Presidency contemplated sending a special messenger to Syria to render personal aid to our Armenian Saints.

Our mission carried us to the Antipodes, and to a number of the South Sea Isles; so the year 1921 was nearing its close before we found ourselves sailing toward Port Said en route to Syria.

During the months intervening, we had received no word concerning conditions in Armenia. We did not know whether anyone had been sent with relief funds. We knew only that it was our duty to visit that mission and report to the First Presidency of the Church.

Inquiry by cable of the president of the European Mission brought us the information that Elder J. Wilford Booth was on his way to Aleppo. This was good news. The next thing was to locate him. We communicated with the United States Consul at Aleppo, and on November 3, 1921, at Jerusalem received the following telegram:

"Aleppo, November 2, 1921: Informed Booth en route Aleppo. Do not know whereabouts — Jackson."

My diary of that same date reads:

"We have no idea where he is, but shall leave Jerusalem for Haifa, en route to Aleppo, to-morrow morning. Have concluded to go by auto through Samaria, visiting Bible scenes."

At 3:30 p.m. of the same day, we ascended the Mount of Olives, and, choosing a secluded spot near where Jesus is supposed to have stood when he cried: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem," etc. (Matt. 23:37), we knelt in humble supplication and thanksgiving to God. The substance of our prayer I need not give here, except that we prayed that we should be led by inspiration on our trip to the Armenian Mission.

Upon returning to the hotel, I felt strongly impressed that we should go by train and not by auto to Haifa. When I said as much to President Cannon, he replied, "If you feel that way, we had better take the train."

Our greatest desire as we neared this mission was to meet Elder Booth. Indeed, it seemed that our trip to Syria would be useless unless we should meet him. We were strangers. We knew no one. The branches of the Church in Syria were disorganized. True, we had some names and addresses; but we could not read them, since they were written in the Turkish language. Later, we learned that these addresses, even if we could have found them were useless. The warning given us not to go to Aintab by a British government official as well as by the United States Consul at Cairo only tended to increase our realization of the need of meeting Brother Booth or some other person who could speak the Turkish language of the country and who knew where we might find our scattered people. We carried in our pockets a letter from President Heber J. Grant received at Jerusalem, in which he, too, expressed the hope that Brother Booth and we might meet.

Carrying out our impression not to go by auto through Samaria, we accordingly left Jerusalem by train at 6 a.m., November 4th. We knew that we should be compelled to remain one night at Haifa, before continuing our journey to Aleppo. Past experiences, one or two of which had been very annoying, had taught us the advisability of knowing the names of respectable hotels in each strange city we approached. This we usually obtained by inquiry at the town we were just leaving.

Shortly after leaving Jerusalem and before we approached a little town caller Bitter, I said to President Cannon:

"Did you ask for the name of a hotel at Haifa?"

"No," he replied, "I didn't; did you?"

Now it was nothing unusual for me to forget a thing like that, but it was for Brother Cannon. Indeed, I do not recall another single important detail on the entire trip which he forgot or overlooked.

We both felt reassured and at our ease when he said:

"The Allenby Hotel runner is on this train: I will ask him when we get to Ludd." (Lydia of New Testament, see Acts.)

But, strange to say, at Ludd, we changed trains and were several miles away from there before we realized that neither of us had remembered to speak to the hotel man about a hotel at Haifa.

I have gone into detail about this seemingly insignificant matter because it has direct bearing upon what follows.

Arriving at Haifa, I said to Brother Cannon, "You take care of the luggage here, and I will try to make inquiry regarding a suitable place at which to stay."

I had some difficulty in doing so; but returned in five or ten minutes saying it seemed "Hobson's choice" between two hotels, so we decided to go to the one that had a "runner" waiting to take care of our luggage.

The delay caused by seeking information about hotels brought us to the station office door just at the same moment that another traveler reached it. He touched me on the shoulder saying, "Isn't this Brother McKay?"

Astonished beyond expression to be thus addressesd in so strange a town, I turned, and recognized Elder Wilford Booth, the one man above all others whom we were most desirous of meeting. We had met, too, at the most opportune time and place. Having known nothing of our whereabouts he had come from the western part of the world, hoping in his heart to meet us. Knowing from the cablegram only that he was en route to Syria, we had come from the eastern part of the world, traveling westward, praying that we might meet him; and there we had met at the very time and place best suited to our convenience and to the success of our mission to the Armenians. It could not have been better had we been planning it for weeks.

As we recounted to each other our experiences, we had no doubt that our coming together was the result of divine interposition.

If Brother Cannon and I had taken an auto from Jerusalem to Haifa; or if we had remembered to secure the name of a hotel before we left the "Allenby"; or if we had thought to ask the hotel runner at Ludd; we should not have met Elder Booth at Haifa. It is true he would have been in town that same day, but he was intending to stop at the German "Hospice," where we should never have met him. He would have left by auto to Beirut; we, by train to Damascus.

Later developments showed that he would have been delayed at Beirut, while we should have been making fruitless search in Aleppo for the lost Saints.

Indeed, had it not been for our having met at Haifa, our trip to the Armenian Mission would have been, so far as human wisdom can tell, a total failure. As it was, among many duties and experiences, we organized the Armenian Mission, to take the place of the Turkish Mission.

This is only one incident of many which I might relate which have convinced me that if men will but seek the Lord in the right way, they will always find him. Truly, I can say with Benjamin Franklin, who evidently discovered the same truth:

"The longer I live the more convincing proof I see that God governs in the affairs of men."
