Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

THE CHINESE REALM DEDICATED FOR THE PREACHING OF THE GOSPEL

Sunday, January 9, 1921

In his world tour diary under date of January 9, 1921, President David O. McKay gives the following account of the dedication of the Chinese realm:

ELDER HUGH J. CANNON and I have traveled continuously since last Tuesday with the sole purpose in mind to be here in Peking on this Sabbath day.

Before we left home, President Grant suggested that when we were in China, if we felt so impressed, to set the land apart for the preaching of the gospel. As Peking is really the heart of China, we had concluded that this would be an appropriate place to perform this sacred and far-reaching duty.

The sky was cloudless. The sun's bright rays tempered the winter air to pleasantness. Every impression following our earnest prayers together and in secret, seemed to confirm our conclusions arrived at last evening; viz., that it seems that the time is near at hand when these teeming millions should at least be given a glimpse of the glorious Light now shining among the children of men in other and more advanced nations.

Accordingly, we strolled almost aimlessly, wondering where it would be possible to find a secluded spot for worship and prayer. We entered that part of the imperial city, known as the "Forbidden City," and walked by the famous old buildings formerly used as temples. On we walked, until we came to a small grove of cypress trees on the edge of what appeared to have been an old moat running parallel with one of the walls. As we proceeded from east to west, we passed a tree with a large branch shooting out on the north side, and I distinctly received the prompting to choose that as the spot. However, we passed it and walked to the west end but returned again to the designated tree, realizing it to be the most suitable place in the grove.

Under the century old limbs and green leaves of this, one of God's own temples, with uncovered heads, we supplicated our Father in heaven and by the authority of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, and in the name of the Only Begotten of the Father, turned the key that unlocked the door for the entrance into this benighted and famine-stricken land of the authorized servants of God to preach the true and restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Brother Cannon, with well-chosen words, and with a spirit of deep earnestness and humility, blessed the chosen spot as one of prayer and supplication to the Almighty. It was plainly evident that he was sincerely affected by the solemnity of the occasion.

Acting under appointment of the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and by virtue of the holy apostleship, I then dedicated and set apart the Chinese realm for the preaching of the glad tidings of great joy as revealed in this dispensation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and prayed particularly that the present government may become stabilized, if not by the Chinese themselves, then by the intervention of the civilized powers of the world.

Brother Hugh J. Cannon in an article published in "The Improvement Era," Vol. 24, pages 443-6, 1920-21, gives the following interesting account of this dedication within the walls of the "Forbidden City," Peking, China:

Elder David O. McKay, of the Council of the Twelve, and the writer, arrived in Peking, the chief city of China, Saturday evening, January 8, 1921. The horde of ragged mendicants, grimy porters and insistent jinrikisha men, who fought noisily for possession of us as we emerged from the station was not such as to inspire a feeling of affectionate brotherhood. However, we had gone to Peking to do the Lord's will, as nearly as we could ascertain what it was. His inspiration rested upon his servant in charge, and Elder McKay decided that the land should be dedicated and set apart for the preaching of the gospel of the Master.

It seemed most desirable that this should be done on the following day, as that was the only Sabbath we should be in Peking. But where, in the midst of that clamor and confusion, could a suitable spot be found? The city lies on a level, barren plain. There are no forests, and so far as we knew, no groves nor even clumps of trees. We were wholly unfamiliar with the city and had met no one who could enlighten us. If we went outside the surrounding walls, there was reason to believe no secluded spot could be found nor the ever-present crowd of supplicants avoided.

January 9 dawned clear and cold. With no definite goal in mind, we left the hotel and walked through the legation quarter, under the shadow of dear Old Glory, out into what is known as "The Forbidden City," past the crumbling temples reared to an "Unknown God." Directed, as we believe, by a Higher Power, we came to a grove of cypress trees, partially surrounded by a moat and walked to its extreme northwest corner, then retraced our steps until we reached a tree with divided trunk which had attracted our attention when we first saw it.

"This is the spot," said Elder McKay.

A reposeful peace hovered over the place which seemed already hallowed; one felt it was almost a profanation to tread thereon with covered head and feet.

Two men were in sight, but they seemed oblivious to our presence, and they soon left the grove. There, in the heart of a city with a million inhabitants, we were entirely alone, except for the presence of a divinely sweet and comforting Spirit.

An act destined to affect the lives of four hundred and fifty millions of people now living, as of millions and perhaps billions yet unborn, calls forth feelings of profound solemnity, and that, too, despite the fact that the vast majority of those affected may die in ignorance of the event.

After a prayer had been offered and the spot dedicated as the place of supplication and for the fulfilment of the object of our visit, Elder David O. McKay, in the authority of the holy apostleship, dedicated and set apart the Chinese realm for the preaching of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, whenever the Church Authorities shall deem it advisable to send out missionaries for that purpose. Never was the power of his calling more apparent in his utterances. He blessed the land and its benighted people and supplicated the Almighty to acknowledge this blessing. He prayed that famine and pestilence might be stayed, that the government might become stable, either through its own initiative, or by the intervention of other powers, and that superstition and error, which for ages have enveloped the people, might be discarded, and truth take their place. He supplicated the Lord to send to this land broadminded and intelligent men and women, that upon them might rest the spirit of discernment and the power to comprehend the Chinese nature, so that in the souls of this people an appreciation of the glorious gospel might be awakened.

It was such a prayer and blessing as must be recognized in heaven, and though the effects may not be suddenly apparent, they will be nonetheless real.

If this nation would observe one of the simplest of the Lord's commandments, that of the monthly fast, and give the meals thus saved to those in need, the famine problem would be solved. This would furnish two meals to each of the fifteen million sufferers.

The cypress tree is a symbol of sorrow and sadness in China, and this cypress grove seemed a peculiarly fitting place in which to invoke the blessing of heaven upon this oppressed and sorrowing people.

At Shanhaikwan, the point at which that wonder of wonders, the great Chinese wall meets the sea, and on the frontier of the famine district, we took a picture. Though the morning was bitterly cold, we judged it to be zero weather, some of these people were nearly naked. The shreds of patches which only partially covered their emaciated and shivering bodies might well feel complimented at being called rags.

One contemplates China's past accomplishments with a feeling akin to awe. We respect old age, and especially so when, with antiquity, we see achievement; and it is well to remember that this land had a highly developed civilization nearly twenty-five centuries before the Christian era.

Notwithstanding her present pitiably inane condition, we have met some admirable Chinese people and cherish the sincere hope that at no very distant day the light of the gospel may penetrate the present over-whelming darkness. Though the abject misery we beheld appealed to our tenderest sympathies, gold and silver we could not give, but the door was unlocked for them through which they may enter into eternal life.
