Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

STORY OF AH CHING

A true faith-promoting story of Ah Ching, a Chinese member of the Church in Samoa, as told by President McKay, June 4, 1921.

"For great and low there's but one test, 'Tis that each one shall do his best. Who works with all the strength he can Shall never die in debt to man."

CONFUCIUS ONCE SAID, "All my knowledge is strung on one thread"; and on that "one connecting thread," we learn from his disciple, Tsang Tsu, were hung the principles, Self-control and Charity to one's neighbor. These are certainly two fundamental elements in character building, without which no man can justly claim true nobility.

I thought I saw the fruits of these two principles exemplified in the life of Ah Ching as I listened to him one day, when he and his wife, his son Arthur and Telese (Mrs. Arthur Ah Ching), acted as host and hostess to a number of missionaries. That Saturday afternoon and evening, June 4, are numbered among the most pleasant of the many delightful days and nights spent in "dear old" Samoa. Every hour seemed rich in fruition of profitable intercourse and valued friendships, of inspirational experiences, not the least interesting of which was Ah Ching's narration of his early life in these islands. I wish my pen could reproduce his accent, and his nervous, animated facial expression as he spoke, in his "pidgin" English mixed with Samoan words, of the trials and reverses and service of those struggling years. But that were wishing the impossible; so I must be content to write in that old prosaic style which, I fear, is "dry, stale and unprofitable."

Ah Ching is small of stature, about five feet-five, I should say, and rather lightly built at that. His muscular movements, like his thoughts, indicate a highly nervous temperament. I fancy his temper in his early youth was of the gunpowder type; when touched off, it would go with a flash; and, yet, today, I believe he can endure imposition and ignominy, if necessary, as patiently as any of his brethren.

If you were to meet him on the street, or could see him move unobtrusively into a rear or side seat of church, you would think him, if you gave him even a passing thought, one of the most humble of Chinamen — I'm not sure that your opinion would change, either, if you chanced to see him in his modest three-roomed house in the rear of his little store in Apia; and yet, if you were to offer him a cashier's check of $50,000 for his property interests, he would undoubtedly smile at you, shake his head, and turn to his busy, unassuming life with a view of adding a few more pounds sterling to his comfortable fortune.

This prosperous little businessman "no can lead" (read), he "no can lite," (write); but he can "speakee China, and speakee Samoa." He keeps no books and has never kept an account in his business transactions; but he has never purchased an article in his life without paying spot cash for it. He has never "owed a man a penny." He quickly remarked, "If any man no payee me, please himself, me no care."

Now, undoubtedly, in this old workaday, business world, which, in many of its aspects, seems a long way from that anticipated time when every man will esteem his neighbor as himself, and there shall be no rogues to defraud and to steal, an X-ray examination into Ah Ching's business might reveal the fact that not a few man have "pleased themselves" not to "payee" all they owe him. At any rate there was one who deliberately planned to defraud him, and whose dastardly treachery was the means of testing Ah Ching in life's crucible. Had his character not possessed more pure gold than dross, he would perhaps even now be deprived of life, or be still wearing the stripes of a condemned felon.

Ah Ching was a young man in his teens when he left Puchow, Fukien Province, China, and enlisted as one of the crew of a small vessel sailing for the South Seas. True to his thrifty nature, acquired by heredity, and necessity, he saved nearly every penny of his fair wage. Thus after ten years' constant service with the ship's company, he had accumulated a thousand pounds sterling or more. A business friend whom he had met during his not infrequent visits to Apia induced him to invest his hard-earned savings in a hotel and store, he to furnish the money, his friend to furnish the brains and business acumen required, and the two to divide the profits upon a proportionate basis acceptable to both. Ah Ching invested his money, only to discover in a year or two that he had been robbed of every penny of his hard-earned savings. In certain transfers of the property, it seems his friend had appropriated everything to himself. Trusting Ah Ching, couldn't "leadee," couldn't "litee," so he became an unsuspecting victim to the treachery of one to whom he had entrusted practically his life; for "you take one's life, when you take away the means whereby one lives," and up to that time Ah Ching had had but one object and that was to make money, though he had always made it honestly.

When he realized that he had been robbed of all the savings of his young life, when he sensed the villainy of the dishonest scoundrel whom he had called friend, all the fire in his Chinese nature flashed forth and showed him but one more thing for which to live, and that one thing, revenge. He truly wished that his enemy "had forty thousand lives — one was too poor, too weak, to satisfy his revenge."

"He cheatee me all my money; I killee him"; he hissed in his rage. "I sharpee a knife like a lacee (razor)," he narrated, indicating the length of the knife by touching with his right hand the elbow of his left arm, which he stretched full length. His knife sharpened, he cried in his agonized rage:

"Me killee him!

"Something inside me say, 'No killee him'; I stop; and it say again 'No killee him.'

"Then I know God, he helpee me, so I no killee him. I cly, that is all — just cly." (Cry.)

Who can deny that God did "helpee" him in this great crisis of his life? Whether that help sprang from an unsullied conscience, or gave strength in a moment of weakness to a will that once more assumed the mastery of a passion, or whether his spirit responded to the promptings of the infinite — the fact remains that his frenzy was overpowered, his spirit subdued and he just "clied."

"Yes, thou art ever present, Power Supreme; Not circumscribed by time, nor fix'd to space, Confined to altars, nor to temples bound, In wealth, in want, in freedom, or in chains; In dungeons or on the thrones the faithful find thee."

Unfortunately, too, many fail to heed the gentle "something inside," and follow the lead of blinded passion whether mental or physical — to their inevitable end, unhappiness, and unescaped misery.

It was not an easy matter for Ah Ching to cry "down" to his injured and revengeful spirit; but once he became victor, he felt, though he did not then know, that,

"Vengeance is mine; and I will repay, saith the Lord."

(Rom. 12:19.)

It was a real joy to all who heard him relate his experience, to see his face light up as he said:

"Me gladee from that day to this."

Truly, the fruits of that Spirit are love, joy, and peace.

"Well, how did the man prosper with his stolen money, Brother Ah Ching?" I asked.

"That house he burnee down," he answered, "man in the stleet — all bowed down — nobody likee him — die poor." This intimation that God had avenged his enemy, recalled the lines:

"I know that each sinful action, as sure as the sun brings shade, Is somewhere, sometime punished ahead of him, though the hour be long delayed."

With prospects of success ahead of him, Ah Ching had married a chieftain's daughter. Now they were homeless and penniless, except for the money earned day by day at odd jobs. To add to his difficulty, he had voluntarily proffered support to two of his fellow countrymen, one of whom was sickly and unable to supply the least of his necessities. I do not now recall, if I learned at all, what claim the other man had.

"Were they your relatives?" I inquired, knowing the strong ties of family relationship in the Chinese mind.

"No," was his reply, "no lelation — just Chinamen, that's all — needee help, and I give him — I findee wolk sometimee; my woman she takee in washing. Sometimee me have no lice (rice) for all, but me givee Chinamen lice ale samee."

Sharing his last kernel of rice with a fellow man in need, and that, too, without any recompense or desire for reward — is not that true service? No doubt the gratitude whispered by the sick and dying man fully repaid Ah Ching for his years of gratuitious food and shelter; but there will be further recompense when One who takes note of all such kindnesses will some day say,

"These deeds shall thy memorial be — Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

It is no wonder that the sound of the gospel struck a responsive chord in this humble man's heart—conscientiousness, self-mastery, service among its principal themes.

His Church record like his life is marked not in words but in deeds. You may know his annual income by his tithes and offerings which are freely and thankfully given as expressions of his gratitude for the manifest goodness of God to him.

His rise from poverty to opulence began about the time that he joined the Church, the turning point being marked in his mind as undoubtedly it was in reality, by a singular dream that came to him.

"I dleamed one night," he narrated, "that the Lord, he say to me, 'Plenty money in the stleet, why you no pick him up?' Next morning I get up, lookee in the stleet — money. I could see no money in the stleet. Then I thought; I sellee things in the stleet, and makee money."

With the little savings he and his wife had hoarded, he purchased by paying cash in full, one case of salmon, one sack of sugar, one gross of matches, five plugs of Samoan tobacco, one hundred pounds of Samoan kava, and 900 pounds of flour. When this was sold he purchased more. Thus began his little business, which today includes three separate stores, and a bakery, all free from encumbrances, and carrying on a thriving trade.

His faithful wife, who shared his struggles in poverty, lived to share only a part of his prosperity. A year or so after her death he married her sister, who evidently is an excellent helpmeet and companion to him, and in whom we thought we could detect the same admirable qualities of womanhood as those elements of manhood which have contributed to the commendable life of her husband. Through her line-age he now holds the title of chief among her people.

Of his sons and daughters, we learned but little. His son Arthur, who is now a partner in the business, was educated in China, where his father supported him seven years. He and his wife Telese are also members of the Church and seem to hold the confidence and esteem of the mission authorities and elders who know them. They are certainly as bounteous in their desires to please and to serve others as their father Ah Ching; for after eighteen or more feasted that afternoon with all the delicacies Samoa produces, all the Sauniatu band boys were feted to their appetites' content.

As we sat in his flower-bedecked home in Tulaele, with evidence of thrift and prosperity on every hand, as we thought of the number of men and women whom it is in his power now to bless, as we heard him express his gratitude for what the gospel has brought him and for what it means to him, there passed quickly in my mind, in striking contrast to this scene of success and sweet contentment, a picture of a possible felon's cell with all its associated misery and ignominy.

Conscientiousness, service, thrift, honesty, and obedience to other principles of the gospel have given Ah Ching this comfort; and self-mastery in a moment when he stood blindly at the parting of life's ways kept him from the felon's cell.

With the results of his industry around him, and the fruit of the Spirit in his soul, it was indeed gratifying to hear him acknowledge God's guidance and inspiration in this simple sentence:

"Me knowee God, helpee me."

A BEAUTIFUL VISION

May 10, 1921 as Elder David O. McKay and Brother Hugh J. Cannon approached Apia, Samoa.

ON TUESDAY, May 10, 1921, we sailed all day on the smoothest sea of our entire trip. The slightly undulating waves had been so free from even signs of unrest that the slight ripples discernible appeared on the surface like millions of little squares — like plaited cloth with the rich design of the same deep blue material as the body.

Nearing Savaii, we could see with the aid of field glasses the "Spouting Horns," which looked like geysers. On our right we caught a glimpse of the little village nestling safely in the mouth of an extinct volcano on the little island of Apolima.

Towards evening, the reflection of the afterglow of a beautiful sunset was most splendid! The sky was tinged with pink, and the clouds lingering around the horizon were fringed with various hues of crimson and orange, while the heavy cloud farther to the west was sombre purple and black. These various colors cast varying shadows on the peaceful surface of the water. Those from the cloud were long and dark, those from the crimson-tinged sky, clear but rose-tinted and fading into a faint pink that merged into the clear blue of the ocean. Gradually, the shadows became deeper and heavier, and then all merged into a beautiful calm twilight that made the sea look like a great mirror upon which fell the faint light of the crescent moon!

Pondering still upon this beautiful scene, I lay in my berth at ten o'clock that night, and thought to myself: Charming as it is, it doesn't stir my soul with emotion as do the innocent lives of children, and the sublime characters of loved ones and friends. Their beauty, unselfishness, and heroism are after all the most glorious!

I then fell asleep, and beheld in vision something infinitely sublime. In the distance I beheld a beautiful white city. Though far away, yet I seemed to realize that trees with luscious fruit, shrubbery with gorgeously-tinted leaves, and flowers in perfect bloom abounded everywhere. The clear sky above seemed to reflect these beautiful shades of color. I then saw a great concourse of people approaching the city. Each one wore a white flowing robe, and a white headdress. Instantly my attention seemed centered upon their Leader, and though I could see only the profile of his features and his body, I recognized him at once as my Savior! The tint and radiance of his countenance were glorious to behold! There was a peace about him which seemed sublime — it was divine!

The city, I understood, was his. It was the City Eternal; and the people following him were to abide there in peace and eternal happiness.

But who were they?

As if the Savior read my thoughts, he answered by pointing to a semicircle that then appeared above them, and on which were written in gold the words:

"These Are They Who Have Overcome The World — Who Have Truly Been Born Again!""

When I awoke, it was breaking day over Apia harbor.

Taken from President McKay's world tour diary, May 10, 1921.

AN EXPERIENCE ON A SAILING VESSEL

Tongan Mission — Nukualofa, Tonga

Taken from President David O. McKay's world tour diary, Thursday, June 30, 1921.

AWOKE AT 4:00 A.M., and couldn't sleep again, thinking about conditions here, and the duties of the day. At six o'clock the band came and played, and at 6:30, Brother Coombs, Mataila, and I were in the auto on our way to Haateiko to look at a site for the school. (President Cannon had proceeded ahead to New Zealand.)

When we returned, the Relief Society had spread a repast of which all who are leaving for Haapai and Vavau partook, during speeches of praise and appreciation.

The rest of the day was spent in saying farewell to individuals and families who called for parting handshakes.

At 3:30 p.m. Mataila's young son drove us to the wharf in his auto. Here a crowd of the Saints had already assembled to bid us farewell. Fua carried one of my satchels from the auto to the boat, and cried all the while as we walked slowly toward the other friends. It seemed that he just could not say the last good-bye. After I shook hands with all the others, he grasped my hand again, and made no effort to keep back his sobbing.

The signal was given for all aboard, but as I stepped on the edge of the boat, Fua still held my hand in a lingering grip. As I withdrew he turned and passed through the crowd crying as if he had parted from his father.

A half dozen or more Nukualofa young men were on the boat as it began to move from the pier. When they came to say good-bye—"Alofa," I became somewhat excited, and said:

"Better jump off, the boat is moving."

They didn't seem to understand me, and appeared so unconcerned that I concluded they were going with us, and wondered why they were saying good-bye. However, I was mistaken in this, for when we were about a quarter of a mile from shore, one after another, extending a last farewell greeting, plunged from the boat into the sea, and started back to the waving crowd on the wharf. As they swam, they would turn every now and again, and wave their hands above the water. One took off his lava lava, and flourished it above his head with one hand while he swam or supported himself with the other.

The quaint island town of Nukualofa in the background, the post office, flagpole, and wharf to the fore, the friends waving hats and handkerchiefs on the pier, these dark-colored fluffy heads bobbing up and down in the water, hands and lava lavas indicating their fond farewell — make up my last mental picture of Tongatabu!

I then turned my attention to the old Tarawa, a sailing vessel commonly known as a "catch." Seventy of us, natives and whites, were crowded on the deck, each one crouching, kneeling, or reclining on a space only sufficiently large for a common-sized dog to lie comfortably in. I was fairly at ease from hips up, as I reclined on top of the "hatch," but my legs hung over, and my feet rested on gasoline cases.

We had left promptly at four o'clock, but the captain exerted no effort to make speed. In fact, he told me that he would sail slowly because he did not want to reach the reefs near Namulue. I learned also that this was the first time he had taken a boat over this particular route.

He seemed a pleasant sort of fellow, and I thought more highly of him when he gave his berth up to Sister Coombs, who became sick as soon as we put to sea.

With a gatu rug under me and my steamer rug over me, which I shared with Brother Coombs and Brother May, I cuddled up in my corner and prepared for an uncomfortable night. As soon as the sun went down, a cold stiff breeze came up, making matters prety disagreeable. Dozens of people became ill. I rather enjoyed seeing Brother Coombs shoot for the rail, followed by two or three other elders, but I felt sorry for the women.

About eight o'clock, Captain Doughty came over to me and said:

"You're not comfortable there, Mr. McKay. I've given up my berth, but the engineer's is just opposite it. Won't you occupy it?"

The young engineer urging me to do so, I accepted, leaving my space and rugs to the others.

I had been down only a short time before I was using the mug when Sister Coombs wasn't. The sea was rough, and the boat rolled and pitched as if it were a shell. I could hear the waters swishing above me, and feel the waves strike the sides with blows that mad the craft quiver.

At 11:30, the captain came down, examined his chart once again, as he had done frequently during the last two or three hours; and I noticed that his movements were unsteady; but I concluded that the responsibility of running the boat in the darkness in a tempestuous sea was fatiguing him. When he threw himself on the seat alongside of the berth I occupied, I offered him my place, but he refused. Then it was that I fancied I smelled whiskey. The thought that his unsteady movement was due to drink almost chilled my blood! But I couldn't believe any man would run such a risk as to become intoxicated on a wild night with seventy men and women and children packed on the deck like cargo.

I was very sick by this time, and my fears only aggravated my condition. Soon he began to cough, and I recognized it as a whiskey cough!

The boat gave a sudden lurch to starboard, and the skipper was thrown in a heap on the floor. He fell like so much sand. With curses under his breath, he struggled back to the bench and again stretched himself for a sleep. The engineer came down, asked something about the sails, which I could not understand, received a curt reply, with an order to call the captain at two o'clock!

I did not know what was going on above, but the way the boat plunged and rolled, and the waters beat above us, the sea seemed to be mad.

Another sudden lurch, and again off rolled the skipper. This time he lay where he fell. Then I saw for the first time that he was holding a quart bottle of whiskey!

I've been in a number of serious predicaments; I've faced a few dangers, and have met with serious accidents, but I've never experienced such forebodings in my life as came over as I lay there trying to decide what could be done. There was a combination of evils that would be hard to duplicate! Seasickness — mid-night — an ocean vessel containing seventy people — a mad sea — reefs ahead — and the captain drunk!

I decided at once that he would drink no more from that bottle, so reached down, and slid it unseen or unfelt by him, under my pillow!

Now we must trust to the young engineer to hold that wheel, and manage the vessel as ordered until 2:30. Perhaps by that time the captain's snooze would sober him a bit. But he soon awoke, felt around for his bottle, got up, looked about him, opened a cupboard door, felt among some maps, then lit a cigarette, and went up on deck.

I rid my stomach of accumulated bile, and threw myself again in my bunk. Just as I began to doze, the captain came down again and began to fumble among some packages in the opposite corner of the cabin. He has another whiskey bottle, I thought. I spoke to him, and he jerked his arm back, picked up a towel, and began to wipe his face! Then I knew that he surmised that I had his bottle, and was sensible enough to know why. I also knew that he wouldn't drink while I watched him.

And that is what I did all night! Not a wink of sleep from 11:30 p.m. until 6 a.m.! And oh, what a night! Talk about the perils of the sea!

At 3 a.m. the engineer came down, and said, "Three o'clock, sir, we've tacked!"

That meant that they had turned the boat to face the wind, had arranged the sails to keep her there, tied the steering wheel, and let her drift. In changing the sails and turning, the boat was thrown into a through of the sea and completely covered by a mountainous wave, which deluged everyone on deck except the native and Sister Coombs' nine months old baby whom she was holding.

Lui Wolfgramme, a native weighing 215 pounds, was lifted up entirely from the deck, and in the darkness he thought he had been washed overboard, wrapped in his tapu cloth! The lifeboat was lifted up and fell again on one of the native women's legs, nearly breaking them. Brother Clark, of Eden, was thrown over the rail. He saved himself from going overboard by catching hold of a rope, and sixty-seven other lives in equal peril because the captain was not at his post!

Two of the elders — Sorenson and Phillips — drenched and cold, and so sick they could not hold up their heads, came down the steps, or rather fell down, and lay on the floor to keep warm! Getting no more opportunity to drink, the skipper was ready to take charge of the boat about daylight, and we hoisted sails and continued once more on our journey to Haapai, where we arrived without mishap at six o'clock that evening, (Friday, July 1st) a weak, bedraggled, but grateful crowd — thankful to the Lord for our lives and power to walk once again on land.

We were greeted at the wharf by a group of warm-hearted, expectant friends, who, with flashlights and lanterns, conducted us to the conference house. Here we changed our clothes, the men shaved, ate a bite, the first in twenty-four hours or more, and at nine o'clock held meeting with 116 people who assembled at that hour for worship.

After administering to two adults, and blessing a baby, I said "Good night," and threw my weary body and tired brain, but buoyant, thankful spirit, upon one of the cleanest, most neatly prepared beds of the trip!

Saturday, July 2, 1921

The captain had promised to leave at seven this morning, so we might arrive at Vavau this evening. Consequently, we were astir early in preparation for sailing. While at breakfast we received word that the boat could not sail until ten o'clock.

The tide ebbed, and we did not leave Haapai until 1:15 p.m. It should be said, however, to the captain's credit that he would have sailed earlier if the gasoline launch on which he depended to tow the Tarawa to deep water, had not lost its rudder. Just before we started, he said to me: "If it weren't for the fact that it would interfere with your plans, I would not start at this hour of the day. It will be dark before we can pick up the islands."

"It's safe to enter Vavau harbor after dark, is it not, Captain?" said I.

"Oh, yes, if we can sight the islands."

"Well, let's go," I suggested.

With "flying jib," "jib sail," "fore stay sail," "main sail," and "spanker" all spread to the wind, and the engine running as well, we sped over the waves in good time. For two hours or more we made good headway.

It was an interesting experience to see how skilfully Captain Doughty could strike the waves, ride their crest, then dive into the trough without having the waves dash over the boat! The sea was rough, and every few moments a wave would come rolling high above, threatening to submerge us, but we found ourselves always on top.

Passengers began to get sick about sundown, when the wind became stronger and the sea rougher.

A woman, her sixteen-year-old daughter, and little three-year-old boy occupied a space opposite mine on the hatch. I suggested that she go down and occupy the berth I had the night before, but she "wanted to stay above to see what was going on."

In a few minutes, I saw that pale green color around her mouth, and I knew she would soon be as sick as her daughter who already spent all her time at the rail. Before midnight they would both, perhaps all three, be unable to move.

"Lady," I suggested. "your staying on deck will make no difference to the sailing of the boat; the captain will run it just the same. You had better go below while the going is good."

"O yes, thank you, I believe I will. I must go somewhere!"

She and her boy were very ill all night, and so was the young girl who remained on deck. Fortunately, I was all right, and was comforted, as I watched the captain, to discern that he was not drinking beer after he left Haapai, and I knew he had no whiskey.

Darkness came on, the wind became fierce, and the waves madder. I felt that the captain was sailing too far west, and so expressed myself to Brother Robinson; but it seemed presumptuous for me to suggest it. About ten o'clock, a sailor was up in the rigging peering out into the darkness to spy an island, but none could be seen.

There was nothing to do but "tack" for the night, which we did.

I gave my robe to a native girl who lay on the deck below with one of Brother Coombs' little children, and with Brother May and Brother Robinson, alternately. Though I was not sick, I could not sleep; so lay all night watching the Southern Cross and other heavenly galaxies as they moved in their "appointed order and unvarying course."

At four o'clock, the crescent moon came up, and about that hour I felt the young English girl at my head shivering. As I tried to tuck the robe around her shoulders, she said:

"Thank you, it's no use; for my feet are wet, my clothes are wet, my hair is wet. You've done all you can to make me comfortable, I'm sure, unless you throw me overboard; and that's the sensible thing to do. Death has lost all terrors for me!"

In the dim light of the moon and morning star, the captain ordered sails adjusted, turned the ship again, and once more started toward vavau; but I noticed he sailed almost in an easterly direction—he had drifted west, as I had surmised.

Just as the sun arose, a wave dashed over the deck, deluging and drenching us all to the skin. The two little boys, crying, wet and cold, were carried down to the parents, and the two native girls, "Takou" and "Seni" sat up, and used my robe, which is almost waterproof, as well as cold proof. The young girl huddled close to my left, so cold and sick that she could scarcely hold up her head.

It was three p.m. before we were safely landed at Vavau!

Note: Later, when President McKay was making a report of this world tour to members of the Church assembled in General Conference, April 6, 1922, he referred to the above experience and said: "I knew of His protecting care in the Tongan Islands; for when the vessel was submerged by a mountainous wave, we felt peace and security."

Elder M. Vernon Coombs who was president of the Tongan Mission was also on board this sailing vessel. A report by him of this experience was published in the March, 1922, issue of The Improvement Era, excerpts from which are as follows:

The sails were all set, and we were looking forward to an interesting voyage, for this was the first time that some of our elders, with Brother McKay and Sister Coombs, had experienced a voyage at sea in a sailing vessel. At first we had a pleasant wind, and all were in the best spirits. Everything went along splendidly until dusk. We had cleared the dangers as well as the protection afforded by the outer reefs and were out on the open sea. Without warning, a heavy wind came up which made the boat behave in such a fashion that we elders, and many of the natives, were suddenly reminded that the rail was a pretty good friend upon which to lean in case of an emergency. Even Brother McKay, experienced sailor that he now is, was glad to avail himself of the mate's unoccupied berth. The tiny craft rocked, leapt, careened and rolled from side to side in a manner that beggars all description, while wave after wave broke on the deck causing the cans of kerosene to bang and float about creating a horrid din. The wind howled in the rigging like a maniac straining at the bands with which he was bound. At irregular intervals a flash of lightning would make the scene more vivid. We were drenched time and time again by the heavy seas which came thundering over the rails, and all the time we were clinging on for dear life, for to be washed overboard would have been the last of us. The captain was drinking heavily and but for the heroic vigil kept by Elder McKay he would have completely incapacitated himself. The helm was lashed down and the boat was left with no one to guide her and to drift as best she might for the night. There was more than one prayer for safety offered during the course of that night. My consolation and assurance lay in the promise of President Penrose that I should go in safety on land and sea.

During the night the only lifeboat was washed loose and hit with a sickening thud on the leg of a poor old sister who as a result has lain in the hospital for eight weeks. The vessel went on her very side, and the luggage and boxes and sacks of flour came down in an avalanche on those poor women and children in the hold, but fortunately no one was hurt. Our three children were in there. Two of the elders were all but washed overboard, and but for their becoming entangled in the rigging would not have been with us at the end of that voyage.

As the wind continued to increase in force, the half-drunken captain came on deck to see if he could not do something to mitigate our danger from being swamped. All sails were taken in but the main sail and this was made as small as possible by reefing, for the rudder had split, and too much strain might render it completely useless. The wind was so strong that the captain was afraid to change the course of the boat by tacking lest when the sail was changed to the opposite side, the vessel be swamped or the mast snapped off by the force of the wind. One of the good Saints, Lui Wolfgramme, then took the helm and stayed with it all day and piloted us through the intricate passages of the Haapai reef. That morning we saw in the distance a small boat, the Malolo, with all sails down, drifting helplessly. We learned afterward that her crew had given up hope and after taking down the sails had thrown out two anchors before going below the deck in the desperate hope that one or both of them might catch on to something and thus save the little raft from drifting on to the treacherous reef. It was twenty-eight hours of such experiences.

Truly President Penrose must have been prompted by the Spirit of God when he pronounced blessings upon Sister Coombs and me. Then, too, Elder McKay was aboard that vessel as a special envoy of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to visit the nations of the world in the interests of the Church. Verily, yes, the Lord will protect his faithful servants in the performance of their duties!
