Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

REFLECTIONS FROM A WORLD TOUR

From an address delivered at the 92nd annual conference of the Church, Salt Lake Tabernacle, April 6, 1922.

WHEN PRESIDENT HUGH J. CANNON and I left home, December 4, 1920, we looked forward with no little misgiving and anxiety to the trip ahead of us. It was no simple matter to contemplate traveling to the Orient, thence to the Antipodes, much of that distance to be spent on the water. The distance itself made us realize that we were undertaking a great responsibility. Absence from our loved ones was keenly felt by both, but greater than these two, and other incidental things that made us hesitate about accepting this responsibility, was the realization that we were going on a first visit to our people to represent the General Authorities. The keen sense of our responsibility adequately to fulfil the desires of President Heber J. Grant and his Counselors and the Twelve who had honored us with that call, made us seek the Lord as I had never sought him before in my life, and I wish to say this afternoon that the promise made by Moses to the children of Israel just before they crossed the Jordan River into the Promised Land has been fulfilled in our experiences. As we sought the Lord with all our souls, he came to our guidance and assistance.

It may be that the realization of our dependence upon him made more prominent what seems to me to be a deplorable tendency of the world to disregard, even to disown, their relationship to our Heavenly Father. It was our privilege to hear educators and other prominent men speak in different places and upon different occasions, and to mingle with different classes of men and women on boats, for we spent a total of five months on the water, sailing in about twenty-three different vessels, every vessel well-crowded with all classes of tourists, most of whom were professional Christians. Frequently, we were grieved to note the attitude of apology that these Christian men and women, assumed toward God, their Creator, and his Son, Jesus Christ.

I have been in mixed gatherings here in the state, and out of the state, in which some men, when speaking of the early pioneers of Utah, would refer in a rather apologetic way to Brigham Young, and on some occasions I have felt that the speakers even hesitated to name him and give him the credit due him in the settlement of this great intermountain commonwealth, and in the founding of institutions that since have become centers of influence and might. Just such an attitude I have seen manifest among so-called Christians when they would begin to talk about God. He did not seem to be real to them. He did not seem to be in very deed their Father in heaven.

There is a tendency, it seems to me, among Christian nations to move toward a conception of God very much similar to the conception of the Buddhist who says: "There is no personal God-Creator on whose mercy and good will the universe is dependent. Everything owes its origin and development to its own inherent vitalism, or, what comes to the same, to its own will to live. Human ignorance it is which alone invented a personal God-Creator." The Buddhist utterly rejects the belief in a personal God. So do many in the Christian world. In opposition to this false conception of God, I wish to declare that today I feel as I have never felt before in all my life that God is my Father. He is not just an intangible power, a moral force in the world, but a personal God with creative powers, the Governor of the world, the Director of our souls. I should like to have the young men of Israel feel so close to him that they will approach him daily, not in public alone, but in private.

It is not imagination that we can approach God and can receive light and guidance from him, that our minds will be enlightened, our souls thrilled by his Spirit. Washington sought it; Abraham Lincoln received it; Joseph Smith knew it; and the testimony, the evidence of the Prophet Joseph's inspiration is manifest to all who will but open their eyes to see and their hearts to understand.

Inspiration was given to us on our world tour of the missions of the Church.

I want to testify to you that God was with us when we stood beneath that tree in old China when we dedicated that land to the preaching of the gospel. My words may not convince you of the fact, but no disputant can convince me that our souls were not filled to overflowing with the Spirit of God on that occasion.

Again the veil was thin between us and departed friends, when we stood in prayer on the side of old Haleakala, the largest extinct volcano in the world, and poured our thanksgiving to God for what he had done for President Joseph F. Smith, George Q. Cannon, Elders Francis A. Hammond, James Hawkins, and their wives, and other missionaries who carried the gospel message to the Hawaiian people.

I knew of his protecting care in the Tongan Islands; for when the vessel was submerged by a mountainous wave, we felt peace and security.

At Papeete, Tahiti, we knew his guiding hand and acknowledged his overruling Providence, when replacing our judgment by his inspiration, he moved us to do something which our own judgment had told us not to do, subsequent events proving that the inspiration came in rich abundance in the priesthood meetings with the missionaries. God bless them wherever they are today, for they are God's servants, as long as they will keep themselves pure and spotless from the sins of the world, and I testify to you that his Spirit is guiding them, magnifying them in their youth, making them a power in preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Again, when among the Samoans, we felt his presence on several occasions, especially in that memorable farewell at Sauniatu.

Another memorable example of God's guiding hand was experienced when we met Joseph Wilford Booth at the very time and place that we should have met him in order to make our mission to the Armenians successful.

I am convinced that there was some power above chance that brought about that meeting.

I desire to say to the children of Israel, in these valleys of the mountains, to the boys and girls especially: If you only knew that Christ is ever ready to give you help in time of need, and comfort and strength, you would approach him in purity, simplicity, and faith. May I illustrate it by the following poem:

"The builder who first bridged Niagara's gorge, Before he swung his cable, shore to shore, Sent out, across the gulf, his venturing kite Bearing a slender cord for unseen hands To grasp upon the further cliff, and draw A greater cord, and a greater yet; Till at last across the chasm swung The cable—then a mighty bridge in air! So we may send our little timid thought Across the void, out to God's reaching hands— Send out our love and faith to thread the deep— Thought after thought, until the little cord Has greatened to a chain no chance to break, And we are anchored to the Infinite!" (Edwin Markham.)

God bless our youth that they may send out these thoughts in prayer and faith and receive the assurance that they are anchored to the infinite.
