Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

"TO SEE THE PROPHET"

President Harold L. Gregory of the East German Mission relates an interesting incident of the chance meeting of two Russian war prisoners with President David O. McKay during his visit to Berlin, Germany, to dedicate the Charlottenburg Church edifice on June 28, 1952.

June 16, 1954

Dear President McKay:

You will be interested to hear of an experience I had this week. Two men about forty years of age, poorly dressed, came to see me during the week. They told me they had lost their faith, and yet they could not turn to any of the other sects or religious organizations they knew. Mr. Braun (as one was called) had prevailed upon his friend, Mr. Fascher, to come and see me. He told Mr. Fascher that he knew of our Church and that we would help them. Fascher objected strenuously for two days, but finally came along.

Mr. Braun began by saying that he was standing on a street corner one day when he noticed hundreds of people going by. He asked one where he was going, and he said, "To see the Prophet." Mr. Braun went along. It was the dedication of the meetinghouse in Berlin-Charlottenburg, and the Prophet was Brother McKay.

He said (and I will quote him roughly): "I had never sensed such a spirit of love and good will as I did among those people that day. And then the Prophet, a tall man in his eighties, with a full head of hair—all white—stood up and addressed the body. I have never seen such a young face on a man that age. When he spoke, something went through me. Afterwards as he was getting into his car, I noticed he was shaking hands with the members, and even though I was not one of them I pressed forward and shook his hand too. Something warm and lovely went clear through my body, and I marveled again at his young, clear features. Through worldly cares and extreme economic difficulties the memory was somewhat beclouded, but I knew that I had to come back to find out more."

Mr. Fascher told me that Braun could say nothing but words of amazement and wonderment at the man he had seen. The two sat in my office and listened intently to the message of the restoration which I gave them, as if hanging on every word. They were penniless and miserable, but they were humble and dissatisfied with the churches of men. I lent them a Book of Mormon, and they promised to be to Church Sunday. I believe these two men (both Russian war prisoners) are ready for the gospel.

May the Lord bless you, Brother McKay. You and all our brethren at the head of our Church are shining examples of all that is righteous and good.

Sincerely your brother

/signed/ Harold L. Gregory.
