Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A PERSONAL EXPERIENCE OF DIVINE HEALING

July 10, 1945

THE LATTER PART of March, 1916, Ogden River overflowed. It came through the Narrows a raging torrent.

Wednesday noon (about the middle of March 1916) I drove three of my young children up there as far as the Narrows that they might see the river at floodtide and hear the grinding of the stones as they pushed against each other by the force of the water.

Wednesday night my brother, Thomas E., called at the house. Unable to get through the canyon, he called his wife by telephone and asked if she would send a horse down with the road supervisor the next morning so that he (Thomas E.) might get up to the valley. As he hung up the telephone, he turned to my son Lawrence and said: "Will you please drive me up as far as where the road is washed out?" Having been up just that afternoon and knowing the danger, I said: "I think I had better drive you, Thomas E., if you will get up early in the morning so that I can get back in time to catch my train for Salt Lake City."

The next morning several things delayed us, and it was seven o'clock before we started for the canyon. My train left in one hour. I hesitated for a moment, thinking that I should not have time to drive up to the mouth of the canyon and return by eight o'clock. It was then that I received a strong impression to "go up to the bridge and back."

We jumped into a little Ford car, dashed through the rain and mud up 21st Street toward the canyon road. Without my having said anything to Thomas E. about my impression, he said: "I think you had better not attempt to cross the bridge."

Notwithstanding these two warnings, as we approached the bridge I thought I could spend another five minutes and take him up as far as I had taken the children the day before. I saw the pile of rocks there at the bridge, and it seemed to be intact just as it had been the day before. So jocularly I said: "I'm going across the bridge, can you swim?" With that I stepped on the gas and dashed across the bridge, only to hear Thomas E. say: "Oh, look out! There's a rope!" The watchman who left at seven o'clock had stretched the derrick rope across the road, and his successor, the day watchman, had not arrived. I reached for the emergency brake but was too late. The rope smashed the window, threw back the top, and caught me just in the chin, severing my lip, knocking out my lower teeth, and breaking my upper jaw. Thomas E. ducked his head and escaped uninjured, but I was left partially senseless.

The engine of the car was unimpaired, and Thomas E. moved me over in the seat, turned the car around, and drove toward home. Just as we neared the top of the hill in Canyon Road, I heard him say: "I think I had better take you to the hospital." I opened my eyes and saw blood in my hand and some loose broken teeth. I said, "No, you had better take me home, something has happened."

About nine o'clock I was on the operating table in care of Dr. Joseph R. Morrell and Dr. Robert S. Joyce. They sewed my upper jaw in place, and took fourteen stitches in my lower lip and lacerated cheek.

One of the attendants remarked: "Too bad; he will be disfigured for life."

Certainly I was most unrecognizable. When I was wheeled back to my room in the hospital, one of the nurses consolingly remarked: "Well, Brother McKay, you can wear a beard," meaning that thus I might hide my scars.

Word of the accident soon spread throughout the city, and at ten o'clock Bishop A. E. Olson, President Thomas B. Evans, and Heber Scowcroft, three very close friends, called and administered to me. In sealing the anointing, Bishop Olson said: "We bless you that you shall not be disfigured and that you shall not have pain."

I repeat, that was Thursday morning.

Friday morning one of my dearest friends, Peter G. Johnston, came down from Blackfoot, Idaho. My face was so swollen and disfigured that he did not recognize me. He passed by the open door, thinking that I was the wrong patient. When he entered later and was leaving, he said: "Well, the eyes are the same anyhow."

Saturday evening Dr. William H. Petty called to see if the teeth that were still remaining in the upper jaw might be saved. It was he who said: "I suppose you are in great pain?" I answered: "No, I haven't any pain." He said: "I cannot understand that — I should think that you would have neuralgia pains."

That evening I began to wonder whether or not my nerves were stunned. As I dozed, my arm that I evidently had up at my forehead dropped and hit some of the stitches on my face. Then I knew that my nerves were not stunned, as I felt the pain intensely, for I was aware of the contact of my hand on the stitches.

Sunday morning President Heber J. Grant came up from Salt Lake City. He was then President of the Council of the Twelve. Having noticed the sign on the door, "Visitors Not Allowed," he entered and said: "David, don't talk; I'm just going to give you a blessing."

Among other things he said: "I bless you that you shall not be scarred." Later when he took his hands off my head and looked at me he thought (as he afterwards told me): "My, I've made a promise that cannot be fulfilled!"

On the following Monday morning the doctors removed the stitches from my lower lip, the severed parts having joined together. When Dr. Joyce came in Tuesday morning to take out the stitches from my face, he said: "Well, Mr. McKay, it pays to live a clean life!" Wednesday morning I returned home.

The following October, at a banquet given to the General Authorities on the Roof Garden of the Hotel Utah, I sat at a table near where President Grant was sitting. I noticed that he was looking at me somewhat intently, and then he said: "David, from where I am sitting I cannot see a scar on your face!" I answered: "No, President Grant, there are no scars — your blessing was realized completely!"

Dictated by President McKay to his secretary, July 10, 1945.
