Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

AN INCIDENT OF TWO CHILDREN FROM BEHIND THE IRON CURTAIN

June 29, 1952

ON SUNDAY, June 29, 1952, Sister McKay and I were in Berlin, Germany, near the Iron Curtain. Arrangements had been made for a meeting of the Saints, investigators, and friends in the "Mercedes Palast" theater, the largest hall in North Berlin. [^1]

Prior to the meeting I had received word through the presidency of the East German Mission that one of the members of the Church in that mission — a sister — had lost her husband and eldest son under communist rule. She had been driven from her home, and was subsequently exposed to the rigors of the weather and lack of nutrition until she finally became paralyzed and had been confined to her bed for five years. She had heard of my coming to Berlin, and being unable to travel herself, she expressed the desire that her two little children — a boy and a girl about ten and twelve years of age — be sent over to meet the President of the Church. This good sister said: "I know if I send my children to shake hands with President McKay, and then they come home and take my hand — if I can hold their little hands in mine — I know that I shall get better."

Arrangements were made for them to take the trip. Some of the Saints contributed to the clothing of the little children, and the missionaries contributed to pay their expenses.

I asked the mission president to point out these little children as they came to the meeting. Two little children among thousands who were assembled! Anticipating meeting them, I took a new handkerchief, and when that little girl and boy came along, I went to them and shook their hands, and said, "Will you take this handkerchief to your mother with my blessing?" I later learned that after I had shaken hands with them, they would not shake hands with anyone else, for they did not want to touch anyone with their hands until they got back to their mother.

We heard no more about it; however, the incident was well-known throughout the crowd. I saw the children again in the conference house that night. They were sleeping on the top floor of the mission home — sweet little darlings!

When Sister McKay returned to Salt Lake City, she wrote to the mission president's wife and asked her to find out how the mother of the two little children was getting along. In her reply, the mission president's wife said,

"This sister thanks the Lord every day for the blessing and the handkerchief which President McKay sent through her two children, and she has the faith that she will fully recover, and I believe so, too. Immediately after the children came home, her feet and

toes began to get feeling in them, and this feeling slowly moved up into her legs, and now she gets out of bed alone and seats herself on a chair, and then, with her feet and the chair, works all the way around to the kitchen sink, where she has the children bring her the dishes to wash, and other things, and is very thankful that she is able to help now."

That is the faith of a mother in the Russian zone. God bless her, and bless all who are over there!

---
Notas:
[^1] That the seed sown during our visits to the various missions on this tour would be blessed and multiplied manyfold.
