Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

THE BLESSING OF A MEMBER OF THE CHURCH IN TONGA

The following letter was received from Elder William M. Waddoups, formerly president of the Hawaii Mission. It has reference to an incident that happened when President David O. McKay was in the Tongan Islands in 1921.

August 23, 1938

Dear President McKay:

Recently I have heard of a little incident containing much human interest in which I am sure you will have a very personal interest. I am writing it to you, for two purposes, that you may know how the leaven is working in the islands of the sea, and may also see some of the many great blessings to the people which followed your visit to those islands a number of years ago.

There is now living in Neiafu Vavao Tonga a true Latter-day Saint by the name of John Kalusi. Sometime ago a great desire possessed him to get a clear understanding of his ancestral line and to obtain sufficient information concerning them to perform temple ordinances in their behalf. He had been told that a woman living in a nearby village was a relative of his family. He visited her, found her to be a relative, obtained some information, and was referred to another village where he would also find a relative. He obtained more information and was directed to visit a certain person in still another nearby village. There he learned that a prominent high chief of the village was his relative. He visited him and found in his possession a written record in longhand of his immediate ancestors back to the year 950 A.D. You may imagine his great joy.

Now comes the great human interest side of this family. The wife of John Kalusi, Vii by name, was childless. She had had several premature births, and despaired of ever having a matured child. While you and President Hugh J. Cannon were visiting in Tonga, she asked you for a blessing that she might become the mother of a living child. In due course of time after the blessing, a well-developed son was born to her. He was given the name of Mataili. He is now about seventeen years old. The father now has a son to help him in doing work for his numerous ancestral line in the house of the Lord.

With pleasure I report a great awakening among the people of the Pacific missions in genealogical and temple work. We believe there is a great future for that work.

Very sincerely your brother,

/signed/William M. Waddoups.
