Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

HEALING OF BABY SILITA IN SAMOA

June 3, 1954

The following copy of a letter from President Howard B. Stone of the Samoan Mission tells of the healing of a native Samoan baby who was stricken ill during the visit of President David O. McKay and Elder Hugh J. Cannon in 1921:

Dear President McKay:

Last Monday, May 31st, was known to all of the Latter-day Saints in Samoa as "McKay Day."

Thirty-three years ago you and Elder Cannon were in Sauniatu, on which occasion, you pronounced an apostolic blessing upon the Saints gathered there, and you blessed the land and the village.

This year many of the Saints from our various Church villages met at Sauniatu at 9:30 in the morning. We marched out of the village, past the McKay monument, across the bridge, and were led by the Sauniatu school band back to the place where you stood and gave your blessing to the Saints. After a brief introduction by Uli, the branch president, Laita, the chairman of the supervisory committee, gave a very spiritual invocation, after which the congregation sang, "Fa' afetai Mo Le Perofeta" (We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet). Following this song, Folau, a member of the Sauniatu Branch Presidency, gave a history of your visit, telling about your traveling from Sauniatu toward the ocean on horseback then turning the horses around toward Sauniatu and returning to the spot by the side of the road where there now stands a monument painted white with a "1921" printed on it, and which incidentally was adorned with a huge wreath of hibiscus, roses, ferns, and other flowers and vines. He pointed out the pulu (rubber tree) where you hung your umbrella during your speech.

There were several people there who were in attendance during your other visit. Sister Sapi Purcell told us all about the blessing which you gave to her sick baby Silita who had actually passed away and had turned black. He was restored to life and is now a healthy young man living in New Zealand with his family.

The day was spent in feasting, games, and native dances. Everyone expressed his gratitude for your love, devotion, and great assistance to the Samoan people. All prayers included supplication to our Heavenly Father for your continued health and a deep and sincere desire that you will again be able to return to Samoa, this fall if possible to dedicate the chapel and school at Sauniatu.

Much more could be related in this letter concerning the impressive events of the day, however because of your very busy daily schedule, I do not feel that I should write a lengthy letter at this time for you to read.

May the Lord bless and sustain you.

Very faithfully your brother,

/signed/ Howard B. Stone.
