Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

HER FAITH MADE HER WHOLE

Under date of July 7, 1954, Elder Mark E. Petersen, of the Council of the Twelve, received a letter from a member of the Church in Ogden relating the story of a sister who received a blessing by shaking hands with President McKay. The following is a copy of that letter:

Dear Brother Petersen:

I FEEL IT A SIGNAL HONOR to have received a letter from you. It is three weeks ago last night at the reception mentioned that I told you of the miraculous happening — yes, blessing — that came to one of our sisters who went to witness the marriage ceremony of my daughter and her fiance.

President McKay, in his masterful manner, performed what was termed an impressive, beautiful rite. Then, I, being one of the witnesses, and also having been down in Tonga on a mission when President McKay and Brother Hugh J. Cannon toured the mission in 1921-1922, President McKay turned to me and shook my hand, commenting upon being of service to the daughter of a missionary from Tonga and of the pleasant memories of experiences we enjoyed there together. That was the beginning of his shaking hands with twenty-nine or thirty other good people there, a very large wedding group. I had helped place eleven extra chairs to accommodate the group in the largest sealing room we could find.

My wife is a counselor in the Relief Society of our ward, and Sister Nina Penrod is the other counselor. As President McKay shook Sister Penrod's hand, she asked him if he remembered her mother, a Sister Graham from Ogden Valley. He answered: "Why, of course I do," and placed his left hand on top of her hand as he clasped it in his right. At the moment of the handshake I saw Sister Penrod's face flush. She said she became overwhelmed and humble, more because as both of President's McKay's hands were on her right hand, she felt a shock, and she wondered if others might have heard the sound that accompanied the shock which had seemed very loud to her. She said a weakness came over her. And this is odd, as President McKay held her right hand with his left hand, he shook hands with many others with his right hand. Sister Penrod said it was very humbling in the extreme to her, yet she felt elated because something wonderful had happened to her, for her arthritis pains were all gone.

We did not see all this, as sixteen of us left for a dinner at the Hotel Utah.

When President McKay left, as it was told to me, Sister Penrod tried to leave with the others but had to be assisted as she was too weak to go alone. They proceeded slowly, and in descending the stairs she cried out, sinking down. She was helped to a bed in the dressing room where after a short time her strength returned, and she stood up, turned her back to those with her, and reached each arm up her back touching her shoulder blades, saying, "I haven't been able to do this for years."

Sister Penrod says she wonders if President McKay knew or was aware that virtue had left him just as the Savior said it had when the woman had touched his garment. The incident as related in the Bible seems such a parallel, yet they were dissimilar as they happened. Sister Penrod says she knows faith has made her whole and that God is good.

Your letter came Saturday, July 3, 1954. Sunday I talked to Sister Penrod at sacrament meeting in the evening. * * *

This experience took place in the new sealing room just to the north of the east temple doors inside the Salt Lake Temple. That was also the first time any of us who were there had seen those doors open when President McKay came in there to officiate on that date — June 15, 1954; time about 1 p.m. This incident is held as a treasured memory.

Yours sincerely,

/signed/ Reuben L. Hansen
