Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

"IN MY NAME THEY SHALL OPEN THE EYES OF THE BLIND"

March, 1939

Brother Melvin T. Mickelson, superintendent of the Bannock Stake Sunday School, (1954) Grace, Idaho, tells his story of regaining his eyesight following administration by President Davd O. McKay.

IF I WERE TO LABOR in the service of our Master all the days of my life, I could only repay in part the blessings he has so freely given to me, by the faith and humility of our great leader, President David O. McKay. He, through the power of the priesthood, made it possible for me to enjoy the blessing of sight.

In the month of March 1939, while trucking grain to Salt Lake City from Gem Valley, Idaho, and returning loaded with coal, I was aware of quite a severe headache, but kept on going even though I realized the trouble was in my eyes, particularly my right eye. As this pain increased, I became sick and was getting ready to go to a doctor when I received word that my uncle, Theodore Mickelson, living in Tetonia, Idaho, had passed away and that the family desired that I speak at his funeral. This seemed an opportunity to speak for one whom I loved very much.

I thought perhaps I could see a doctor in Idaho Falls, Idaho. I went to a doctor there, and, when he looked at my eyes, he said that my trouble was more than he would like to take care of. He then recommended another doctor in another town whom I went to see. This doctor seemed quite excited about my condition, and he, being a specialist, treated my eyes. At this time I was unable to see anything out of my right eye, and the pain was increasing by the hour. However, I stayed and spoke at the funeral of my uncle.

As soon as I finished speaking, I was brought home by my brother-in-law, Vernon H. Mendenhall. I went immediately to see a doctor at Soda Springs, Idaho, who exclaimed that I was blind the minute he examined my eyes. He suggested that I go at once to Salt Lake City, Utah. We arrived there about five o'clock the next morning.

My wife, Mary, called an eye physician, who came to his office about six a.m. After she told him what was wrong he examined my eyes, and then he exclaimed, "Mary, you are a week or ten days too late in coming for aid to save your husband's eye. We may have to remove both of them." I was suffering with iritis. After talking with Mary and me, he decided to fight the infection with medicine.

The doctor worked hard and was very kind as the treatments were severe and painful. I realized that if I had gone to the doctor as my wife had suggested when I first took sick, most of the trouble could have been stopped.

The doctor advised me to keep on my feet and walk around if it were possible. This was accomplished only by my wife leading me, for the sight in one eye was completely gone, and the other had sympathized to a point I could not see to get around. For one week the doctor treated my eyes, only to say each day that they were getting worse.

Then one morning the doctor told me he would have to remove my right eye. By so doing the other eye might be saved. About two hours after we had left the doctor's office, President McKay came to our door and told us he had heard of my sickness and wondered if I would like a blessing. No one could deny the feeling of peace which came with him. As he blessed me, the pain eased and then left me. As President McKay left the room, my wife's words of faith were, "You will be all right."

I had felt bad because I could not attend the meeting in the temple with the bishops that day, for at that time I was bishop of Lago Ward, Bannock Stake; but I had received a blessing which shall never be forgotten.

The next morning I returned to the doctor's office. After examining my eyes, he said, "Some miracle has happened. We won't have to remove that eye. Why, you will receive fifteen to twenty percent of your eyesight." The next day he told me seventy-five percent of my vision would come back, and on the third day, perhaps all of my vision.

I was so humble and thankful that I could not tell the doctor what had happened. I do not know if he knows what happened and why he did not have to perform an operation, but I know.

I am so thankful for our wonderful Prophet and his great love and faith and that he took time for one of his fellow men.

In a letter dated March 8, 1954, addressed to General Superintendent George R. Hill of the Sunday School, Brother Mickelson stated:

I don't know why the Lord saw fit to give me such a great blessing when I was so sick, but this I know, that when President McKay was told they were going to remove one of my eyes the next morning, he promised me by the authority which he held that I should be made well and receive my normal vision. No one could possibly know the feeling of joy and peace which came to my wife and me in those few moments we spent with the Prophet of God that day, and while his hands were still upon my head the pain, which was greater than I could explain, left my head.

Two or three years later, an eye specialist looked at my eyes and said, "You have a lot of scar-tissue in your eyes, but I have never seen more perfect vision."

I have a desire to serve the Lord in all things, and to work wherever I am called for all that I have I owe to him. With this desire in mind constantly I will help where I am called to serve.
