Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

SECTION IV

INSPIRATIONAL STORIES FOR YOUTH

INTRODUCTION

At one time President McKay said, "Leading youth, leading children to know God, to have faith in his laws, to have confidence in his Fatherhood, and to find solace and peace in his love—this is the greatest privilege, the most sublime opportunity offered the true educator."

For over a half century boys and girls and older ones too, throughout the Church have been touched and impressed by President McKay's stories and illustrations. They have been inspired by his great personality, and have been led to cherish worthy ideals and noble aspirations. Through his teachings, they have come to a realization that there can be no happiness without spirituality, and that the Church is "established as a means of consummating God's purposes."

The following illustrations are a few that are frequently used by this master teacher in leading children, men, and women to know God and the abundant life.

Clare Middlemiss

IMPORTANCE OF GUIDING YOUTH

Delivered at a leadership convention held at Brigham Young University, February 3, 1946.

RECENTLY I HAD GREAT PLEASURE in training a well-bred colt. He had a good disposition, clean, well-rounded eye, was well-proportioned, and all in all, a choice equine possession. Under the saddle he was as willing, responsive, and co-operative as a horse could be. He and my dog "Scotty" were real companions. I liked the way he would go up to something of which he was afraid. He had confidence that if he would do as I bade him he would not be injured.

But "U-Dandy" resented restraint. He was ill-contented when tied and would nibble at the tie-rope until he was free. He would not run away, just wanted to be free. Thinking other horses felt the same, he would proceed to untie their ropes. He hated to be confined in the pasture, and if he could find a place in the fence where there was only smooth wire, he would paw the wire carefully with his feet until he could step over to freedom. More than once my neighbors were kind enough to put him back in the field. He learned even to push open the gate. Though his depredations were provoking and sometimes expensive, I admired his intelligence and ingenuity.

But his curiosity and desire to explore the neighborhood led him and me into trouble. Once on the highway he was hit by an automobile, resulting in a demolished machine, injury to the horse, and slight, though not serious, injury to the driver.

Recovering from that, and still impelled with a feeling of wanderlust he inspected the fence throughout the entire boundary. He even found the gates wired. So, for awhile we thought we had "U-Dandy" secure in the pasture.

One day, however, somebody left the gate unwired. Detecting this, "U-Dandy" unlatched it, took "Nig," his companion, with him, and together they visited the neighbor's field. They went to an old house used for storage. "U-Dandy's" curiosity prompted him to push open the door. Just as he had surmised, there was a sack of grain. What a find! Yes, and what a tragedy! The grain was poison bait for rodents! In a few minutes "U-Dandy" and "Nig" were in spasmodic pain, and shortly both were dead.

How like "U-Dandy" are many of our youth! They are not bad; they do not even intend to do wrong, but they are impulsive, full of life, full of curiosity, and long to do something. They, too, are restive under restraint, but if they are kept busy, guided carefully and rightly, they prove to be responsive and capable; but if left to wander unguided, they all too frequently find themselves in the environment of temptation and too often are entangled in the snares of evil.

"WHATE'ER THOU ART, ACT WELL THY PART"

From dedicatory address at Sauniatu, Upolu, Samoa, January 15, 1955.

I REMEMBER as a missionary in Scotland fifty-seven years ago, after having been in Stirling only a few weeks, I walked around Stirling Castle with my senior companion, Elder Peter G. Johnston of Idaho. We had not yet secured our lodging in Stirling. I confess I was homesick. I did not like the attitude of the people there as they were so suspicious that we were there for ulterior motives. We had spent a halfday around the castle, and the men out in the fields ploughing, that spring day, made me all the more homesick, and took me back to my old home town.

As we returned to the town, I saw an unfinished building standing back from the sidewalk several yards. Over the front door was a stone arch, something unusual in a residence, and what was still more unusual, I could see from the sidewalk that there was an inscription chiseled in that arch.

I said to my companion: "That's unusual! I am going to see what the inscription is." When I approached near enough, this message came to me, not only in stone, but as if it came from One in whose service we were engaged: "Whate'er Thou Art, Act Well Thy Part."

I turned and walked thoughtfully away, and when I reached my companion I repeated the message to him.

That was a message to me that morning to act my part well as a missionary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is merely another way of saying—what is more precious because it comes from the words of the Savior—"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)
