Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

LOSING SELF FOR OTHERS

Address at the dedication of the Nurses' Residence of the Latter-day Saint Hospital School of Nursing, Salt Lake City, May 8, 1953.

TRUE HAPPINESS IS FOUND in the paradoxical saying of the Savior, "He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.) Our lives are wrapped up with the lives of others, and we are happiest as we contribute to their happiness.

This principle is portrayed by Robert Browning in his immortal story of Paracelsus, who selfishly sought fame and glory by withdrawing from direct contact with his fellow men. Old age overtook him before he realized his mistake and before he learned the great lesson of life. When his friend Festus found him, after a separation of many years, Paracelsus, lying on a bed in a Greek conjurer's house said:

"I am happy; my foot is on the threshold of boundless life. I see the whole world and hurricane of life behind me. All my life passes by and I know its purpose, and to what end it has brought me, and whither I am going. I will tell you all the meaning of life."

Festus exclaimed: "My friend, tell it to the world."

Paracelsus: "There was a time when I was happy; the secret of life was in that happiness."

Festus: "When, when was that? All I hope that answer will decide."

Paracelsus: "When, but the time I vowed myself to man."

Festus: "Great God, thy judgments are inscrutable."

Paracelsus: "There is an answer to the passionate longings of the heart for fullness, and I knew it, and the answer is this: Live in all things outside yourself by love, and you will have joy. That is the life of God; it ought to be our life. In him it is accomplished and perfect; but in all created things it is a lesson learned slowly and through difficulty."

"Serve ye one another by love," writes the Apostle; and Jesus sums it up as follows:

". . . Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

"This is the first and great commandment.

"And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

"On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:37-40.)

There are those who declare such an ideal merely theoretical; they call it impractical! Why not try it? A test by application will prove its practicability. Let the nations of the world which are today descending the hills of progress and slipping down into the slums and gutters of animal indulgence, sneer at the ideals if they will; but as sure as God has given us the revelation of life, so shall we find happiness supreme as we climb the hill of service.
