Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

A GLASS OF PURE WATER AND A DROP OF INK

An illustration and a story on chastity as given by President David O. McKay at a meeting held in the South African Mission, Johannesburg, South Africa, January 10, 1954.

I AM GOING TO TELL YOU a true story, but before I tell you that story I am going to ask some questions, because I never tell a story to children who do not think. There is no use talking to children who do not think. Some teachers make that mistake — they give the lesson, but they do not stop to see whether or not the thoughts are in the minds of the children. If you children will answer a few questions so that I shall know that you are thinking, I will tell a story illustrative of the value of character.

"What am I holding in my hand?" (President McKay exhibiting a glass of water.)

Answer: "A glass of water."

"What kind of water?"

Answer: "Pure water."

"What is this I hold in my hand?" (exhibiting a fountain pen) (hands) "Look at those thinkers!"

Answer: "A pen."

"A pen is right. And what do you think is in that pen? You tell me, young man."

Answer: "Ink."

President McKay: "I am going to take that glass of pure water and put just one drop of ink in it—I think I shall put not even a drop in it, but I shall bring this pen, with ink in it, in contact with that pure water. Now watch." (President McKay inserted the pen and moved it about a bit and the ink spread from the pen into the water.) "Now what kind of water is in the glass?"

Answer: "Impure water."

"Yes, I have polluted that water. Should you like to drink it now?"

Answer: "No."

"No, for I have put ink in that water and made it impure.

"How many of you have a little baby boy or girl at home?" (hands) "I see. Do you know that that little baby is just as pure and sweet as that pure water I had in the glass; and that it has just come from the presence of our Heavenly Father? One man, as he looked at a baby dressed in white, said:

'Daisies adorn the fresh meadow, Lilies gladden the field; Roses make bright every wayside, Each twig has some beauty to yield— All are expressions of Goodness, And praises to God invite; But the glory of all creation, Is a baby dressed in white.' (From "A Baby Dressed in White," by President David O. McKay.)

"Now, imagine that sweet little baby before you this morning, just as that glass of water—and here, again, I want thinkers before I tell you a story.

"Will you tell me what might enter that baby's life if you would pollute it, just as that ink polluted the water?"

Answer: "Death."

"No, death is not such a terrible thing as we think it is. I want to know, while that little baby is in life here what might go into his soul that could pollute it as that ink did the water."

Answer: "Evil."

"Evil is right. Now, will you specify some things which are evil."

Answer: "Sin."

"Yes, sin and evil, but I want to know some specific things. As the little baby grows to be your size, a little boy or girl, what might happen that would pollute that child's soul?"

Answer: "Disbelief in God."

"Thank you. I think that is a very good answer! Now, another thing."

Answer: "Smoking."

"Smoking is right! I think it is one of the great evils of our time; just as sure as that ink polluted the water, so will smoking pollute the lives of our boys and girls! Another."

Answer: "Robbing."

"Yes, robbing or stealing. The other day a little boy I know stole something and then denied it to his mother. He thought he could hide it. He did not know that there were two people in the world who would know about it whether his mother or anybody else knew it. He himself knew it, and and God knew it. You never can hide it. Stealing will pollute that little boy's life." (hands) "You tell me."

Answer: "Coffee."

"That is right. Another."

Answer: "Drinking."

"Drinking beer or whiskey, that is right. Another?"

Answer: "Taking another's life."

"Yes. Infringing in any way. Thank you. Those are the things which pollute." (hands)

"Have you something?"

Answer: "Lying."

"Lying! Just as injurious as adding ink to that pure water! And one evil that covers all of them — who can think of one word? Disobedience! Disobeying Mother; disobeying Father; disobeying our Heavenly Father's teachings. Thank you."

And now, as promised, I will tell you a true story of a young boy who went with his father, an American admiral in the early American history, down to New Orleans in the Southern part of the United States to quell a treasonable uprising of Aaron Burr. The admiral's son, David, about twelve years of age, went as his cabin boy.

An admiral controls several ships, as you know, and David was the cabin boy of the admiral of the fleet. He was proud of his position and thought that he was bigger than he was.

Unwisely David took up smoking and swearing. His father worried. He was not a religious man, but he knew that those things would pollute that boy's life, especially while he was young. He, therefore, cautioned the sailors not to take David into their card games, and gambling, or to take him to the bar and treat him with grog. David was learning to like the grog, and learning also to like tobacco and swearing, and his father did not like that. He was a bright, active boy, and the sailors liked to have him in the game.

Before they reached New Orleans the father decided there was only one thing to do and that was to get David to decide for himself.

One day after the noon meal, the father dismissed the officers but said to David, "Wait a minute!" After the officers passed to their various duties, the father shut the door and coming back to David, said: "David, what do you intend to be when you grow up to be a man?"

David threw back his shoulders: "I intend to follow the sea!"

"Yes," said the father, "follow the sea. Be a poor, miserable, drunken sailor, kicked and cuffed about before the mast, and die of fever in some foreign hospital."

"No," said David, "I intend to tread the quarter-deck and command as you do."

The father said, "No. David, no boy ever trod the quarter-deck with such principles as you have, and such habits as you are exhibiting. You will have to change your whole course of life if you grow to be a man."

The father walked out and left David alone.

And as the prodigal son who ate husks with the swine, David came to himself. (Note that.) And he said to himself, "So that is my life, is it—to be a poor, miserable sailor kicked and cuffed about before the mast, and die of fever in some foreign hospital? I'll change my life, and I'll change it now! I'll never drink another drop of intoxicating liquor—I'll never take the name of God in vain again—I'll never gamble!" And he walked out of the door.

In about an hour, three sailors saw David pass, and said, "Come here, and have a game of cards."

"No, thank you," said David.

One said, "What's eating the lad?"

David went on, and then passed some who were drinking, who called out to him, "Come have a drink, Dave."

"No, thank you, I am not taking it any more."

A few said, "Stay with it, lad."

And David did.

The father quelled the treason of Aaron Burr. That is a matter of United States history, and then he returned.

Years afterward a banquet was given in a leading hotel in New York City in honor of an admiral who had won distinction in a recent war. He was the honored guest, and when the chairman arose to introduce him, he introduced Admiral David Farragut of the United States Navy who, when he arose to acknowledge the welcome, said, "Should you men like to know to what I owe my success in the Navy?" and a round of applause was the answer. And this is what he said:

"It was all owing to a resolution I formed when I was a young boy, twelve years of age, acting as cabin boy to my father who went to New Orleans to quell the treason of Aaron Burr."

And then he repeated in detail what I have given you in a general way only—the conversation between the father and himself. When he came to that part where he made the resolution never to drink another drop of intoxicating liquor and never to take the name of God in vain, he added: "As God is my witness, I have kept that vow to this day."

These simple illustrations by President McKay to indicate the pollution of sin on the innate virtue of a human soul have touched and impressed the lives of thousands of boys and girls and also men and women throughout the Church.

The illustration of a drop of ink made a lasting impression on a young boy forty years ago, and when Marion G. Romney was sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve in a general conference meeting held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on October 4, 1951, he paid the following tribute to President McKay:

"I have loved President McKay for a long, long time. He doesn't remember when I first fell in love with him. I guess he doesn't remember when you did either.

"It was down in Los Angeles in the winter of 1912 and 1913. We were known then as Mormon refugees. We had lost our homes in Mexico—invited out down there. Brother McKay came to Los Angeles; he came to Sunday School, and he took a glass of water. He had a pen in his hand. He showed us how clear and beautiful the water was, and then he dropped a drop of ink in the water, and it clouded it all through, and he said to us little fellows, 'That is what sin does to a life,' and I have ever since then, President McKay, been trying to keep that sin out of my life."
