Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

THE STORY OF FUA

Incident of 1921 world tour of missions as related September 9, 1940.

IN MIDSUMMER OF 1921, Hugh J. Cannon, several elders, and I were quarantined on the island of Makaka'a, Tonga. On that small island twenty-nine people had to remain for two weeks before the Tongan government would permit them to land at Nukualofa.

One of the government attendants of this group was a Latter-day Saint Tongan youth about nineteen or twenty years of age, named Fua. Fua had never before sought the job of waiter, and he chose it this time merely to make sure that the visiting missionaries would receive proper attention. He feared that because of general prejudice they might be neglected, slighted, or inconvenienced. The young man proved to be an excellent attendant, not only to the elders but also to all whom he served.

When, after two weeks, the quarantine was raised, a government official said to Fua, "Your work has been so satisfactory, we should like to employ you for the next company."

"Thank you," said Fua, "but I am going to visit the islands with the elders."

"We will pay you more than they will pay you," said the government official.

"They pay me nothing," answered Fua.

"What!" exclaimed the official, "do you mean to say you will give up this job at twice your present wages and go with those men for nothing!"

"Yes," said Fua, "I shall do it gladly."

And he did.

Membership in the Church, and instruction in gospel truths in the organization of the Church and the companionship of leading Church officials meant more to Fua than dollars and cents. To a true Latter-day Saint, the gospel is the "pearl of great price," and a heartfelt appreciation of the Church brings a joy and peace of soul that cannot be found in worldly acquisitions alone.

When President David O. McKay returned to Tonga, he was a speaker at a general meeting held at the Liahona College, Tongatapu, January 11, 1955. He told the audience of some of his memories of thirty-four years ago. He recalled some of his very dear friends whom he met in Tonga at that time. He learned that very morning that one of them had died two years ago. He was young Fua regarding whom the above incident is related. The President deeply regretted that he did not have the opportunity once again to see Fua whose story of faith and loyalty has been told by him on countless occasions.

President McKay then told this story of another Tongan, a young man who joined the Church.

"This young man's parents," related President McKay, "and some of the government officials tried to get him to renounce his religion, and they offered him an enticing amount of money if he would give it up. . . . However, that young man said, 'Do you see those islands? Well, if you owned all of them and offered them to me if I would give up my religion; I should refuse your offer because I know that this religion is true.' "

Then said President McKay: "I remember with gratitude that expression of faith and loyalty. Many of those young men then, and others who remember me when I was on that memorable visit in 1921, I have been happy to meet today."
