Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

MAINTAINING THE IDEALS OF THE CHURCH

Taken from a letter to the members of the Church in the Tahitian Mission, dated March 31, 1939, and signed by President David O. McKay.

WHEN I VISITED the beautiful Island of Tahiti in 1921 I learned of an incident associated with Brother Vaio, (a member of the Church), who was then captain of one of the government schooners.

The newly appointed governor of the island was to make a tour of inspection of a government-owned vessel. Captain Vaio and his associates decorated their ship, placed fruits and delicacies on the table, and made ready for a suitable and appropriate reception to his excellency. A glass of wine was placed at each plate with which at the proper time all would respond to the toast and drink to the health of the governor. There was one exception however—at Captain Vaio's plate there was placed a glass of lemonade. One of his associates protested saying that he would offend the governor if he drank only lemonade at the toast, but notwithstanding these protestations Brother Vaio insisted that he would drink only lemonade when the toast was proposed.

It was Captain Vaio's responsibility and honor to make the welcome speech. This he did, and at the conclusion he explained in substance:

"Your Excellency, before proposing the toast I wish to explain why I am drinking lemonade instead of the customary wine. I am a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Every Sunday morning I teach a class of young people. It is one of our tenets not to drink wine or strong drink, tea, nor coffee, nor use tobacco. I cannot consistently tell them not to use intoxicating liquor and then indulge myself; therefore, you will understand why on this occasion I am drinking lemonade. And now I propose a toast to the health and happiness of his Excellency, governor of Tahiti."

There was a tense silence among the ship's crew as the Governor arose to make his response. He was a true gentleman and appreciated the loyalty and manhood of the man who had given the welcoming speech. In substance the governor said:

"Captain Vaio, I thank you and your associates for this hearty welcome, and I am glad to learn that you maintain the ideals of your Church in regard to temperance. I wish we had more men with such sterling character to take charge of the government's ships."

As we sailed that evening toward Rarotonga, I wondered in admiration how many of the members of the Church were as loyal to the ideals and teachings of the gospel as was Captain Vaio; and the words of the Savior came to my mind as they come again as I dictate these lines. "Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

I have learned that Captain Vaio has gone to his eternal reward. Perhaps he knows how many times I have told this story to Sunday School children, not a few of whom let us hope have been encouraged along the pathway of duty, because of his courage and loyalty to what he knew was right.

"How far that little candle throws its beams! So shines a good deed in this naughty world." (Shakespeare)
