Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

SACRIFICE BRINGS BLESSINGS

From "A Solution for Present-day Problems," "Millennial Star," 1931, Vol. 31, page 709.

JUST HOW SACRIFICE brings us closer to the Lord I think we can better understand if I relate to you the story of a father whose son had been away nearly two years. The financial depression had hit the father. He was an architect. Building had ceased, and the father's income had become quite limited. A letter came from the son that he needed forty-two or forty-four dollars. The father did not have it. He did not know where to get it, but he wanted his son not to be without the necessary funds. Well, what could he do? He could do just what every true Latterday Saint does—exercise his faith in God. To that end he and his wife, in evening prayer, prayed that the way might be opened for them to send their son the money asked for. They retired that night as usual. The next morning he went to his work, not knowing any source from which that forty dollars and more could come.

Towards evening a man came in the office and said: "Two years ago or more you did some architectural work for me, and I could not pay you. You told me not to worry about it, to pay you whenever I wanted to. I had forgotten it until last evening. I have come here now to give you my check." The father, quite overcome, said: "How did you happen to think of this? I had forgotten it entirely." The man answered:

"My wife and I were coming from Lagoon last night. Your name came up in the conversation, and it was she who asked: 'Have you ever paid him that bill?' I answered 'No,' and said, 'I will attend to that to-morrow.' " The father said: "At what time was that?" and the architect's heart filled with gratitude when he realized that it was just a few minutes after he and his wife had knelt in prayer, asking God to open the way.

Well, you may say it was a coincidence. Others may say it was merely an association of ideas when the name came up, but to that father and mother it was the direct interposition of God, and their faith in him was more implicit than ever before.
