Clare Middlemiss, David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay ( 1955)

DAVID O. MCKAY, A GREAT TEACHER

From address delivered by President Stephen L Richards at the Dedicatory Services of the "David O. McKay" Educational Building, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, December 14, 1954.

HERE IS A TEACHER distinctive, set apart from other teachers of the world. One of his fundamental concepts in pedagogy is that there can be no adequate teaching of youth without personality, without making every truth and principle taught a motivating factor in the life and living of the individual. In his younger days he carried on his profession in the classroom and in the administration of a school. Through native endowment, industry, and study, he acquired great proficiency in the educational processes. Those who were in his classes, in his school, a half century ago remember him with great affection and gratitude, and their children have been told of the influence of his personality on the lives of their parents. But, after all, the lives of those touched immediately by his classroom work are relatively few in number. In young manhood he was called from his principalship of an academy to be a teacher in the kingdom of our Lord. He never deserted his profession. He expanded it. He dignified it, and he glorified it.

The Sunday Schools of the Church were the first beneficiaries of his art. He did much to bring order into their teaching. Uniform courses of study were established. The aims and objectives of lessons were clarified, and immeasurable inspiration given to the teachers of this great organization for the application of gospel principles in making Latter-day Saints. The procedures fostered by him had influence in all the organizations of the Church. He brought untold improvement in their teaching procedure. His constant advocacy of personality as a potent factor in education has proved to be of inestimable value through the years. His attitude toward teaching has come about naturally from his abiding interest and faith in the individual. Every little boy or girl, and grown ones too, who has heard him speak to them has been made to feel that his or her individual welfare was the intimate concern of this great teacher. All who have come within the radiation of his teaching have been made to feel, not only that they have been enlightened by his exposition of truth, but also that they have a friend deeply concerned in their individual welfare.

It would be impossible to list all of the splendid contributions of this great educator. Suffice it to say that five great institutions of learning have recognized his high merits by granting him honorary degrees, and the whole Church, with all its organizations, including particularly the department of education, the colleges, schools institutes, and seminaries have all been beneficiaries of his outstanding accomplishments and contributions in the field of education.

Clare Middlemiss
