Hyrum L. Andrus, Distinct Doctrines and Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price ( 1960)

Light and truth forsake that evil one. (D&C 93:36-37.)

If we can conceive of a Being, in form and stature like man, who has centered within Himself the great life-forces of the universe—the great forces of truth, of intelligence, and of light—to such an extent that the concentration of those forces within Himself makes Him a Being of brilliance above the light of the sun, then we can conceive of the type of Beings that Joseph Smith beheld in 1820.

Can you imagine the ideas that this great Being can formulate in his mind, the depths and the intricacies of his thought, the joy and happiness of his life, in the expression of his great intellect; and the emotional endowments that are associated with this divine glory or intelligence. This certainly explains why the Prophet Joseph said that God was a Being that defied all description. Human language breaks down in its effort to explain God as a Being of glory.

There are several commentary sources, some of which I would like to refer to, which relate this concept of God to the universe and life about us. For example, let me turn first to the testimony of Patriarch Benjamin F. Johnson, an intimate associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who wrote a significant letter in which he mentioned several teachings of the Prophet. Brother Johnson said:

[Joseph Smith taught] that all light and heat are the "Glory of God," which is His power, that fills the "immensity of space," and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed. (Benjamin F. Johnson to George S. Gibbs, "An Interesting Letter," p. 8.)

Parley P. Pratt also gave us a statement concerning that great principle of power, intelligence, light and truth that centers in Deity. Of it he said:

This is the great, positive, controlling element of all other elements. It is omnipresent by reason of its infinitude and it pervades all things. It is the agent or executive by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds, and which by the mandate of the Almighty, or any of His commissioned servants, performs all the mighty wonders, signs, and miracles, ever manifest in the name of the Lord—the dividing of the sea, the removing of a mountain, the raising of the dead, or the healing of the sick. (Key to Theology, 9th edition, pp. 46-47.)

Brother Pratt then adds:

This is the true light, which in some measure illuminates all men. It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances; and by reflection on the eye makes visible the truth of the outward world.

It is also, in its higher degrees, the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend and remember the subjects within our reach.

Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, vision in the Prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead throughout all his creations.

(Ibid.)

Let me break this statement down into spectrum form, to see what Pratt is getting at. He says, first, that there is centered in Deity—in God's presence or glory—the light, the truth, the power, and the intelligence that radiates from God as a divine Personage, to fill the immensity of space. As this is broken down into its various areas of influence, he says that it constitutes the light of the sun, so that the light of the sun is part of light, truth, intelligence and power that centers in the Personage of Deity.

Let me give you two or three other testimonies right along this same idea, by other prominent brethren of the Church. Here is one from Orson Pratt:

The light we see is spirit; ... the light that comes from the sun is spirit. (Journal of Discourses, Vol. III, pp. 104.)

We talk about spirit as being matter-pure and refined matter. Here Elder Pratt says that light and spirit, in a sense, are synonymous; that light is a form of spirit or inseparably related to it. Charles W. Penrose agreed. He says, while speaking of the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88,

It is in the earth on which we stand; it is in the stars that shine in the firmament; it is in the moon that reflects the light of the sun; it is in the sun and is the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made; and these grosser particles [He uses the word "grosser" here instead of "less refined," as Pratt used it.] of light that illuminate the heavens and enable us to behold the works of nature, are from the same Spirit that enlightens our minds and unfolds the things of God. As that light comes forth from the sun, so the light of God comes to us. That natural light is the grosser substance or particles of the same Spirit. (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XXVI, pp. 21-22.)

Let me give you one other testimony along this same line from President John Taylor. He says:

... God is light and in him there is no darkness. He is the light of the sun and the power thereof by which it was made; He is also the light of the moon and the power thereof by which it was made; He is also the light of the stars and the power by which they were made; ... it is the same light that enlightens the understanding of men. What, have we a mental light and a visual light, all proceeding from the same source? Yes, so says the scripture, and so says science when rightly comprehended. (Journal of Discourses, Vol. XVIII, p. 330.)

In coming back to Parley P. Pratt's definition, we see that in the less refined area of this great spectrum there is sunlight with its influence on the plant kingdom. Up the spectrum, in the next component area, is the light of instinct which influences animal life, fish, birds, etc. In its more refined degrees, there is what Pratt calls the "light of reason," which is the natural heritage of all men who come into the world. This is the light that Paul had reference to when he said "In Him [Christ] we live, and move, and have our being." (Acts 17:28.) The light of reason affects what the scriptures term the natural man. Pratt explains that in its higher and even more pure and refined forms it is that light that quickens the prophets and that gives the manifestations of gospel power to men.

It is in this area where the individual, having been justified by faith in Jesus Christ, comes into a new relationship with Deity and is given the more pure and refined manifestations of the power that centers in Jesus as the light and the life of the world. Brigham Young explained, for instance, that the gift of the Holy Ghost gives one access to "the increased rays of that light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (Journal of Discourses, Vol. VI, p. 315.) In other words, here is the manifestation of that power which we call the power of the Holy Ghost. On the day of Pentecost when the apostles and elders were endowed with those gifts of the Spirit, they had come upon them as cloven tongues like unto fire. This manifestation of pure intelligence quickened the attributes and endowed them with divine gifts of the Spirit. In short, Joseph Smith gave us, in this concept of God, a tremendous concept in which we have the powers of the gospel actually centered in God but manifested at times to men.

I think one of the best explanations reconciling God as a personal Being with God as a Being who is in all things and through all things comes from Charles W. Penrose. Let me read from the Journal of Discourses what Brother Penrose has to say.

He is omnipresent in the power of that spirit—the Holy Spirit—which animates all created things ... This spirit which pervades all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence. We are told in the revelations of God to us that, "Intelligence or the light of truth never was created, neither indeed can be." And we are told further, that this Spirit, when it is manifest, is God moving in His ... majesty and in His power. Now, this spirit always existed; it always operated, but it is not understood, and cannot be comprehended except through organisms. If you see a living blade of grass you see a manifestation of that Spirit which is called God. If you see an animal of any kind on the face of the earth having life, there is a manifestation of that Spirit. If you see a man you behold its most perfect earthly manifestation. And if you see a glorified man, a man who has passed through all the various grades of being, who has overcome all things, who has been raised from the dead, who has been quickened by the spirit in its fullness, there you see manifested, in its perfection, this eternal, beginningless, endless spirit of intelligence.

Such a Being is our Father and our God, and we are following in His footsteps. He has attained to perfection. He has arisen to kingdoms of power. He comprehends all things, because in Him dwelleth the fullness of the Godhead, bodily. He is a perfect manifestation, expression and revelation of this eternal essence, the spirit of eternal, everlasting intelligence or light and truth. It is embodied in His spiritual personality or spiritual organism.

(Journal of Discourses, Vol. XXVI, pp. 23-24.)

The point that I would like to make is simply this: in order for one to become a personage of Deity, that being must go through what we might term three births, commencing with the initial primeval intelligence. First he must be given the birth by which he receives a spirit body and thereby becomes the "offspring of God." In the next birth he is "added upon," by being given a physical organization. This birth, that we receive here in mortality through the processes of procreation, is the means that God has ordained for man to receive a physical body. The third birth that we need is a birth into glory. Let me say at this point that Jesus is the son of his Eternal Father in three ways. He is the firstborn in the spirit world. Second, he is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. And thirdly, he is the Son of God in glory. For example, in Section 93, where John gives his testimony concerning Jesus, he says:

And I, John, saw that he received not the fullness at first, but received grace for grace [that is Christ received one endowment, one gift, one divine anointing after another];

And he received not of the fullness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fullness;

And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not the fullness at the first. (D&C 93:12-14.)

Now Christ is not here called the Son of God because of a premortal relationship; nor is he called the Son of God because of a relationship as the Only Begotten, but he is the Son of God because he was subordinate to his Eternal Father in the acquisition of this divine element which we call intelligence or glory, which, when he received it in its fullness, constituted him a personage of Deity. John states further:

And I, John, bear record that he received a fullness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. (D&C 93:16-17.)

We also must go through three basic births. In our premortal relationship we were the sons and daughters of God, receiving a spirit body by birth in that premortal world. In our mortal relationships, we become the sons and daughters of that particular family into which we are born. But when we are born again, spiritually, we become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ, because it is through him that these divine powers of light and truth, or intelligence, are to be developed within us. Here is the purpose of mortality: that we come to earth; that a Saviour be provided; and that through him we might be justified (having repented of our transgressions), anointed, and endowed with intelligence, from grace to grace, until we receive ultimately of the fullness. Those individuals who come back into the celestial kingdom, who are glorified with Christ, become his sons and daughters. As Jesus said to His Father of his disciples, in that famous prayer in the garden before his crucifixion, "Thine they were, but thou gavest them me." (John 17:6.) In that sense, then we are given unto Christ, and he becomes our father, and we become his sons and his daughters in this new and divine relationship. The Pearl of Great Price teaches us that in this way Adam, after the Fall, became a son of God. It adds, further, that "Thus may all become my sons."

(Moses 6:68.) For this reason, also, Noah and his sons "were called the sons of God." (Ibid., 8:13.)

Now when we receive God's glory in its fullness, there is endowed, centered and organized within us a fullness of intelligence. In this way Christ is in us and we are in him, even as He is in the Father and the Father is in him. For example, Christ prayed to His Father of this great union that exists in the celestial kingdom, and said:

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;

That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee ... (John 17:20-21.)

Here is the relationship that He wants—here is the relationship he is praying for, "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us." He goes on and says:

And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one.

And then He explains further:

I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. (John 17:22-23.)

This divine element of intelligence, of glory, is thus a fundamental factor in man's relation to Deity. In Section 93 the Lord, after explaining this, makes this statement:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fullness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fullness, and be glorified in me as I am in thy Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:19-20.)

Here is the crux of the gospel of Jesus Christ—the way by which man is to come into this relationship with Deity. Here is the great truth that our modern-day scriptures point out to us. Let me turn to the Pearl of Great Price, to the book of Moses, to the great doctrine that was revealed to Adam concerning the second birth (as we sometimes call it) here in mortality—the birth into glory or the birth into this divine element of light and truth or intelligence, which brings us into spiritual union with God. Here in Moses 6 it reports that Adam asked the question, "Why is it necessary to be baptized?" In reply, the Lord made a very fundamental explanation of the principle of baptism as the key or channel through which the powers of God's glory are extended to men. Explained the Lord:

That by reason of the transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into this world of water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, become of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven ... (Moses 6:59.)

The Lord then points out the similitude and the symbolism between our birth here in mortality and birth into this divine element of power, truth and light. To those who are thus born again, He said:

Therefore it is given to abide in you [those individuals who are born into this new, divine relationship]; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, judgment. (Moses 6:61.)

In other words, these divine powers that constitute the powers of God begin to develop within the person through the process of the rebirth. Just as the acquisition of a physical body here in mortality is contingent upon the processes of birth into mortality, so also is the acquisition of those powers that will make this physical body a glorified body contingent upon a rebirth. This is the channel through which we receive those divine powers and are brought into an eternal union with Deity. In a sense we are wired up; in us is developed that divine truth and intelligence that has previously been developed in Christ. We then become one with Him as he is one with the Father.

Here in the book of Moses, chapter 1, we have a statement concerning Moses, when he was enveloped with this divine principle of glory. After explaining that Moses had been caught up to this exceeding high mountain, the record says: "And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.) In order for Moses to endure God's presence, Moses had to be enveloped in this divine element of intelligence; and then, thus enveloped or transfigured, he could abide God's presence. Later, this divine element withdrew from Moses. It says: "And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses." (Moses 1:9.) Note that the "presence of God" is here synonymous with the "glory of God." When God's presence withdrew, then, His glory was gone from Moses.

This statement, with other scriptures, gives us an understanding of the spiritual relationship that Adam had with God before the Fall. He was in the presence of God. He was enveloped about with this divine power of intelligence—these forces of life—and under these circumstances he was in a paradisiacal state of glory, in a condition where he was in large measure in union with these tremendous powers of the spirit, these powers of glory. Under these circumstances death could not exist. As the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "All corruption is devoured by the fire." (History of the Church, Vol. VI, p. 366.) Here we have a real insight into the state of Adam's existence previous to the Fall. A knowledge of these things also points out what the spiritual Fall was all about. It was the withdrawal of glory from the earth, and the withdrawal of that element made it possible for the death processes to commence.

By understanding the nature of a translated being, we have a further key to understanding the nature of the Fall. For example, when the Lord translates a person he does not take him back, as the Prophet Joseph explained, into a fullness of His glory, but He does develop within him this divine element so that the light, truth and intelligence within him holds in abeyance the forces of death. For this reason, then, the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 7, verse 6 refers to John the Revelator as a "flaming fire," having developed this power within him to the point where he can dwell in a terrestrial state of glory with power over death. So did Adam have power over death in the world previous to the Fall. He was not a translated being, but he was enveloped in the glory of God. From this state he fell; and this is the purpose of the gospel to take man back into the presence of God, there to receive even a fuller manifestation of God's glory.

Let me now turn to some related areas of information concerning the Pearl of Great Price's contribution to our knowledge of Deity. It is God's work and his glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. By that I mean that this is His work and this is how He develops his glory, by bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. In so doing, man, in the final analysis, becomes a spiritual being. For example, the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88, speaks of man in this relationship and says: "For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body." (D&C 88:27.) Amulek, in the Book of Mormon, also speaks of how there will be a reuniting of the flesh with the spirit, then says: "... Thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." (Alma 11:45.) Certainly a resurrected being cannot see corruption, if he is endowed with this divine element of pure intelligence that consumes all corruption. Though physical, in the final analysis, man is a spiritual being, endowed with glory, brought into union with God; and in this sense the divine purpose of things is to bring about his immortality and eternal life. In a similar manner, all life is to a degree in union with God, even now, and thus all organized life is a manifestation of God's glory or power. For example, the Lord said of His many creations:

Behold all these kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him, nevertheless, he who came into his own was not comprehended.

(D&C 88:47-48.)

Man has seen God in this sense—that God is a being of glory, and He extends and develops His glory in all forms of life, and ultimately glorifies all forms of life. By the development of His intelligence, His truth, and His power in the elements of this earth, God will one day glorify this earth and make of it a shining, brilliant orb, in brilliance above the light of the sun. Thus the Prophet and others associated with him taught that this earth will become a celestialized sphere, likened unto a sea of glass and fire. It will then be unto crystal because of the purity of elements, by the concentration of this pure intelligence within it. Furthermore, one will then be able to see through and in it, and it will become a great Urim and Thummin, as Section 130 teaches.

Eternal marriage is the ordained program by which God organizes beings in whom He can later develop His glory. Thus, as God commences to bring about his purposes and work, the principle of eternal marriage becomes a very important part of this program. The book of Abraham speaks considerably about Abraham's promise concerning his posterity. This posterity was to be given to Abraham by the promise of the new and everlasting covenant, which keys he then held and which constitute at least in some measure the keys of the gospel of Abraham. These blessings and keys were also given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, in our day and age, and with them an explanation that here is the key to an understanding of God, to an understanding and the continuation of His works. For example, Section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants, speaks of the promise to Abraham—the promise to continue his posterity in eternity as well as here upon the earth—and then the Lord says this to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself. (D&C 132:31.)

I would like you to note the statement, "wherein he glorifieth himself." How does God glorify himself? He does so, as the Pearl of Great Price says, by bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. He must first of all, by this divine law of eternal increase, beget spirit children, provide for them a mortal probation, and extend the powers of the gospel to them, by which they are glorified, by which they are brought into an eternal union with Him. Thereby the power, the truth and the intelligence of his glory, is centered in them.

Having considered the nature of God as a Being of glory and eternal marriage as a key in this whole picture, let us now consider how the Law of Consecration and Stewardship fits into the picture. You recall that in Moses 4, there is an account of the council of heaven, and that particular account mentions the proposal made by Christ that the program of the Father be carried out. It also reports Satan's contrary proposal. The Lord, in explaining these things to Moses, said that Lucifer came before him, saying:

Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

(Moses 4:1-2.)

Here the idea of consecration, as part of the celestial system, is set forth. In other words, when Christ gets through this work of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life for the people on this earth, He will then consecrate the whole to the Father. Let me give you the Prophet Joseph Smith's explanation of this particular doctrine as he gave it in his great King Follett discourse. He starts out by defining eternal life as "going from one small degree to another, from a small capacity to a great one, from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings ..." There is the goal, to sit in glory as do those who are enthroned in everlasting power. The power, the truth, the intelligence of the universe is then centered in them, and so that they are in Christ as He is in the Father. (History of the Church, Vol. VI, pp. 302-318.) The Prophet states further that such individuals are heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. He also explains in the following statement what it means to be an heir of God and a joint heir with Jesus Christ:

What is it? To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. (Ibid.)

Now here is where the concept of consecration comes in, and also the idea of stewardship. Jesus has this world as a stewardship and can draw upon the intelligence and power of the Father to sanctify and glorify it, but when he gets through what is he going to do? He is going to present it to His Father, so that He may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt His Father in glory.

Now is the Father going to be exalted just in dominion? No, the Father will be exalted further in glory. After the Father, through his Son, creates and redeems worlds and develops within them His divine intelligence—the light and truth that constitutes his glory—those who come into eternal union with Him reciprocate by consecrating back to Him; and by the consecration of themselves, with their intelligence and power, there is a development of truth and light within the Father. Thus there is a continual concentration through consecration of this divine element of truth and light, or intelligence, in God. As the Prophet says,

He [the Father] will then take a higher exaltation, [that is, in glory] and I [Jesus] shall take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children. (Ibid.)

Here is a tremendous concept, my brothers and sisters. First it emphasizes the idea of God as a personal Being, but as a personal Being He nevertheless is intuitively in union with the universe, and in a sense is in all things. Furthermore, the great principle of eternal increase through eternal marriage comes into the program as a means of adding to and developing glory in the Father. Finally, there exists this divine system of consecration and stewardship. Those who come into celestial union with Christ come unto Him through the covenants of the Priesthood, one of which is consecration. When they do, they add to the glory and the intelligence that is centered in Deity, so that God is continually progressing and developing in dominion and in glory. As the Lord explained to Moses: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Meanwhile, those who come into the celestial system by consecration become heirs of all that the Father possesses, and can draw upon His wealth, power and intelligence to develop their own stewardships. When they beget spirit children and glorify them, those spirit children will consecrate to them, the same as we do to the Father, through Christ. Here is the program of eternal progression. Again, the Lord explained to Moses: "Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." (Moses 1:5.) The Lord is talking here of celestialized worlds. You could line up a group of fallen worlds, such as our earth, from here to Kolob, and the glory centered in the whole of them probably would not be too brilliant for a transfigured person to behold, but line up that many celestialized worlds and, in order to see and comprehend them, center their glory in a person, and you see what the Lord meant when he explained that no man can behold all His works without beholding all His glory; and should this be done that person could no longer remain in the flesh on the earth. The effect of such glory should make it so.

Here the Pearl of Great Price, with other latter-day scriptures, adds to our understanding of God by giving us this magnificent concept of Deity. If I had time, I would also like to point out how modern scripture aids in reconciling the view that Christ is progressing in truth (a component of intelligence), even though he is endowed with a fullness of the Father's glory. But my time is gone. May the Lord bless us in our desire to learn more of Him, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
