Hyrum L. Andrus, Distinct Doctrines and Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price ( 1960)

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: Where does the Holy Ghost figure in this arrangement?

Answer: Let me turn to two scriptures on this point. In John 6:14, Jesus speaks of his relationship to the Holy Ghost, and says:

He [the Holy Ghost] shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:14-15.)

Jesus is the light and the life of the world. All the truth, the light, the power and the intelligence that comes from God to man comes through Jesus Christ; and the Holy Ghost is therefore subordinate to Him. Christ here states that the Holy Ghost "shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you." The Holy Ghost is a third member of the Godhead, but he is subordinate to Jesus Christ and He acts under His direction to manifest Christ's power and truth to those who receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Consider also this statement from the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord speaks to Edward Partridge:

I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon, and you shall receive my Spirit [that is, the Spirit or power of Christ], the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom. (D&C 36:2.)

Here also the Priesthood and its power centers. For example, read Doctrine and Covenants, Section 50, verse 27, where the Lord speaks of one who is properly ordained to the Priesthood and says:

Wherefore, he is possessor of all things; for all things are subject unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son. (D&C 50:27.)

Thus we see that the power of the Priesthood centers in the glory of God as it emanates therefrom through Christ; and the Holy Ghost, as the Prophet said, is the administrator under Christ in all of these Priesthoods.

Question: Do you think the celestialization of the earth will be brought about by men themselves, inspired by God?

Answer: In a sense, yes. Brigham Young once said that man has brought about the Fall on earth and that man will redeem it, by the powers of truth given through the Priesthood. Let us keep in mind, however, that it is the power of God that man will utilize. I believe that one purpose of the millenium is to teach men about this divine element of glory to where ultimately they can manifest its power to sanctify and transfigure and celestialize our earth. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 101, we are told that the millenium will be essentially a glory age. It states:

And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together.

And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; (D&C 101:23-24.)

This consuming fire will come by the manifestation of Christ's glory. When the veil is taken away, the powers of intelligence that center in Him will be manifest to such extent that the elements will melt with fervent heat and the mountains will flow down at his presence. This has no reference to thermonuclear bombs, but the revelation of Christ's glory. The Doctrine and Covenants continues:

And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth. (D&C 101:25.)

This burning is not just a bonfire, but a purifying fire. It will purify the earth, says the Lord, "that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth." His glory will then be visibly manifest during the millenial reign. This is a real fulfillment of Joel's prophecy, where the Spirit of the Lord is poured out upon all flesh. As of end result the Lord says, "And in that day the enmity of man and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh shall cease from before my face." (D&C 101:26.) These things will be realized as the result of the influence of God's pure intelligence or glory, manifesting the attributes of love, peace, calmness and serenity; and under its influence enmity will be taken from the face of the earth. At that day whatsoever a man shall ask, it shall be given unto him, because they will be in such union with God. There shall be no sorrow because there will be no death. The word "death" as it is here used means that there will be no degeneration. The initial manifestation of glory at Christ's second coming will purify all flesh so that the elements of degeneration and corruption in the flesh will be consumed. Men will not grow old and become decrepit, but they will bloom forth in perpetual youth, until they get to that point where the complete change to immortality is made. Well, then, I believe that under these circumstances they will eventually learn enough about these powers, in this age of glory that we call the millenium, to where ultimately they will be able to sanctify this earth and bring it forth as a celestial sphere.

Question: Would you please make clear Adam's place, before mortality, in the eternal scheme?

Answer: Let me give you two or three scriptures on this point. First, the Tenth Article of Faith states: "We believe ... that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." There are four kinds of glory referred to in the scriptures: (1) celestial, (2) terrestrial, and (3) telestial. In each of these conditions glory is organized and diffused into matter. On page 351 of The Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he comments "... we infer that God had materials to organize the world out of chaotic matter which is element, in which dwells all glory." In celestial, terrestrial, and telestial worlds, glory is organized within the elements; and there is an organization of light among the glorified spheres in the universe, as there is an organization of glory among celestial beings. The Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar to which Dr. Clark has referred points out that our sun receives its light from higher spheres, but the ultimate center of the great organization of light is the glory that centers in Jesus Christ. When Adam was in the garden of Eden, he was in a state of paradisiacal glory (the fourth kind of glory), which is not a condition of glory where light is organized into the elements, but where the light only shines forth upon them from the presence of God, as when the veil is taken away. This is the condition of glory to which the earth will be renewed during the millenium. When Adam fell, he fell spiritually; he died spiritually. In dying spiritually, he was severed in large measure from that intelligence or glory that constitute God's presence leaving only enough of the light of Christ to quicken life in mortality, and give man the power to think, reason, judge, etc. In 2 Nephi, Lehi speaks of this pre-fall condition, having received his understanding on the matter from the Brass Plates. He makes this explanation:

... behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; ... (2 Nephi 2:22.)

Now, why would this be the case? Because they were in the presence of God, and there could be no death on the earth. It says in Moses 6:59: "That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death. ..." Transgression did not directly bring death; the fall brought death. In other words, Adam transgressed, and through transgression he severed himself from God's presence, and when he did, the fall brought death. In Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77, the Prophet speaks of the earth, answering certain questions about the book of Revelations:

Question: What are we to understand by the book which John saw, which was sealed on the back with seven seals?

Answer: We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence. (D&C 77:6.)

Now what existed before the earth's temporal existence? I would say its spiritual existence; it was then in spiritual-physical condition. It was in a condition of paradisiacal glory, where it was in the presence of God and enjoyed His glory. Life upon it in that circumstance and condition was not subject to death. The powers of God's presence consume corruption. The whole gospel plan is here to get us back to the presence of God, by means of the second birth, through which the powers of light and truth are developed within us, to the extent that we become spiritually alive and are eventually glorified. Hence, Paul says of the body:

... It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption:

It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power:

It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. (I Corinthians 15:42-44.)

It is by the power of the gospel that the body is raised in incorruption, power, and glory; and baptism is the gateway to this goal. It is the channel through which such power is given.

In Moses 1:6, Christ speaks in the office of the Father. Let me say that at the time of the fall, the Father withdrew himself—that is, He withdrew his relationships with man because of the fall, and he placed upon Jesus both the authority to act and to speak as himself and also his endowment of glory and power, so that Jesus became both the Father and Son, and he manifests himself in both relationships to mankind upon earth. In the Book of Mormon, Ether, you have the pre-mortal Christ, specifically and technically identified as Jesus, appearing to Mahonri Moriacumer, the brother of Jared, and he says there: "... And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast." (Ether 3:15.) I believe that this is the first time that Jesus, in the office of the Son, appeared unto mankind; that previous to that his appearances to prophets on earth was in the office of the Father, speaking as though he were the Father, endowed with that power, as for example, over here in Section 49, when he speaks here just as though he were the Father, and concludes with a different idea. He says,

Thus saith the Lord; for I am God, and have sent mine Only Begotten Son into the world for the redemption of the world ... [just as though it were the Father speaking, but he signs off by saying,] Behold, I am Jesus Christ, and I come quickly. Even so. Amen. (D&C 49:5, 28.)

Another good example of such a transfer of authority is in Exodus

Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.

Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him. (Exodus 23:20, 21.)

In other words, the Angel had the name of Jehovah in him, so that he could speak and act just as though he were Jehovah and it would be binding. Now, in the same way Jesus Christ has the name of the name of the Father in him.

Here in John 14, for example, Philip inquired, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us." (John 14:8.) And Jesus on that occasion declared that he was the Father:

Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet has thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me, hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?

Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. (John 14:9-10.)

Question: Is the power of God within the glory or is God the power of the substance called glory?

Answer: Glory is a concentration of truth and light or intelligence and its associated powers. Intelligence is the great governing key of God's power. I think if Section 88 teaches us one thing it is that light is the principal of government in the universe. This is the light of Christ, which is the light of the sun. It is the light of the individual, the power by which man thinks and moves, etc. In short, it is the power of God who sits upon His throne in the midst of eternity, etc. These powers actually manifest the attributes and powers of God, as they manifest in the universe.

Question: Does the third birth begin with baptism or mortal death, or when?

Answer: We usually think of it as commencing with baptism, but in a sense it commences with the true exercise of faith. On one occasion Joseph Smith gave a discourse on John 3:3-5. You will recall the incident where Nicodemus came to Jesus and said, "What must I do to be saved?" Jesus first said, "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God." Then he later said, "Except a man be born of the water and of the Spirit he cannot enter the kingdom of God." He was talking about two things, and this the Prophet Joseph Smith pointed out. First, Christ spoke about a birth to see; and secondly, a birth to enter. The first birth comes, as Alma would say, by planting the seed in your soul and by having the mind illuminated through the power of the Holy Spirit. As Nephi would say, in 2 Nephi 33:1, "When a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men." As the Spirit carries the message of truth unto the hearts of the children of men, it awakens them to a rebirth, to see the kingdom. And having seen it, they have the responsibility of the coming in by baptism and confirmation. Technically this rebirth commences with the exercise of genuine faith, by which these powers of rebirth begin to germinate within the individual; and when the person finally goes through the full process of the rebirth, then he is born of water and of the Spirit. He may then walk in a newness of life and in a relationship with God where the power and glory of Christ begin to develop within him.

Let me give you one other comment, this one from Doctrine and Covenants 88:66-67 where the Lord is talking about the Spirit:

Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound.

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. (D&C 88:66-67.)

Such illumination is the result of the Second Birth—the result of the development of God's truth, power, and intelligence within man. Then, if I can take your time to quote just one other reference here in Section 88, the Lord explains how this rebirth lays the foundation for celestial resurrection. First, he states that in the resurrection man will be raised a spiritual body. Then He says this:

They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness. (D&C 88:28-29.)

I take it that that "portion" thus prepares men for celestial glory and is given through the process of the Second Birth, through the gift of the Holy Ghost. Those who have received and applied this gift "shall then receive of the same, even a fulness." So the promise of the fulness comes in the resurrection, but the actual Second Birth commences with faith and continues and is consummated by receiving the ordinances of the gospel.

Thank you a lot, brothers and sisters. I appreciate your patience and time. May the Lord ever be with you. Amen.
