Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER HUGH B. BROWN

Biographical Sketch

A former army officer, practicing attorney, college professor and oil company executive, Elder Hugh B. Brown was called to be a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles on April 6, 1958, after he had served as an Assistant to the Council since 1953. He was named a member of the First Presidency on June 22, 1961 and served as First Counselor to President David O. McKay until the President's death on January 18, 1970, at which time Elder Brown resumed his position in the Quorum of the Twelve.

He was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, October 24, 1883, second son and fifth of fourteen children of Homer Manley and Lydia J. B. Brown. The family moved to Canada fifteen years later and much of Elder Brown's life has been centered there. He married Zina Young Card, daughter of Charles O. Card (founder of Cardston, Alta., Canada) and grand-daughter of Brigham Young, June 17, 1908, in the Salt Lake Temple. They have six daughters and a son living. Another son, Hugh Card Brown, was killed in World War II.

Elder Brown first practiced law in Canada and later in the United States. During World War I, he served overseas in the Canadian Army, attaining the rank of major. He was professor of religion and coordinator of veterans affairs at Brigham Young University from 1946 to 1950. And at the time of his call to be one of the Church's General Authorities, Elder Brown was president and manager of the Richland Oil Development Company of Canada, Ltd.

His present responsibility has been preceded by years of Church service. He was a missionary in Great Britain, 1904-6, and subsequently has been a bishop's counselor, Alberta (Canada) Stake high councilman, Lethbridge (Canada) stake president; Granite (Salt Lake City) counselor and stake president; and twice (1937-40 and 1944-46) British Mission president. During World War II, he was coordinator of LDS servicemen's activities.
