Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Father, Are You There?"

I think one of the first things that every young person should do is attempt to get acquainted with God. I mean that in a very literal sense. I mean it in the sense that we are able to go to him and obtain the kind of help that we need. I remember when I was quite a lad (and that's remembering a long way back)—I remember my mother said to me when I went to go on my mission in 1904 (and that's before some of you were born)—she said, "My boy, you are going a long ways away from me now. Do you remember," she said, "that when you were a little lad you used to have bad dreams and get frightened? Your bedroom was just off mine, and frequently you would cry out in the night and say, 'Mother, are you there?' And I would answer 'Yes, my boy, I'm here—everything is all right. Turn over and go to sleep.' You always did. Knowing that I was there gave you courage.

"Now," she said, "you will be about 6,000 miles away, and though you may cry out for me I cannot answer you." She added this: "There is one who can, and if you call to him, He'll hear you when you call. He will respond to your appeal. You just say, 'Father, are you there?' and there will come into your heart the comfort and solace such as you knew as a boy when I answered you."

I want to say to you young people that many times since then in many and varying conditions I have cried out, "Father, are you there?" I made that plea when in the mission field we were mobbed almost every night, driven from place to place. We were beaten, expelled from cities, our lives threatened. Every time before I went out to those meetings I would say, "Father, are you there?" And though I didn't hear a voice and I didn't see his person, I want to tell you young people he replied to me with the comfort and assurance and testimony of his presence. It made me unafraid; and with that presence, I am grateful to say, we did not suffer much.

(BYU Stakes Fireside Address, "Father, Are You There?" October 8, 1967 [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press], pp. 5-6.)
