Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"The Identification of Jock Anderson"

I am thinking in terms, at the moment, of an experience I had when returning from the First World War. I always hesitate to tell these experiences of the First World War because they definitely date me as approaching middle life. I was there in 1915 to 1918 and saw many things and experienced some things, but I'm thinking of a certain man who was known to us in the regiment as the "unsentimental cuss." He was a man apparently without any feeling, a man who was not touched by the things that affect most of us at times, a man who could stand by his comrades and see them shot down and never bat an eye. He was the kind of fellow that most of us—as we noted his actions and his attitudes, heard his coarse language, and saw him in debauchery at times—most of us became for the moment like the Pharisees of old and said in our hearts, though we didn't have the courage to say it out loud, "I thank thee, God, that I'm not like that." I felt that way. And I was a Pharisee.

We got over to France finally. And there it became the duty of the officers to read the incoming and outgoing mail. A very interesting assignment, incidentally. You learn a lot of things that way. This man was on duty reading the mail. He was a captain. He read a letter from a woman in Ontario, Canada, Mrs. Jock Anderson. She had written to her husband. It was impressed on my memory because of what happened subsequently. She said among other things, "My darling, Jock. I'm so happy to have you where you are. We're all so proud of what you're doing. The ten little bairns are coming along all right. I had to wean the baby because I have to work to help with the separation allowance the government gives us. But we're all right, Jock, and if God should see fit to take your life, we'll carry on. But, oh Jock, darling, won't you plead with God with me that he will never allow us to receive word that you are missing?" She said, "Poor Mrs. Johnson next door received that word two months ago, and she's almost frantic. She'd much rather have heard he was dead. Pray God with me Jock, that I may never get word you are missing."

That was the letter this "unsentimental cuss" read. And that night there appeared before him a sergeant and six men. They were to go out into no-man's land on a very dangerous mission. The sergeant read the roll, and the men responded to their names, and one of them was Jock Anderson. They went out, and in the early morning three of them came back with the sergeant. And again he called the roll. And they answered. But Jock Anderson was not among them. This unsentimental man—of whom I said I thank God that I'm not like him—said, "Sergeant, do you know where Jock Anderson fell?"

"Yes, sir. He was on an elevated piece of land covered by a German machine gun."

"Would it be possible, Sergeant, for a man to go out and get his identification disc?" You remember that each soldier had a disc around his neck, and there was a definite rule that unless you could produce his identification disc or his body, you could not report him dead no matter how many men saw him fall. And so the captain said, "Could you get his disc from where he is?"

The sergeant said, "No sir, it would be absolute suicide, but if you say so, I'll try."

The captain said, "No, I didn't mean that. I just wanted to know."

And that night the captain was missing. No one knew where he had gone. And the next morning there came a large envelope, a military envelope, and upon opening it we read, "Dear Major, I am enclosing herewith the identification disc of Jock Anderson. Will you please send word to Mrs. Anderson that God heard her prayer? Her husband is not missing. He's dead." And then he added, as though it didn't amount to anything, "As for me, I'm off to Blighty in the morning. The doctor says it's an amputation case and may prove fatal. Cheerio."

And that was the man who had the intestinal fortitude to crawl out at night alone up to a dead man's body and get a disc from his neck in order that his wife could have the poor satisfaction of learning that her husband was not missing. Many times since then I have felt to say in my heart, "Help me, oh God, never to judge another man. However he may appear, there is something in him better than I.

("The Measure of a Man," An address to Seminary and Institute Personnel, July 14, 1966.)
