Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Cannot Buy That with Money"

I think I should not leave you this morning without bearing my testimony to you. I have no object in trying to deceive you. There is nothing to be gained by lying to you, and what I shall now say comes from the very center of my heart. It has to do with my convictions—convictions gained over a period of sixty to eighty years—convictions regarding myself, my sources, my destiny, my God and my relationship to him. I can say to you my young friends, that God has been so good to me as to give me an individual testimony of his Son, Jesus Christ. He is, in fact, the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world, its Savior. I know that to be true. I know it as I know of few other things in the world. May I just take a moment of your time to give you one incident to illustrate how I know it. This is a little unknown chapter out of my own life. It illustrates how I know that God lives.

We were in Canada. I was . . . an attorney for an oil company and a manager of it. We were drilling wells and making money. I was at the moment up in the Canadian Rockies, way back from the highways. We were drilling there. Everything looked very prosperous. I woke very early one morning before daylight. I was troubled in my mind, and I didn't know the source or the reason for the trouble. And I began to pray, but didn't seem to get an answer. And I remembered that the Savior was wont to go into the mountain tops frequently. You remember, his life was punctuated by mountain peaks. There is the mountain peak of the temptation, there is the mountain peak of the transfiguration, there is the mountain peak of the Beatitudes, there is the mountain peak from which he took flight into heaven. So thinking about this, I arose before daylight and went back up into the hills where I knew no one would be near. And when I got up on an advantageous point, I began to talk out loud. I was talking to God! Now, I do not mean that he was standing there listening to me or replying to me. But I mean from the very center of my heart I was calling to him.

Now my family were all in good health, all quite prosperous, and it looked as for myself that within a few days I would be a multi-millionaire. And yet, I was depressed. And up there on that mountain peak I said to him, "O God, if what it seems is about to happen will happen, and if it is not to be for the best good of myself and my family and my friends, don't let it happen. Take it from me." I said, "Don't let it happen unless in your wisdom it is good for me." Well, I left the mountains and came down to the camp. I got into my car and drove to the city of Edmonton. It was a Friday, and while I was driving I was thinking of what had happened. And I felt that there was something impending that I couldn't understand. When I arrived home, and after a bite to eat, I said to Sister Brown, "I think I'll occupy the back bedroom because I'm afraid I'm not going to sleep." Now I went in the bedroom alone and there, through the night, I had the most terrible battle with the powers of the adversary. I wanted to destroy myself Not in the sense of suicide; but something within me was impelling me to wish that I could cease to be. . . . It was terrible. The blackness was so thick you could feel it.

Sister Brown came in later in the night, toward morning in fact, wanting to know what was the matter. And when she closed the door, she said, "What's in this room?" And I said, "Nothing but the power of the devil is in this room." And we knelt together by the bedside and prayed for release. We spent the night together, the balance of it. And in the morning I went down to my office. It was Saturday now and there was no one at the office. And in going into the office, I knelt by a cot and asked God for deliverance from the darkness that had enveloped me. And coming from somewhere there was an element of peace, the kind of peace that rests on the souls of men when they make contact with God. And I called her and said, "Everything is all right, or is going to be!"

That night at 10:00 o'clock, October 1953—the telephone rang. Sister Brown answered. She called me and said, "Salt Lake's calling," and I wondered who could be calling me from that far away. I took the phone and said, "Hello." "This is David O. McKay calling. The Lord wants you to give the balance of your life to Him and His Church. We are in a conference of the Church. The concluding session will be tomorrow afternoon. Can you get here?"

I told him I couldn't get there because there were no planes flying, but I would get there as soon as possible. I knew that a call had come. And the call came after this awful conflict with the adversary. And when he said, "The Lord wants you to give the balance of your life to the Church," I knew that it meant giving up the money; it meant that I'd turn everything over to someone else and go to Salt Lake without monetary remuneration.

Since that time, I've been happier than ever before in my life. The men with whom I was associated have made millions. And yet, when one of them was in my office not long ago in Salt Lake, he said, "I am worth at least seven million dollars. I would gladly give every dollar of it to you if you could give me what you have. I can't buy it with money, but I'd like to have what you have. What you have is peace of soul, and I cannot buy that with money."

Brothers and sisters, I leave this testimony with you.

("Eternal Progression," an address to the student body of the Church College of Hawaii, October 16, 1964, pp. 8-10.)
