Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"He Was Obviously from the Farm"

There are some four thousand returned missionaries sitting here today (and a host of prospective missionaries) who ought to express appreciation to that mother who instilled a missionary spirit in her son when first she held him in her arms, and as she taught and counseled him through the years of his sometimes wavering youth. Most missionaries know that they are to go on missions before they know what a mission is, thanks to the vision and faith of their mothers.

I hope I can always remember the scene that Brother Packer and I saw several years ago. While we were waiting in the Deseret Book Company for some materials, we saw a slender young man, bronzed from exposure to the sun except for the pale border that a recent haircut revealed, purchasing his missionary supplies. He was dressed in a new suit, new shirt, new shoes, and new hat. That he was obviously from the farm was also evident from his parents who accompanied him. His father's rough, gnarled hands spoke eloquently of the years of hard, manual labor. His solicitious mother wore a tidy but faded housedress. His father's old-styled suit, frayed shirt, and run-down heels on his shoes bore mute testimony that sending their son on a mission was not going to be easy. This mother and father hovered around their son suggesting this or that book. Having purchased the standard works and his I.P. book and some miscellaneous things, we heard his father say, "Now, is there anything else you need, son?"

I have thought of that little episode in the lives of those three people—and it could be multiplied hundreds, and I suppose thousands of times—and I have thought, "Yes, there is something more that son needs—a grateful heart and a firm resolve to prove worthy of his heritage!"

I set a missionary apart last Wednesday, and as I handed him his missionary certificate, tears filled his eyes and he said, "Finally! I have waited nineteen years for this. Now, let me at 'em!"

What kind of thanks?

Take a moment for prayer and express gratitude to those who touch your life and make you better. The expression of gratitude is a divine attribute. We need to cultivate it and we need to practice it.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "What Kind of Thanks," November 26, 1968, p. 5.)
