Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"An Accounting"

One time I turned over books to be audited by the auditor for our Boy Scout council. I was keeping the books.

He called me up the next day and said, "Come over. I want to show you something." So I went over. What he showed me was a receipt written in my handwriting for $500 and the bank deposit for that day for $300, also in my handwriting. I was $200 short.

So to make a quite long story shorter, we visited the president of the council. I had said to the auditor, "I can't account for it. I don't remember." It had been a year before and I couldn't remember a thing about it. So when we got to the president of the council, the auditor briefly told him what was wrong, and the president looked at me, and I said, "Sir, I can't account for this. But I know one thing—I didn't take the money. There is an error somewhere and I don't know what the error is. But I suppose you will want my resignation and so I shall write you one. You can do with me what you will—if you want to prosecute me, go ahead. I can't tell you more than that. I don't know."

So I went home and wrote the letter and took it to him. Two days later he had a meeting of the whole finance committee of our executive board, and he surprised me. I sat there and he told them what I had told him. He said, "Dil, we know you didn't take the money. We are instructing our auditor to find out how the mistake occurred.

The only way the auditor could figure it out was that I had written a receipt for both the cash we received, which was $300, and the pledges we received, which was $200 perhaps. Nobody knew. I didn't know, and I don't know to this day. I don't know why, but I had a reputation for being honest and truthful and it saved me. I could have been ruined on that occasion and never again would anybody ever have trusted me. But the trust went right on just the same. It never was brought up again.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Courage to Be Righteous," May 7, 1968, p. 4.)
