Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I'm Going to Give You a Warning Ticket"

I had another experience one time. My wife was very ill. I was here in Provo to some Scout affair—I don't recall what it was now—and I had promised her that I would come home by six o'clock that night. I had left food at the side of her bed so that she could have something to eat because she couldn't get off the bed—she wasn't able—and I had to leave her alone.

Things took place here so that I didn't get away from Provo until eleven o'clock that night, and I was worried as I headed for home. The roads in those days weren't like they are today; one went through every town—"Middlesex, village and town," as Longfellow says—and gave the sound of alarm as one went through. I passed through Salt Lake at midnight. Going north on the highway—the moon was full, the light was bright, I could see as easily as in daylight and I was the only person on the road—I went quite rapidly until I got to Farmington Junction, where I was to turn off to go up over the mountain road toward home. I turned off on that road and I really hit it up. I had that car going 70 miles an hour, which was good for those days over that road, and I whipped past the road going over to Hill Field, and down into Weber Canyon. I got about half way down the hill when through the rear view mirror I saw the flashing red light. The patrolman had been hiding up Hill Field road. So I pulled to a stop and got out. (One always wants to get out of his car when a policeman comes, and hold out his hands so he can see that one is not armed—at midnight, anyhow!) It was now nearly one o'clock.

So I walked back a few yards and stood there and his headlights picked me up and he came to a stop about thirty yards away. He got out of his car and came up to me. He said, "May I see your driver's license and your car registration." So I got the car registration and he took a look at it—he didn't bother to look at my license.

I said, "Well, give me the ticket. I've got to get home; my wife is ill and helpless. That's why I was speeding."

He said, "Yes, you were going faster than sixty miles an hour."

And I said, "I was going faster than seventy miles an hour."

He said, "Well, I'm not going to give you a ticket. I'm going to give you a warning ticket so you won't do it again, but I'll just warn you. This will make it so you will not have to go to court; but if you do it again, of course, then they'll collect on both counts."

I couldn't imagine why he had given me just a warning ticket. He got the ticket written out and he handed it to me—then he smiled, and he put his hand out, which a cop seldom does, and he said to me, "My name is Bybee. I used to be one of your scouts at Camp Kiesel."

All the rest of the way home, every time the wheels turned, I said to myself, "What if I'd lied to him—what if I'd lied to him—what if I'd lied to him."

I've learned by what little experience I've had with lies that anyone who tells a lie—I can guarantee that that lie will last him all his life and he'll have it burn into his soul over and over again until he dies.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Courage to Be Righteous," May 7, 1968, pp. 4-6.)
