Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"If It Is Told About You"

Do not bear false witness. It's easy to do. We do it all the time on this campus and in other places. We love the juicy morsel about what someone did or what someone thought they did. "If you can't say anything good about a person, don't say anything at all"—you've heard that over and over again.

I don't speak of times when a person is on trial and you are testifying in a court. I speak of the times when you thoughtlessly brand someone with a trait or an act, which may or may not be true, but which you heard. And with a certain amount of pleasure you enjoy repeating the tale to your associates. It is dangerous business.

One time I was conducting a conference in Salt Lake City and President George F. Richards of the Council of the Twelve was there. I invited him to speak and he said, no, he didn't care to speak but to go ahead. So I began to speak, and I told them that if they ever told a story about anybody, that story would stick to that person no matter how long he lived, and it would be believed by most people, and therefore they must not bear false witness.

While I was speaking, I felt a tap on my shoulder, and there stood Brother Richards right behind me, and he said, "I've changed my mind. I want to speak."

He said words about like this: "Once upon a time I was a high council member in a stake, and somebody made a serious accusation against a man. We debated whether to have him in and try him. Finally, the stake president decided he would talk to the man privately, and apparently he did, and the man proved to the satisfaction of all of us that not only was he not guilty of the accusation, but he hadn't even been in the country when it was supposed to have taken place. He was away somewhere, and he couldn't possibly have done it."

He said, "Forty years went by, and that man's name came up for a very high appointment in the Church." He said, "In spite of myself, I caught myself wondering if the story told about the man was true, even though it had been proven false. I had to get hold of myself to keep from voting negatively against that man on a false story, told forty years before, which was proved false." Then he sat down, and I continued speaking.

That can happen to you. And if some falsehood is told about you, you'll know what I mean.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Courage To Be Righteous," May 7, 1968, pp. 6-7.)
