Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Michael and Bill"

Michael is now sixteen years of age. His parents were members of the Piute Indian tribe. Michael was born without his eyesight. On the Indian reservation, this was considered a terrible handicap. His family was very poor, and a blind boy was more than they could cope with. So, when Michael was about seven years old, he was left on the desert to die. Fortunately, some passing tourists found him and took him to a hospital. It took a year for the doctors and nurses to save his life and restore his health.

During this experience of being left on the desert all alone without food and water, unable to see, Michael's basic animal instincts for survival became so strong that he almost became an animal, fearing and hating everybody and everything. Eight years later, when I first met him, he told me he could remember the horror of being all alone—hungry, thirsty, and lost.

When he became well enough, Michael was sent to school. He was incorrigible. Because of his tragic experience, he destroyed everything he could get his hands on—paper, pencils, record player. Everything was his enemy. I suppose the school authorities despaired of ever reaching this boy. One day, they placed a call to a wonderful Latter-day Saint woman and asked her if she would mind taking an Indian boy into her home. She readily agreed.

Michael's nature had not changed. He still considered everyone his enemy. He continued to destroy almost everything that came in his way. One day one of the neighbor boys, a white boy by the name of Richard, became acquainted with Michael. Richard was bout fifteen years old. He was a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood. He took an interest in Michael and fast became his friend.

Richard came to the Presiding Bishopric's Office one day and asked about the cost of the Book of Mormon in Braille. He had been saving his money for a long time so that he might purchase a Book of Mormon in Braille as a birthday present for his blind Indian buddy. The cost was more than Richard had saved. However, a kind person made it possible for him to obtain the book. As Michael read with his fingers, Richard followed along in his own Book of Mormon reading out loud, thus helping Michael over the more difficult words. As I visited with Michael, he said he had never read such wonderful stories. He said that everything he had read in the past was kid stuff, but the Book of Mormon was different. I asked him what the greatest desire of his heart was. This fifteen-year-old Indian boy replied: "To become sixteen years old so I can be baptized a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." He explained that he must wait until his sixteenth birthday because of the requirement of the agency responsible for him.

Michael had his sixteenth birthday just this August and was baptized by his buddy, Richard, who is now a priest. Just four weeks ago, Michael was ordained a deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood by his foster father.

Michael told his mother that as he was being confirmed a member of the Church, the brightest feeling went through his entire body. He said, "I know now what 'white' looks like.' This sixteen-year-old Indian boy who has never seen the light of day now knows what "white" looks like. The Holy Ghost has borne witness to him.

This last school year, Michael, the boy who was incorrigible, was honored for his excellence in school effort—excellence in deportment, scholarship, and progress—the only boy so honored by his school this year. He hopes someday to teach other blind children as he has been taught.

Bill is not fifteen. His parents are Navajo. When Bill was a child, he was stricken with polio, which left him without the use of his legs. Bill and Michael are brothers in this foster home. They are both Boy Scouts. A year ago, they needed money to go to Scout camp, so they decided to sell toothbrushes and toothpaste. They didn't have much luck in their own neighborhood, so Michael pushed Bill in his wheelchair seven miles to another community where they had some success. They said that the most interesting and the funniest experience of the day was when they sold a toothbrush and some toothpaste to a man who didn't have any teeth.

Three weeks ago at a stake quarterly conference, I invited Bill to come to the front of the chapel and bear his testimony to over twelve hundred people. I wish you could have seen this fifteen-year-old Navajo Indian boy. Immaculate in his appearance and with all the dignity and majesty of a great chief, he sat in his wheelchair and humbly expressed his gratitude to his Heavenly Father for his many blessings, for his parents, his brothers and sisters, his membership in the Church, and the blessing of holding the office of teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood. Bill is a fine artist and hopes someday to become a great architect.

Bill and Michael have two lovely, blond, fair-skinned sisters and a baby brother, Ronnie. Let me tell you about Ronnie. As far as we know, he is also a Navajo Indian boy. When the agency called this same good mother and asked if she would take a three-year-old Indian baby into her home, they said that the child was totally incapacitated. He could not walk; he could not talk. They explained the outlook for him as almost hopeless. Notwithstanding this, she accepted him into her home. When I met Ronnie the other day, he had a mischievous twinkle in his eye and a smile on his face as he ran and tried to escape from one of his sisters—as normal a four-year-old as I have ever seen.

A blind boy, a crippled boy, a child who was a complete invalid—each one destined to a life of misery and hopelessness but for the love, compassion, charity, and understanding of a wonderful woman—a woman who wanted children more than anything else in the world and who was not blessed with any of her own. She wanted them so badly it didn't matter what their handicaps nor that their skin was copper color. The love she gave them was the love she had missed so desperately during her childhood. The compassion she blessed these children with was the compassion she longed for and sought but failed to find as she was growing up. To me she typifies the saint as described by Felix Adler as he makes the distinction between a hero and a saint. Paraphrasing this statement:

"The hero (heroine) is one who kindles a great light in the world, who sets up blazing torches in the dark streets of life for men to see by. The saint is the man (woman) who walks through the dark paths of the world, himself (herself) a 'light'."

(Conference Report, October 6, 1963, pp. 119-20.)
