Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"A Call from the Prophet"

The next voice I heard was that of our prophet. He came on very firmly, very kindly. He said, "Brother Dunn?" When I heard that, I came to full attention. "Yes, sir?"

He said, "How long would it take you to get to Salt Lake City?"

Well, I have a very peculiar mind. The way that my thought processes go, I tend oftentimes, without thinking any more than I do, to say things that need to be thought out more clearly. This was one of those occasions. I said, "President McKay, I am in Downey, sir. That's in California."

He then made what I thought was a very marvelous observation for a prophet. He came right back and he said, "I know that." I guess he did. He said, very gently again, "I'm asking you, how long would it take you to come to Salt Lake?"

I said, "Well, without checking into the schedules, I believe I could be there some time tomorrow."

He said, "That would be fine. I'll expect you in my office at eight o'clock tomorrow morning."

Well, my mind is still the inquisitive type. So I started to pursue a little bit, because I could tell he was ready to hang up. I said, "Well, what should I bring with me? Do you need my institute of religion reports?" I thought, "What has he discovered?" By then every sin I had ever committed had gone by. I needed to know how to defend myself.

He said, "No. Just bring yourself."

I said, "How about my wife?"

He said, "That would be lovely, if you could bring her."

"Anything else?"

"No," he said, "I'll see you in my office at eight o'clock tomorrow morning. Have a nice journey. Good-bye." And he hung up.

That is a traumatic thing. How do you go back into the kitchen and tell your wife that the Prophet wants to see you? I tried. She was just putting the final touches on the meal and was at the breadboard slicing the roast beef. Typical of all good American housewives, wanting to know what was the purpose of the call, she turned to me, and I will never forget that expression. She said, "Who was on the phone, dear?"

I said, "Oh, no one, just the Prophet." She about cut the breadboard in two.

Then to show you how much faith she had in me, the next observation she made, she said, "Well what did you do? What did you do?"

I said, "I don't know, but he wants to see us tomorrow morning at eight o'clock, and we had better get going."

Some of you who reside in Utah and the surrounding areas may appreciate the problem we were having with the weather here last April. I finally elected to drive because it was the only sure way of getting there at the appropriate hour. What a trip that was!

I pulled into Salt Lake about ten minutes before I was due. I left my wife with the Tingeys, very close friends of ours here in Provo, because the Prophet asked to see me alone.

I knocked on his hotel door, standing there wondering what must this entail. The door very quickly opened. One of the aides asked me to step in. I did. Getting just inside the doorway I could see down the little corridor to my right into the room that had been made over into a little office for President McKay, where he could work in the hotel when his strength would not permit him to go over to the office.

He was sitting there very diligently at his work. He looked up and, noticing that I had arrived, he very quickly got up and took his cane—he was able to move without more aid than that at the time—and he hurried down that little corridor, laid his cane beside the wall, and extended his two hands in greeting to me. He said, as he looked into my eyes, "Brother Dunn, thanks so much for coming to Salt Lake to see me."

Imagine that! Talk about graciousness and respect! He was thanking me for coming to see him.

Then he turned to the other individual and said, "Will you see that Brother Dunn and I are not disturbed for the next hour?"

I remember thinking, "What in the world have we got to talk about for an hour?"

Then he very quickly and gently took me by the arm, cane in the other hand, and I was literally escorted back into his room. He was helping me; it was not the reverse.

As we got inside his office, he closed the door. Because I had a topcoat on, he turned me around—just moved me bodily—helped me off with my overcoat, put it over his arm, took it over and put it on the couch there in the room. He came back, and instead of putting me out in front in a typical counselee-counselor relationship, he asked me to take a chair beside him. Then he worked his way back around the desk and took his place in a little swivel chair. He turned it sideways so that we had this face-to-face contact, and he leaned back, just looking right through me as only he can do. With that wonderful smile on his face, he said, "Brother Dunn, tell me a little bit about yourself."

I couldn't even remember my name. I remembered vaguely I had a mother, so I started there and kind of worked back. I believe he enjoyed my fright and plight, just sitting there smiling very kindly.

After about twelve minutes of visiting—and, oh, does he have an ability, those of you who have had this opportunity to stand and sit in his presence know, to make you feel good and at ease and the equal brother and sister that we are in the gospel setting.

As I sat experiencing this, he said, "I guess you are wondering why I have asked you to come to see me."

The thought had gone through my mind. I said, "Yes, sir."

He said, "Brother Dunn, last December, as you know, we lost a great Latter-day Saint in the passing of President Levi Edgar Young." He said, "I am calling you this morning to fill that vacancy."

When he said that, I had a feeling, and an impression come over me, like I have never experienced in my life. Spiritually I was just out of breath. Having played professional baseball for a number of years, I have been hit in the midsection my share of the time. You brethren who have been so involved—maybe some of you good sisters—know how difficult it is to get your wind. This is exactly what I was going through—just gasping for air. I believe he even enjoyed that as I watched him.

I made another comment that came out before I thought about it. Don't ever do this in his presence. I said, "President McKay, in all my life I have never once doubted your judgment or inspiration—until right now."

He did not lose his sense of humor entirely, but he came pretty close. He raised that finger and started to shake it at me a little bit, and he said, "Now, Brother Dunn, I don't want to hear of that any more." He said, "The Lord has called you to this position."

Then he went on for the next forty-seven minutes to interrogate and to investigate my soul through the process of diligent interviewing. . . .

At the conclusion of it, he stood up, which was my indication that the interview was over. He again extended his hands to me to take very warmly. As I did so, without any warning, he very quickly threw his arms around me and kind of pulled me close and held me there, just the way a father would do his son, or a grandfather his grandson, and did not say a word. But, oh, the spirit that radiates from a living prophet as you are in close physical communication one with another! Talk about a testimony being verified! Latter-day Saints, there is a living prophet if I have ever known one.

("A Call from the Prophet," an address given to the BYU student body October 20, 1964.)
