Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"A Tribute to the Church"

The presidency of the university, in being the genial hosts they are, provided a very fine luncheon just prior to our conference presentations. I noticed, as I stepped into the dining area, that I had been placed right beside a man in full Navy uniform, a commander by rank. We had never met. As we took our places—they were so identified by the little place cards—he turned to me. He had no way of knowing, except perhaps for a clue or two that I had given him, that I was a Mormon. He said, "Mr. Dunn, I would like to get acquainted with you." We shook hands and he said, "You're the Latter-day Saint, aren't you?"

I thought, "Good heavens! What have I done to tip my hand already?" I said, "Yes. How did you know?"

He said, "I noticed that you are not going to partake of that liquid." I had turned my cup over. There was the clue. I immediately, as we frequently do almost mechanically, started to defend my position. He said, as he interrupted me very quickly, "Look, I didn't inquire about your background to get a defense of your position." I then asked him why and he said, "I wanted to take this opportunity to salute you, sir. May I?"

Now I was just a PFC in World War II. For you ladies, that isn't very high. It is about as low as you can go. Any time a Navy commander wants to salute a private, I am not going to stop him. So I turned to him and said, "Yes, sir. Please go ahead."

Then he kind of hurt my ego a little. He said, "Well, I don't mean you, personally. I mean the organization that you are representing today—the great Latter-day Saint faith."

I was very inquisitive. I wanted to know why he had singled us out. As we sat down, I inquired, too. I said, "Why do you pay tribute to my church?"

He said, "Very simple. In my assignment as a Navy Commander I am in charge of the testing program for the United States Navy. But even prior to this I had an opportunity to travel all over the world. I have watched you people with keen interest." He was a sharp, capable leader, himself. He said, "Mr. Dunn, I don't know what it is about you people, but you have something that gets through to me. It's an air of confidence; it's an ideal; it's something that I can't quite put my hands on; but I'm convinced, sir, that one day this country—in fact, this world—will look to you people for spiritual direction. I want to take this opportunity as a family man, as an educator, and as a member of the armed forces, to salute you, sir, and your church for their wonderful standards and spiritual truths. It gives us all a sense of well-being just to know that such an organization exists."

Can you appreciate a little how proud I felt inside, with you, because individuals of this caliber know what you are? I thought as he gave us this tribute, "What a responsibility we each have to not only measure up, but to assume adequately the positions that our Heavenly Father has placed upon us to go and assist the world in becoming, literally, the kingdom of God."

(Education Week Devotional, "Blessed Are the Teachable," June 8, 1964, pp. 11-12.)
