Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"A New Ball Glove"

Let me share a brief experience of a priesthood father, my own. When I was about two years old, my family moved to the southern states, and there I spent the early part of my life. This was during the depression, and things were hard; but, fortunately for us, the Dunn family had it reasonably easy. My father was well paid for his labor. I remember, as a young, aspiring athlete, wanting to approach Dad on one occasion for a new ball glove; and being the child psychologist that I was, I knew that timing was everything. I plotted and schemed for the right moment to approach him, and it finally came.

I heard him come into the driveway and slam the car door and enter the house quickly. He entered the house whistling. That was always a good sign. My mother unknowingly had helped me to set the stage by fixing one of his favorite meals.

After dinner was over he had occupied his usual rocking chair and picked up the paper. I let him get through the heavy part, knowing that that was not a good time to inerrupt, and then I tiptoed in at the appropriate moment. I had an old worn-out mitt that wouldn't see me through another game, and I thought certainly he would understand my needs and would give the money without question. Well, I held the glove behind me, and as I stood looking at my father, I said, "Dad, how are you feeling?"

He assured me he was in good shape.

I said, "You have always taught your boys that whenever you do a thing in this life, you ought to do it right. Is that correct?"

He said, "That's right. I am glad you know it."

I said, "You have always taught us that when you do a job, you need the best equipment. Is that right?"

"That's right. I am glad that got through."

And then I said, "Whenever your boys perform, you have taught us to give it the best we had. Is that right?"

He said, "That is exactly right."

"All right," I said, "that is the reason I am here, sir. I want to show you something," and I brought the glove out.

He said, "Good heavens, what is it?"

I said, "It is a ball glove, and I need a new one. It will only cost $7.50 and I need the money right now. I have a big game Friday night and I am to pitch. If you will give me the money I'll be on my way and we'll both be happy."

He reached in his pocket and took out his pencil and his little notebook, and then I knew I had lost the battle. He went to work figuring. The going rate at that time for a boy my age was, I think, something like ten cents an hour. He said, "Why, Paul, that will only cost you seventy-five hours of labor." And I thought, how can a man be that cruel?

And so we went to work figuring out projects, and sure enough some four or five weeks later when I turned in my work slips, I was handed the $7.50 that I had earned. I remember going down to select that ball glove, and as I put it on my hand, I patted the pocket for just the right fit. I bought a ten-cent can of linseed oil in order to put it in proper shape.

I learned a great lesson that day. Of all the gloves I had ever owned, that glove was never left in the rain or for someone else to care for. I was a proud young man, but more specifically, young priesthood bearers, I began to see the point of a "welfare" dad and the principles he taught. The time has now come when my father isn't with me anymore, but the principles he taught remain, and I will always be able, I think, to stand and look the world in the eye because a dad cared.

(Conference Report, April 8, 1967, pp. 91-92.)
