Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Had Really Earned My Letter"

May I just share quickly one other experience. (Don't let this get any further, but I suppose this is the one part that will get out.) I was sitting in my little study at home and reminiscing with some old books and school records. (Do you ever do this—go through an old picture album, an old diary or something, and vicariously relive the past? Well, you are too young, you haven't had that much go past yet.) The time will come when you will find a great joy in reminiscing. I was doing just this, and, as I was cleaning out a file that contained some old documents, lo and behold, I came upon two Aaronic Priesthood awards given me some twenty-plus years ago. They had gold seals attached and you would normally think that a young priesthood bearer would be proud to have these in his possession, wouldn't you? That is true, if it truly represented what he had earned.

Now this is the part—unbeknownst even to my wife and daughters, I slipped into an area of our basement and burned both of those awards. I am sorry to have to tell you that today, my fellow brothers and sisters, because I hadn't really earned them and the fear entered my heart that the time might come when my own wife or children might one day discover them and think they were honorably won. Lest that happen, I destroyed the evidence, because you see it goes back into an era when I went through the mechanics of gospel living—not real living—only the motions. I let them put stars on my forehead and an award insignia on my lapel, but they were for complying with the mechanics, not for qualifying spiritually. Can you appreciate what I am trying to say? So I destroyed the awards.

Contrast that experience if you will with another experience that same night. As I continued to clean our records and books, I stepped over to the closet where some materials were located and, as I opened up the closet, in the shadows I could see my old high school letterman sweater hanging there. Can you appreciate, some of you athletes, what a bit of reminiscing that this brought to mind! I took it out and because I suppose this is the human side of people, I put it on. It was a bit snug here and there. I didn't dare let my family see me in it for fear they wouldn't understand.

I stood in front of the mirror. Here in front was the big block "H" from Hollywood High, and it had some interesting insignia attached which signified I was somebody—some stripes around the left sleeve—white on that beautiful maroon background. I stood there with real pride. I thought, "Isn't that great!" Do you know why? Because I had really earned my letter, and that letterman's sweater has a significant place in my heart.

Let me just conclude by telling you why. During the 1942 baseball season we in the Western Athletic Association had a real contest going. Hollywood High, my team, and Fairfax High, who were arch rivals, were battling it out for the city championship. We closed the season one game behind Fairfax with two games to go, and—wouldn't you know it—they both were to be played against Fairfax. I drew the starting assignment to pitch the second-to-the-last game. Well, I had the usual butterflies, you know how it is—couldn't sleep, couldn't think, couldn't study, couldn't do anything.

The day before the crucial game, Coach Meb Schroeder had us all assembled on the ball field. As we stood around the batting cage getting last minute instructions and the old pep talk, we were reminded of the standards and the oaths we had taken as athletes earlier in the year. Schroeder, even though he was not a member of the Church, held a very tight rein and demanded high standards. We had each committed ourselves to no smoking, no drinking, or staying out at night. He was building character in boys, not just teams or statistics. We took that commitment, and each of us promised we would obey; and we knew the penalties if we disobeyed.

As he made his way around the circle that day on the field he happened to glance over to where Jimmy Daniels, our star second baseman, was standing (batting .382—and for you sisters, that is a pretty good average, it really is). He was the Maury Wills of our team. He was the take-charge guy. He was the one that, when you had two men on base and only one out and things really were falling apart, could mold the team together.

The coach said, "Jimmy, is that a nicotine stain on your finger?"

Jimmy said, "Yes, sir."

He said, "Don't you know the rule?"

"Yes, sir."

He said, "Do you know the penalty?"

"Yes."

"You see the gym?"

"Yes, sir."

"Turn your uniform in right now. You are through."

The team was stunned. I almost hollered, "Coach, wait until tomorrow! We've got a game to win and we need Jimmy!" You know, isn't that the way we sometimes look at it? It doesn't matter what we are doing to people, but let's just win, win!

I have never seen a more dejected figure than Jimmy that day, walking toward the gym. But Schroeder was the kind of coach that didn't let a boy flounder. He worked with him all the more, even though he had lost his privilege to be on the team.

The next day on the Fairfax diamond we went into the bottom half of the thirteenth inning before they squeezed across run number one, which was the deciding run that beat us, 1 to 0. Would it surprise you if I told you that I bawled all night? That was a hearbreaker to lose for any pitcher.

Twenty years have come and gone and, do you know what is interesting about life, I don't remember who was on the top of the standing those many years ago, who batted what, where, when; but I do remember a great coach who taught me to discipline self.

So, as I occasionally look in the closet and see my letterman's sweater, I say, "Thank you, Meb Schroeder, wherever you are, for letting me know that the really important things in life are principles and standards—not records." This is what I found true happiness to be. I have come to know it, not in winning—sure it is great to win. But it is still greater to find the joy and peace and the serenity that come in truly living standards and principles of the gospel. I think that is what the scriptures are all about, and when applied to the everyday things of life, true joy is experienced.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Happiness Is . . .," April 18, 1967, pp. 9-12.)
