Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"You Don't Look Like What You Are Supposed to Be"

That is what Nick Cullup, my former manager in the old Pioneer League, did to me. While I would not want to follow some of his personal habits, he was an enthusiastic, effective manager. Three of us reported as rookies on the same day. He looked us over and said, "You fellows are supposed to be ball players?"

"Yep!" I showed him all my news clippings.

He wasn't impressed, "You don't look like what you are supposed to be."

(Great principle! "You don't look like what you are supposed to be." You don't radiate that confidence.)

He continued, "Kid, when I put you on a ball field, I want you to look like something. You don't know how to dress; you don't know how to walk; you don't know how to project yourself. Why, the opposing batters will have a field day on you! You have to learn to look mean and confident as well as skillful."

Time won't permit me to relate all the antics Nick put me through, but he taught me how to dress one day in front of a mirror: how to tuck my shirt in so that I looked like what I was supposed to be; how to beak the old cap; how to stand out on the mound and look mean at the batter. It is all a part of radiating enthusiasm.

He was an old catcher himself, from way back with the Washington Senators. His hands were knotted like the knots on a tree. That first day he walked out and said to me, "Kid, what's your best pitch?"

"Well," I said, "I can throw a fast ball and a good curve."

Then, without a catcher's mitt, he said, "Throw it to me. Give it all you've got."

I threw it—Pow!—and he said, "Is that all the harder you can throw?" (Now that really builds confidence, doesn't it?) He said, "I wouldn't mind if you played ball in my living room; you wouldn't hurt anything."

The need to radiate—he said, "I'm gonna help you." He had made a big overstuffed catcher's mitt, which looked like something Al Shaulk would carry out on the ball field. Nick used to soak this mitt in linseed oil. Then he'd bake it and get it just so it was crisp. Every time you would even throw a slow ball—POW!—that thing would pop.

"Now, when we get out on the field," he explained, "we're going to make you sound like what you're supposed to be. You're going to radiate, and the opponent is going to be so nervous that he will drop fifteen percent of his batting average when he sees you on the mound."

He taught me how to walk on to the field, how to look, how to observe, how to make the ball sound like it was moving twice as fast as it was—WHAM! The opponent soon got the message. Enthusiasm is what Nick Cullup taught me, and that's the key to success. You radiate what you are!

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Keys to Successful Living," February 13, 1968, pp. 15-16.)
