Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Lou Brisse"

You students are now in the preparatory stage of life. Whether you are planning marriage or a profession, do you have the ingredient of education? Unless you are committed to your cause, your reaping of the happiness and success harvest will be nil. To be sure, dedication is a basic ingredient of a successful life.

I don't know how many of you will remember Lou Brisse, former pitcher of the Philadelphia Athletics some years ago. Most of you were still blessing the pre-existence when he broke into baseball. Here was a young man who had commitment, that dedication—a southpaw pitcher who signed with the Athletics. I happen to have gone into professional baseball the same year Lou did. We were of comparable age, graduating from high school at the same time.

Lou was a competitor's competitor. He was a hungry ball player, as we used to say. He wanted to go to the top, and he was committed to doing it. Well, as many of us may know, 1942 was a bleak period. That was when World War II really started to spread, and eighteen-year-olds were being drafted.

Lou was one of these. I didn't know much about him. I remember his name being talked about over in the spring training camps as a comer, a real competitor. Lou went over to Italy, to Sicily with the infantry. I got lost in the Pacific and didn't hear much about him. But his story came out a little later. On one of the beachheads he got hit in the right leg with a fragment from an 88 shell; it nearly took his leg off. He lay on the beach literally bleeding to death. In a semi-conscious state, he heard one of the field doctors say, "We'll have to take his leg off."

He gained just enough strength to say, "No! Please leave it on. I've got to earn a living as a ball player. Leave it, even though it is lifeless."

The doctor complied, "We will do what we can."

Back to the field hospital he went. After operations they put a steel plate in his leg and sent him home for fifty-three more operations. You would think that would discourage most people in this world—even with the gospel—wouldn't you? And Lou didn't have the gospel. Finally, in 1946 he was set free from his medical labors. He limped with a cane and reported back to Connie Mack and the Philadelphia ball club: "Connie, can I have my job back? The government says that's the arrangement."

Connie looked at his leg and with little hope said, "You can come and play with us."

So that year Lou worked out with the Athletics. In the spring of 1947 I happened to be in the training camp just a couple of fields away from where Lou was playing. They let him suit up that year. He went out with a bit of a limp, and through a rugged training program, he got himself into shape. To make a long story short, on opening day at Fenway Park, old Connie Mack walked out with that brand new baseball and handed it to him and said, "Lou, you have earned the right to start the game today." Lou walked out on the mound. If you have ever known the thrill of a lifetime to see a man come back, this is the example.

Lou got the first two batters out without any trouble. The third hitter that day was Ted Williams. Ted Williams was no slouch. I know; I have pitched to him a time or two, and if you ever want a lesson in humility, that's it! As he leveled off that bat, Ted hit the third pitch—a screaming line drive right back to the pitcher's box. It caught Lou on the right leg where the steel plate was embedded and threw him to the ground. He lay writhing on the mound, screaming in agony. I suppose some of you might be able to contemplate the pain. At that point, most people would quit, saying, "Why do I get all the problems?" "I'm discouraged. I'll throw in the towel." Not Lou Brisse. No, he was committed to a cause. He had a purpose in life. And, without the gospel of Jesus Christ, he crawled to his knees as old Connie Mack walked out to him and said, "Give me the ball, Lou. We'd better not take any more chances."

Lou objected. "Don't take me out. You know how long I have had to fight to come back."

"Sure, we know. Think you can get up on your feet?"

"Yes, sir."

With pain I suppose we can't measure, Lou stood and threw the next pitch. He finished that inning and the next. Finally, in the bottom half of the ninth inning, the score read: Philadelphia 4, Boston 2. It is one of the great comeback stories of all time. Eighteen wins he registered that year, because he would not quit. He had that commitment, that dedication to a great cause.

That is what makes a success, young people. Not quitting—stay down when you fall and you are a loser. Get up one more time and you will win. There is no disgrace in falling; it is lying there that defeats us. The life of every great person is full of discouragement—falling, failing. Getting up is what makes the winner. I love the life of that man who has taught me a great deal in this area of commitment.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Keys To Successful Living," February 13, 1968, pp. 7-9.)
