Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Yes, Sir"

As one banker in the Chase-Manhattan organization said, "The primary problem with the college graduate of today is that he knows too much." If we could move into our fields of endeavor with the attitude of willingness to serve, to give, and to receive in terms of counsel—there is the man that will be at the top in a short time.

May I just illustrate this very quickly. I remember about three or four weeks after we had our grand opening at the particular supermarket I managed, I was plagued with applications for employment. It was a hard time in the late 1940's and it was obvious that there were fewer jobs than the number of people seeking them.

I got a telephone call one afternoon from a sixteen-year-old high school boy. He was very much to the point—very polite—and radiated just enough self-confidence so that I wanted to listen for a moment. He used the right terminology—"Yes,sir," and he let me take the lead—not that that was important, but it made me want to hear him. I have often watched this point of courtesy with great interest in the mission home, for example, and particularly on the day when we set these wonderful young people apart to go forth to teach the gospel. It is rare day, and I wish you could watch the brethren at the front of the room start to hum and buzz and whisper with each other when a young man with some competence can stand and look them in the eye and say, "Yes, sir," or "No, sir." Joseph Fielding Smith, our beloved President of the Council of the Twelve, directs and coordinates this meeting. Frequently he has to ask a personal question, like, "What does the 'N' stand for in your middle name? Is that 'N' another name?" Often as he asks the question the boy won't look up. He will reply, "Naw, naw," instead of saying, "No sir, it's just an initial." We cannot find two missionaries out of one hundred who are this courteous. It concerns us because it says, in essence, this is the type of attitude they are going to take to the rest of the world as they present the divine gospel.

To get back to my telephone conversation with the high school boy—the young man said, "Mr. Dunn, you don't know me." This was clever, I thought. He said, "I have watched with great interest the opening of this fine market in our community. My mother has been a constant shopper there ever since, and she is delighted!" I don't know how delighted she was, but I was ready to hear more.

He said, "I realize that you probably have all of your positions filled, but I believe I have something that will help your business. At a time that is convenient to you, sir, I would like to present my credentials. May I?" A sixteen-year-old boy!

I wanted to hear more about it. I said, "How about Wednesday afternoon after school?"

"Yes, sir, I'll be there." So I set it for four o'clock.

At one minute to four here came this young man—properly dressed, with a certain amount of confidence in his walk. I am sure he was scared to death. He probably had more butterflies than most of us have as he approached this interview. I thought then, as I watched this little episode unfold, "Wouldn't it have been marvelous if our deacon's quorum, our teachers and priests, could have even dressed like this on Sunday and walked in with equal competence and commitment!"

As we walked into the office I had him take a seat and I pulled up a chair beside him. I said, "Tell me just a little bit about yourself."

He did. He said, "I have had one job as a box boy on Saturdays. I believe I know enough of the business to be an asset to your organization. Mr. Dunn, I don't expect you to hire me here and now, but because I do have some ability, I'd like to prove it to you."

He said, "May we step out into the store for just a moment?"

I said, "Why, certainly."

So we did, and he took me over to the wall where all the canned goods were lined up. In opening the store we were having a difficult time keeping them properly stocked. He said, "Now Mr. Dunn, I think you know enough about sales appeal and the intuition of women as they shop around in a store to realize that if that shelf could always look full and properly aligned, I believe you could even double the sales." He said, "I'm the greatest man in the world in terms of keeping that shelf stocked. I don't expect you to believe it. You even look a little doubtful"—words to this effect. "Would you be willing to let me invest one week of my time every afternoon after school and all day Saturday to show you what I can do? And you have no obligation, sir."

What do you imagine I was thinking? I had at that time fifteen part-time box boys, Saturday boys, and they were all the "let-s'see-what-time-we-can-get-out-of-here-boys"—and the kids would gather at the counter, and here would come their friends. They were more concerned about acceptance with the peer group (which is important) than they were about what they could give to a business. They had the capacity, but they lacked the will to serve and to give of themselves.

Now, if you were managing a store, which element would you want, brothers and sisters? Do I have to tell you what I did? He worked that one afternoon. I had him take his coat off and show me. I didn't need to watch him very long. I let three boys go the next Saturday because this young man could fill all three positions.

Was the opportunity there? You bet. He had the ability; but, more important, he had the will to give and to serve and to show to the world in an unselfish way what he could do.

Who do you think got the consistent raise? Who do you think I made openings for in the future as the store volume dropped and settled to normal? Who do you think was going to succeed in college? Who do you think is going to the top in business with an attitude like this? There is no question, is there?

(Brigham Young University Summer School Devotional, "Three Basic Ingredients for Success," July 20, 1965, pp. 12-14.)
