Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Give Me a New Thought"

I thought as Brother Webb was praying of one of the greatest advisers that walked into our lives when we were priests. His name was Charles B. Stewart. He is the father of Ike Stewart, the president of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir. I suppose he was late in his seventies when he was assigned by the bishop of the Hollywood Ward to be our adviser. And you know what a seventy-year-old man looks like to sixteen-year-olds. I thought Moses had returned. And we weren't about to give him much of a chance—sometimes we were a little cruel the way many teen-agers are.

I'll never forget the first morning we went up to our priests' class. Brother Stewart was standing at the door, not in the room, greeting his boys. There were six of us, as I recall, in that little quorum. He stopped us one by one as we made ready to enter into the room. And when it came my turn he said, "You're Paul Dunn, aren't you?"

"Yes, sir."

And he told me a little bit about myself. "Now," he said, "We have a requirement in this priests' class. You can't enter until you give me a thought." He said, "Have you got one?"

I hadn't had one in ten years, but he insisted, "We want a new thought." And I couldn't give him one. So he said, "All right, I'll teach you one. Now, you repeat after me, 'Attention is the mother of memory.'" And I stumbled through it and gave it back to him. He said, "That's fine, young man, you may enter my class." And I remember Francis had to give one too. I don't remember what his first line was but that was mine, "Attention is the mother of memory."

We had a fine class. We were a little disturbing to him at times, I'm sure, I remember he had long, bony fingers. I'll never forget he used to seat us in a semicircle around his feet. He would walk back and forth and Francis and I used to frog each other once in a while. (That doesn't shake your faith, does it? You look at the size of him—I still wear a bruise from it!) He would come along that row and say, "Now, young men, we have invited the Lord to be with us today and he expects our attention. Remember, 'Attention is the mother of memory.'"

And I'll never forget one day as that finger came down the row, he said, "You realize, young men, that you are the future leaders of the Church?" He continued, "Why in this very circle there may be a future General Authority." And we all laughed. I remember when my call came, some of them were still laughing.

Well, the class period ended. We shaped up a little bit and went to go out, and he stopped me at the door and he said, "You can't leave until you give me another new thought." I didn't have one, and so he taught me another. He said, "Remember, Paul, 'A strong man and a waterfall always channel their own path.' Now repeat it back to me." And I did. He said, "You may go."

The following week I came to class and once more he said, "Do you have another new thought?"

"No, sir." So he taught me another.

I still recall it: "Example sheds a genial ray which men are apt to borrow, so first improve yourself today and then your friends tomorrow." I had a little trouble giving that one back, but he helped me as he did all of his boys.

Soon the class ended and he said, "Have you got a new thought?"

"No, I haven't."

"I'll teach you another, 'There was a wise old owl that sat in an oak, the longer he sat the less he spoke. The less he spoke the more he heard. Oh! Why can't we be like that wise old bird?'" Then he told us that he called these sayings "gem thoughts" and that the time would come in our lives when we would want to draw upon these ideas to help us in our lives. "One day you will find their true meaning."

"Paul," he'd say, "'A good name is better than a girdle of gold.' Remember that!" Well, we left his class finally, after almost two years of association. I can testify to you the impact of his example still remains.

I was on the island of Okinawa, May of 1945, when I received a letter from Mrs. Stewart, and attached to the letter was a little obituary column announcing the passing of Charles B. Stewart, my adviser, my friend, my teacher. And honor to his name, in his concluding week of life he had typed a fresh page of "gem thoughts" for one of his priests who was fighting a great battle far away. I still carry the list with me, brothers and sisters, and so I admonish you to listen carefully to these great leaders and teachers.

I know some of you get a little discouraged at times when things aren't always going just the way they ought—pressures of the moment, great decisions to make, lots of other complications—but listen while you can because I promise you the hour will come in your life when you will draw upon these great words of wisdom as you make greater decisions in the future.

Since my days with Charles B. Stewart I have become a collector of "gem thoughts." One of these days if I get the inspiration I think I'll compile them for you. I have many thousands because he taught me to think new thoughts.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Have Ye Inquired of the Lord?," April 8, 1969, pp. 3-5.)
