Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"The New Testament Really Works"

Some time ago I had a challenge as a father when one of my daughters, during her junior high school days, came to me with a social problem which was very disturbing. My daughter at the time was involved with a social group consisting of seven girls (four members of the Church and three nonmembers). The four had a silent pact, as it were, to try to convert the other three. As they were lunching together, as they frequently did, one of the young Latter-day Saint girls commenced to tell an off-color story. It was in poor taste, and totally out of order.

My daughter came home that night and recounted the situation; in fact, she was even bold enough to tell me the story. It was a problem! "Now," she said, "Dad, don't tell me what's right and what's wrong. I think I understand the principles of the gospel sufficiently to know that that wasn't the thing to do. But," she said, "What do you do when you find yourself in this kind of situation? How do you handle it?"

She didn't add this postscript, but I could see it in her eyes: "Remember, Dad, the important thing at my age is to be included. And remember, sir, any fifteen-year-old wants to be popular, to be accepted, to be wanted, and they don't want things to be too 'churchy!'" She was saying, in effect, "Will you give me an answer, and at the same time, keep me popular." Well, now, that is a task for any teacher or parent.

So we visited for a while and time won't permit all the details. I try frequently to get my daughters to see the principles of the gospel and their application to life. I turned, after some discussion, to the cleansing of the temple experience recorded in Matthew, Mark and Luke. You will recall the story of the Pharisees, the Sadducees, and the practices of the money changers. (I didn't take a lot of time to give her the history or background, although there are times when the history is needed and helpful. Somehow she could still live in this life without all of the excess baggage, as it were. Oh, I am not trying to suggest that these things aren't important to know historically, but more important than knowing the dimensions of the Nauvoo Temple, more important than knowing how many missions we have in the Church, more important than knowing what exactly will occur in the millennial reign, is the ability to apply divine principles daily so that life can be happy and truly enjoyed.) So as I read the cleansing of the temple story, I asked her, "What do you get out of this story?"

She said, "Well, the Savior was upset."

I said, "May I suggest one thought. He was saying to His peer group that there comes a time in every person's life when he has to stand up and be counted; and while it may not be the popular thing to do, there are times when you have to do what's right even though it isn't easy. You may have to stand alone a few times."

I said, "You think about that. Then you and I will have another talk."

She thought about it and came back a little while later and said, "I can't think of any way yet to apply the principles, Dad."

So we talked some more.

I said, "I'll tell you what, if the Savior was right, let's you and I go out in the garage, and I'll make a cat-o-nine-tails whip, and you go over tomorrow and clean out that junior high school of all its iniquities."

"Dad," she said, "you have missed the point. You can't do that and be popular."

I said, "All right, how's this for an idea? How would it be, the next time you find yourself in that kind of social situation and somebody starts to tell an off-colored story, you stand up and say, 'Now you listen here, we won't have any more of that!'"

She said, "Dad, you just haven't got it! I couldn't do that!"

Well, I thought maybe she would think that way, and I said, "Well, now, why don't you submit a plan?"

She said, "Let me think some more." She walked away with that look, "How did I ever get you for a Dad!"

I went about my business. A new day came and went, and as I returned home the next day I found my wife was in the kitchen peeling potatoes for supper. As I approached her to give her a little kiss, I noticed she was holding back the tears. I thought, "Potatoes don't do this."

"What's the matter honey?"

She said, "It is your daughter! Better go see her."

I thought, "Another crisis!" So I tiptoed into the back bedroom and there was a sweet experience awaiting me. This little lady, who had wrestled with life as it really is, was sitting on the bed pushing back a few tears all of her own, although she is not overly emotional.

I said, "Well, tell me what is the matter."

She said, "Dad, it is an interesting thing. I took the cleansing of the temple story to task today and tried it out."

I said, "Oh, did you clean out the junior high?"

"No," she said, "I called M_____ (who was the girl that had told the off-color story, her LDS friend) and said, 'Can you walk home with me?' 'Yes.' So we walked home. I brought her into the bedroom and sat her down and I said, 'M_____, I just want you to know that our friendship means a great deal to me. Yesterday you really put all of us on the spot. I felt it and I think you did. I know you didn't mean to cause feelings or tension, but when you told that story it reduced all of us in the eyes of our non-Latter-day Saint friends. Now, while I appreciate your intent was maybe honorable and you thought this was a clever way to be noticed, I wonder if the next time you feel that you have to do this would you warn me in advance so that I could be excused?'"

M_____ broke down and put her arms around this daughter and said, "Will you forgive me?"

She said, "Dad, we cried for half an hour." Then the climax: "You know what, Dad?"

I said, "No, what?"

She said, "The New Testament really works, doesn't it?"

Yes, "the New Testament really works." Because when you come to understand the concepts and the principles contained in it and you make the proper application in life, it doesn't matter whether you are sitting in a parked car; it doesn't matter whether you are at the ball game; it doesn't matter whether you are in the athletic contest—you will be able to draw upon the gospel principles and solve life's daily challenge and thus find eternal joy and happiness that we each seek.

May I suggest that happiness, as I have come to know it and to appreciate it—limited as it might be—is being able to discipline self, to accept the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ and again make proper application to daily living.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Happiness Is . . .," April 18, 1967, pp. 6-9.)
