Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Love, Your Home Teacher"

I would like to share a little experience that happened not too long ago in our home. I have a home teacher whom I wish we could put on a mimeograph and run off for the whole Church. I hope your home teacher has understanding of people and a commitment to the cause like mine. He is not a professional educator. He is a self-made businessman, but he is dedicated and he understands himself and others.

He was assigned to visit our family about three years ago. (I can appreciate that he might have had some concern getting the name of a General Authority. You know, "All the names in the Church and I draw one of these guys!") He called me on the telephone. "Brother Dunn, I have been assigned to be your new home teacher. I am wondering if we could set up a schedule that would be conducive to you and to me."

I said, "Certainly," so we agreed that the following Thursday would be his first visit. We set it for 7:30, giving us time to clear up the dinner dishes and get the family together. At 7:25 on the appointed night, I got the front room ready and turned on the porch light. (I hope you can understand that I am not normally a snoopy person, but I love to study people. I learn a great deal by observing people and their reactions.)

This particular night was no exception; I walked to the dining room window where the curtains were drawn and waited for my home teacher to come. About twenty-five minutes after the hour, a car pulled up, the headlights went out, and I could see that he and his little companion, a fifteen-year-old boy, were having a word of prayer. I know; I have sat in that seat a few times myself. So I bowed my head at the window; I prayed, too, that the Dunns might be receptive, that our visitors might have the courage of their convictions to present their message. Then he got out of the car. I'll never forget that last moment of getting fresh courage. He walked back and forth on the curb for a minute and then he put his arm around that little companion and up to the door they came.

I quickly backed away from the window and waited for the bell to ring. (You know, you don't want people spying on you.) He rang the doorbell and I waited about thirty seconds before stepping to the door and opening it.

"Good evening, Brother Dunn." He introduced me to his young companion. I escorted them into the front room and went and got my wife and one daughter. Then I made a parental faux pas—I called to the daughter who was downstairs. (This tells you a little about home life, I suppose—how we treat one another when we don't understand.) I called downstairs gently "Can you come up, honey? Home teachers are here."

Then came that resounding voice from the basement, "How long is it going to be?" Well, there's real insight there, both ways. I knew that quip would be out all over the Church before long. I went down and brought her upstairs. She asked again on the way, "My favorite program is on. How long is he going to be?"

"We owe it to them," I said. "Let's go in, honey."

The family gathered around, and our home teacher began. He was nervous, I could tell. But because he cared about people, he had taken time to learn a little bit about each one of my family members. He started out with little Kellie. She was about five then. He said, "Kellie, I understand that Miss Finlinson is your kindergarten teacher. Is that right?"

"That's right."

"What is your favorite subject?"

This little gal started to open up and talk. It usually takes her days to get her going the way she did then. But he was right there with her. He asked about Candy and Pam, her little girl friends—because he cared and had taken time to find out about Kellie's particular interests. He could lose himself in others.

He went on to visit with my second daughter. He knew a little about her love life and some of her other interests; he had found a level on which they could communicate.

I remember that he turned then to our oldest daughter, Janet, who is now a student at this very university. He said, "Janet, is your dad holding a family home evening?"

There I was, really on the spot. Under my breath I said, "Come on, honey, answer it right!"

"Yes."

"Is it the kind of an experience that you like?"

"Sometimes."

He looked at me, as though to ask, "Brother Dunn, what are you going to do to make it a good experience all the time?"

Addressing daughter number two, he asked, "Tell me, if your dad could make your family home evenings even better than they are, what would you suggest that he do?"

And do you know what that girl answered? She didn't even pause '"Could you get him to quit talking so much?"

He turned to me, "Did you get the message, Elder?"

I got it. You see, here was a man who understood what he was supposed to do. He understood the program. As they stood and were ready to leave. he asked. "May we kneel in prayer, Brother Dunn?"

"We'd be honored."

So we knelt down and prayed. He left a beautiful spirit in our home. On the way to the door, he asked me, "Brother Dunn, what specifically are you doing to give your family a spiritual experience every week?"

You know, that made me think. "Well, I come home once in a while."

"No," he said, "I mean different than that."

I said, "Well, other than what we try in our little family get-togethers, not too much. We pray together, we have fun together, but I don't know that I am giving them a spiritual experience."

Then he challenged me to read the scriptures to my family and interpret them and have a good experience in this way. Time won't permit further details, but my home teacher followed through and kept me committed until we increased the spirituality in our home—all this, accomplished by a wonderful home teacher who understands people.

To add a quick postscript, one week later—it wasn't in his handbook and the bishop didn't tell him he had to, but because he understood people—this good brother called at our door unannounced.

I answered and was surprised to see him. "What are you doing here tonight? Have I forgotten the night of our appointment?"

"No," he said, "Could I see your daughter Marsha for just a minute?"

"Why, certainly. We are almost ready to sit down to dinner."

I escorted him into the front room and went out into the kitchen where Marsha was setting the table. "Marsha, our home teacher wants to see you."

"What did I do?"

"I don't know. Why don't you go see?"

So she tiptoed in. He wasn't a minute with her. I heard the front door shut as she came into the kitchen, carrying a little box, nicely gift wrapped. It was her birthday and somebody besides the family cared enough to remember! Pleased, she exclaimed, "Look!"

"What is it?" I asked.

"I don't know."

"Why not open it and find out?"

So she set it down, opened it—and there was a beautiful little corsage. The attached card said, "Happy Birthday, Marsha. Been thinking about you all day. Love, Your Home Teacher."

How do you think she responded the next time he called? You see, this is one of the great keys to success in this life, the ability to lose yourself in the lives of others.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Keys To Successful Living," February 13, 1968, pp. 10-14.)
