Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Death in a Foxhole"

My mind immediately was called back to a day about twenty years ago when, as a young soldier participating in the activity of this country during World War II, I found myself on the island of Okinawa, somewhere in my nineteenth year. In that serious mortal conflict, while trying to do what we could to preserve these very freedoms that have been discussed today, by chance I fell into the good graces of another young man who had fine ideals and high standards. Almost automatically we got together and shared the experiences of the war together. Frequently we shared the same foxhole. One night during the month of May, our forces had sustained such heavy casualties that it became necessary for my friend and me to be separated. We were in different holes about fifty yards apart. It had commenced to rain about seven that evening, and it was a cold night. Along about eleven the enemy let go with a barrage that was almost unbelievable, and for almost two hours they harassed our lines with heavy artillery and mortar fire. Shortly after midnight one of these shells landed in the hole of my good friend. I could tell from the sound of the blast that it was serious. I called to him but couldn't get an answer, and the type of fighting we did in the Pacific prevented me from crawling over to offer aid. About an hour later I got a faint response indicating life still existed. All that night long, under heavy fire, I tried to call words of comfort to him, and finally as it commenced to get light I crawled to the hole of my friend and found that he had almost become submerged in the water from the heavy rain of the night before.

As I lifted him out on that cold, muddy bank and laid his head in my lap, I tried to offer what physical comfort I could under those conditions, wiping his brow and face with a handkerchief. He was almost limp with death now. I said, "Harold, you hold on, and I'll get you to the aid station just as soon as I can. It's only a few hundred yards away. "No," he said, "I know this is the end, and I've held on as long as possible because I want you to do two things for me, Paul, if you would." I said, "You just name it, Harold." He said, "If you are permitted to live through this terrible ordeal, will you somehow get word to my parents and tell them how grateful I am for their teaching and influence which has enabled me to meet death with security and calmness, and this in turn will sustain them." And I'm happy to report to you I was able to fulfill that commitment.

"Second, Paul," he said, "if you ever have the opportunity to talk to the youth of the world, will you tell them for me that it is a sacred privilege to lay down my life for the principles that we have been defending here today." And with that testimony on his lips he like so many others before, gave his life for the principles of freedom and righteousness.

Well, as we buried Harold along with his comrades, close friends, and associates, we placed over a cemetary on Okinawa this inscription, and I think it still stands for all to observe who would: "We gave our todays in order that you might have your tomorrows."

'The Improvement Era, "Who Shall Lead Them?", December, 1965, p. 1147.)
