Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Staff Sergeant Isso"

At the beginning of World War II, Paul H. Dunn, of the First Council of Seventy, was drafted into the United States Army. He was eighteen years of age and had just a few months earlier commenced a very promising professional baseball career. He was sent to the East Coast, and, out of 20,000 men, he was the only Latter-day Saint. He was assigned to Hawaii to undergo general training for a period of time prior to assignment to the South Pacific. The training completed, the men were to have one weekend in Honolulu before shipping out and into combat. Elder Dunn tells the story as follows:

"I had, in this whole procedure of getting involved in that division and finally going over seas, a sergeant I cannot describe. Let me just say that he was the most miserable, unrighteous person I have ever known. . . . He had tremendous power and authority; he could motivate people. . . . He couldn't say three words without profaning two of them. Let's call him Sergeant Isso, to protect identity. Sergeant Isso and Private Dunn had a personal war going on within World War II. . . . When the time came for the pass in Hawaii he lined up his thirty men (he was our platoon leader) and these were pretty good soldiers after a fashion, and he had another philosophy. He called it 'be a man.' . . . Well, here's Isso out there with his thirty men. He says, 'tonight we're going into Honolulu.' And there's a big old two-and-a-half ton truck they backed up. And he said, 'Now men, some of you haven't yet arrived in manhood. You've gone through training; you're pretty good, but we want a symbol in our platoon of being the whole soldier.' And he says, 'it's going to be a tattoo. That's an order. . . . You're not going to come back here tonight without it; and if you do, I'll throw the book at you. I'll give you every detail in the book.' That isn't the way he said it. He was far more descriptive. . . . 'The other thing is that when we get into Honolulu before you're on your own, because some of you haven't conquered woman, you're going to have an experience in a house of prostitution. And that's an order.' And two of us said, 'oh yah?' He said, 'Yah, that's right. . . .'

"I didn't come back with a tattoo or the experience. I got thirty straight days of KP . . . guard duty every night on top of it, because I didn't give in. I woke up one night before we shipped out and found my arm strapped to the bunk and Sergeant Isso, my leader, sitting on my chest with two other fellows holding me down while he attempted to pour a fifth of whiskey into my mouth. He said, 'You're going to qualify, kid.' Well, this went on for two more years, all the way through combat. . . .

. . . At the end of that two years, out of one thousand men in the second battalion, six of us were left alive . . . the others killed, wounded, sent home. Wouldn't you know—Isso and Dunn were two of the six. Well, finally it came time to go home, and we had a point system which was a fair way they thought of locating you home. They gave you one point for each month you served in the service, one extra point for each month overseas, five points for every campaign, five for every time you were shot or wounded. And they posted out scores in Hokaido, Japan, and PFC Dunn had 87 points; Staff Sergeant Isso—85. What a thrilling moment that was. That meant I was going home a whole week ahead of him. And so they gave me a party the night before I was supposed to go. All the gang got together in an old barracks and threw in their cookies and other good things from home. Right in the middle of the party, Isso got up and walked out in the circle and said, 'I want to talk to you, men.' He turned to me and said, 'Paul, I want you to know, and I want this whole group to know that you and I have had a personal battle going on. I don't think Paul does know that I have planned and organized personally every single thing I've tried to get him to do. Do you want to know why?'

"'I'd like to.'

"He said, 'Because in my own way of life and the activities I have been involved with, I never felt comfortable with you.' And he said, 'The only way I could feel I could be comfortable with you was to put you in the gutter. And you wouldn't let me.' And he said with tears in his eyes as he looked at those other crude characters, 'If I could go home tomorrow to my wife and two kids with his record, morally, I'd give my life. . . .'

"Seven years passed. And one night a knock came at my door. And I answered it. And, lo and behold, there in the framework stood Staff Sergeant Isso. I almost shut the door. I didn't want to invite him in; but I did. He came in, sat down, and said, 'Paul, I've been trying to find you for five years. . . . You know, I wasn't home in Pennsylvania more than six weeks when a knock came at my door. Two of your missionaries came to call. The only reason I let them in was because it was your faith. I'm happy to tell you that another six months later we joined the Church. I wonder, Paul, if you and your wife would do us the honor of coming to the temple tomorrow and being our witnesses. Would you?'

"'Would I!'

"The next day as I went out to stand in that holy house, watching this sergeant who had been worthless join hands with a beautiful woman and now four children, I saw the gospel of Jesus Christ in action. I saw the most miserable human being this world has ever produced become a living son of the Father."
