Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Six Feet Four Inches Tall and a Spirit to Match"

I had a great athlete who was a member of the Church come take a class from me at the University of Southern California some years ago—big fellow, about six feet four inches and two-hundred and twenty pounds. He was an all-American boy from the physical standpoint. He was at USC on a four-year, fully paid football scholarship. And he had a right; he had earned it. Everybody clamored for him. I think he could have gone to any one of sixty colleges. He had one problem—he thought he was the only thing that existed. And as he walked around the campus he gave that air and authority. The only reason he came to the institute was that I had a class at noon that had twenty-eight girls in it and two boys. That was his motivation.

He used to time his entrance into the class just following the opening prayer, and he would plop down on the back row, put his feet up on an adjoining chair. And then a sneer would come on his face which suggested, "Brother Dunn, I'm here. I dare you to teach me."

Did you ever see a student like that? It is a real challenge to a teacher, I promise you. Try as I would—I put on floor show after floor show for him—I couldn't penetrate his shell. He was just too hard, because he was turned in, selfish. The only time he would look interested was if we were honoring him at some event or banquet.

Talk about discouragement! I would go home and tell my wife, "I'm through. I quit. I can't teach." That would usually be about Thursday or Friday.

And she would grab me by the arm and say, "You can! Go get him!"

By Monday morning I would charge back. "I'm gonna get that boy!"

By Wednesday, down in the valley of despair I'd go. "I can't, I can't!"

"Yes, you can!"

I guess I resigned every week for six weeks.

One day I got a telephone call from a very close friend of mine in Hollywood. He had had a little baby born prematurely, and it wasn't expected to live. They had it in an incubator at the Hollywood Children's Hospital, and he wondered if I could hurry over and help administer to it and give it a name and a blessing before it passed on. I was honored. I hurried over, and in my anxiety to get to the third or fourth floor (I have forgotten which) where the incubators were located, I got off one floor too soon. And, lo and behold, I found myself standing in the orthopedic ward of the Hollywood Children's Hospital—thirty little beds lined up. Have you ever been up to the Primary Children's Hospital to see those little children, confined, many of them with crippled bodies? I don't know what it does to you, but to this dad—it touches him. I was deeply touched.

So, after completing the administration I came back to take a second look at those little children, and again it affected me. This time I noticed they had some volunteers working with them. And so I stepped up to the desk and asked the nurse, "What's going on here?"

She said, "Well, we have a little program where two days a week people from the community come in and try to brighten their day."

"How do you get involved?"

She said, "It is easy, sign right here."

Now I took the pen really wanting to put down my own name, and I couldn't. I was inspired to put my student's name, ol' Bill. So I wrote his name in place of mine.

She said, "Thank you," and called me by his name.

I had signed for the following Thursday, I think it was six o'clock in the evening. I didn't have the heart to go tell him what I had done. You see, he was the type of a person that would have refused had you asked him because we weren't honoring him. To do something for somebody else? "Haven't got time, I'm too busy." So I waited until five o'clock on the following Thursday, which was the date of our appointment. I rang him up on the phone, and his mother answered and I said, "Is Bill there?"

She said, "Yes, we're just ready to sit down to supper."

I said, "May I speak to him for a minute?"

"Certainly."

I learned a long time ago in World War II that the element of surprise is necessary in combat. Bill came to the phone and he said, "Hello?"

And I just reared back and I said, "Bill! Will you help me, please!"

He said, "Oh, yes, sir. Yes, sir. But who is it?"

I said, "It's your institute teacher, Brother Dunn. Thank you, I'll be by and pick you up in fifteen minutes," and I just hung up.

Well, I wish you could have been in the car with me. I drove over and he was standing out on the curb. He had his letterman's sweater on, all three stripes showing, and a half of an apple pie in his hand, eating it. I pulled over to the curb and opened the door and I said, "Get in quick!"

He said, "What's the matter?"

I said, "Get in and I'll tell you."

And he got in, and I slammed the door, and I think he thought we had just received a call to go back to Missouri. Then I just sped off. I sped off, knowing that when I did tell him, he would probably bail out. I got around the corner doing about forty. He said, "What's the excitement?"

I said, "Bill, I really appreciate you."

He said, "For what, for what?"

I said, "You're going down to the Children's Hospital and read to some kids."

He said, "I'm what?" Well, he wouldn't talk to me the rest of the trip.

We got to the hospital. I literally pushed him out on the sidewalk. I gave him a note—third floor and the name of the nurse—and drove off and left him. I had said, "I'll be back in an hour and get you. The Lord bless you."

Well, an hour later I came back, and out of that hospital door walked a new man. He got in the car, and he couldn't talk.

I said, "Well, how'd it go, Bill?"

"I can't tell you."

I said, "I understand. Don't try, but when you get your composure, let me know." So I turned on the car radio so the silence wouldn't be so obvious. We drove for about ten minutes.

Then he turned the radio off. He said, "Brother Dunn, that is one of the great experiences of my life."

I said, "I thought it would be. What happened?"

He said, "They assigned me to a little three-year-old girl that was born without a spine, never known a day out of bed. And that little girl was happier than me. What's the matter with me?" (I wanted to tell him, but that wasn't the place.) And then he went on to say that he was given a chair, and it was brought up to the side of the bed. All the time he was reading she wanted to hold his hand. He read to her out of a giant pop-up Pinnochio book. And he said, "You know, it is embarrassing to read to kids, particularly when people can hear you. But you know, after I finished the first page, I didn't care who heard me." Then he went on to say he finished the story and then another and another, and finally it was time to go.

He said, "Brother Dunn, I made ready to go, and the little girl didn't want me to. She pulled me down, and you know her whole hand barely fit around one of my fingers. And then she gave me a kiss on the nose and asked me to come back next week. Brother Dunn, you might think I'm a nut, but I signed up for another month."

"No, I don't think you're a nut, Bill. This is what we've been trying to talk about in class. See, you can talk about theories and lesson plans all you want. But you found out what the Lord said, as Luke records it, when you lose yourself in the service of others, you find the real you. This is the greatness of the gospel."

Bill discovered it in his nineteenth year. Two weeks later a knock came at my door, and he filled the whole framework. I said, "What is it, Bill? What can I do to help you?"

"Well," he said, "I've really done it this time."

"What did you do?"

He said, "I just resigned my scholarship—four years!"

"Now, what did you do that for?"

"Just accepted a mission. I'm going out and kind of lose myself."

I spoke at his farewell. Two years later he returned. He blessed me with a little visitith a little visit. I am proud to announce to you that when Bill came back—he was still six feet four inches tall and two-hundred and twenty pounds—but he had a spirit to match it. What a great contribution he will make to the world—to the Church—because he followed the admonition of the Savior.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Know Thyself—Control Thyself—Give Thyself," October 7, 1969, pp. 13-16.)
