Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER ALVIN R. DYER

Biographical Sketch

Elder Alvin R. Dyer was called to be an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve on October 11, 1958. He was ordained an apostle on October 5, 1967. On April 6, 1968, he became a member of the First Presidency and served in that capacity until the death of President David O. McKay on January 18, 1970, after which Elder Dyer resumed a previous position as an Assistant to the Council of Twelve.

Elder Dyer presided over the Central States Mission for four and one-half years followed by two years over the European Mission with headquarters in Frankfurt, Germany. He returned from that assignment in January of 1962.

Elder Dyer was an engineer in the heating and ventilation field, once holding membership in the American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers. During World II he served with the American military engineers, acting as a consultant during the early part of the war. At one time he was active with the Exchange Club. During his service as president of the Central States Mission, he became a member of the Missouri Historical Society, a membership he still holds.

Elder Dyer's education, beyond high school, has been obtained largely on a self-teaching basis. He took many correspondence courses to get needed information for his profession. He obtained a journeyman's rating as a sheet metal worker (1925-1933), a trade which assisted him materially in his heating and ventilating profession. He was manager of the heating department of the Utah Builders Supply from 1934 to 1949. At this time he organized his own company which was highly successful, known as the Dyer Distributing Company. In 1955 he disposed of his interest in this company. He has no professional interests at present, devoting all of his time to the Church.

One of thirteen children, Elder Dyer was born January 1, 1903, in Salt Lake City to Alfred Robert and Harriet Walsh Dyer. He married May Elizabeth Jackson in the Salt Lake Temple. The have two children—Gloria May Klein and Brent Rulon—and six grandchildren.

In April 1958 he was called, while still president of the Central States Mission, to be the first assistant general superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. After seven months he became a General Authority.

Elder Dyer has held many other positions in the Church, extending back to 1924 when he returned from a 26-month mission in the eastern states, where he was the supervising elder of the New York District. He served as the superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association in the sixteenth Ward of the Salt Lake Stake, after which he was called to be the first counselor in the bishopric of the Fifteenth Ward of the same stake, a position held for seven years. He subsequently served for eight years on two stake high councils, seven in the Salt Lake Stake and one in the Riverside Stake. He later served as Sunday School superintendent of the Yalecrest Ward of the Bonneville Stake, and upon division of that ward, he served as second counselor in the bishopric of the Monument Park Ward for three and one-half years and then as bishop for more than five years.

Elder Dyer is the author of many books, some dealing with history, such as The Refiner's Fire@ and This Age of Confusion. His many years of missionary service led to the publication of several books in this area. These are The Challenge, The Meaning of Truth, and The Lord Speaketh Other books are The Fallacy and, most recent, Who Am I?. The latter deals with the meaning of life and man's destiny.

Athletically minded, Elder Dyer played high school baseball and M Men basketball and at one time bowled in major league circles. Of late he plays handball. At one time, following his first mission, he had an opportunity to play professional baseball, but the offer was declined because of Church responsibilities.
