Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Dad Wants You to Come Back"

I bear you my testimony in all humility that this is the work of God. I have seen it in the lives of people. I have witnessed it as it causes men and women to change their lives. I have seen it become a motivating force for good, and I bear record that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, the Mediator—not as it is preached by these predominant countries of the lands of Europe. And do you know that this is the message we declare when we go to the doors of the people for the first time? It is through the testimony of our missionaries that the veneer of false concepts and the antiquities of these people are being laid aside for the acceptance of the gospel. It is more powerful than all other things that we do in our missionary work as we look into their faces and bear record that God has raised up a prophet, and they are listening to this message.

We had a family of seven visited recently by the missionaries where the woman was about to close the door when the elder said, "I can see you are going to close the door. I am very sorry. We have such a wonderful message." And we have told them, "Before any door is closed, you bear your testimony." He said, "Before you close that door, I want to bear my testimony to you of these brief things we have stated today," and he bore his testimony. The door closed, and the missionaries started for their home when they heard a voice. It was the young boy of the home, fourteen-years-old, who said, "Dad wants you to come back." And they went back, and the father said, "I listened to your message at the door on the other side as you spoke to my wife, and I did not think much of it until that young man bore his testimony. And then something came over me that I have never experienced before, and now I have to know what this is."

I had the privilege of shaking hands with this family of seven and hearing them testify that God had made known to them that these things are true. This is the reason why so many are accepting the gospel in the lands of Europe. We are proclaiming the message by testimony and through the Spirit.

(Conference Report, October 8, 1960, p. 62.)
