Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"The Mayor of Reykjavik"

I recall a fulfillment in this type of procedure when in London, England, in the early part of 1961 with President McKay. He had gone there to dedicate the Hyde Park Chapel and to place a plaque on the front of the little Wales residence at Merthyr Tydfil, the birthplace of his mother. He said to me, "President Dyer, I want you to go to Iceland to investigate the possibilities of sending missionaries there."

Through obedience to his request, within a few weeks we had taken an Icelandic Airways plane from Oslo, Norway, in company with the president of the Norwegian Mission, and a legal representative of our Church who was then in Europe, and my son, who was serving then in the European Mission office. As we flew to Iceland we had the thrilling experience, out over the Arctic Ocean, of having one of the motors on the plane go out in mid-air. This is always a very pleasant experience—to look out the window and see the propeller standing still. But the pilot said, "Don't worry about it; it has been 'feathered,'" which means that the propeller blade is adjusted to knife the stream of air and not against the air. So he said, "We will successfully land at Reykjavik." This we did, but I noticed they had all the crash equipment ready, so he was not so sure.

But what do you do when you go to a country like this, to establish an image for the Church? In the few days that we were there we decided upon a procedure which, I think, is a good one. First we visited the embassy of the United States, which is always a protective measure to follow when you are away from home. One thing happened there that impressed me very much.

After we got through with our business wherein we inquired about the customs of the people, of religious tolerations and restrictions, and other things that obtained in Iceland that could affect the sending of missionaries there, the ambassador said, "Are all Latter-day Saints like Barney Timmins?"

I said, "Why do you ask?" Fortunately. I happened to know of him, but I did not know that he had been there.

He said, "He was attached to our embassy here for a number of years, and if all Latter-day Saints are like that young man, then you must have a wonderful church."

I thought of the influence for good that an individual can leave in a place and how he can lift the image of the Church when he stands on the things that he believes in and obeys the standards that he has been taught.

We left the office of the ambassador and went to the office of the head bishop of the Luthern Church on the island, where we had a very pleasant visit and heard the bishop speak of his high regard for this young man, a Latter-day Saint—Barney Timmins.

From there we went to the office of the minister of education. At each of the places of contact, we spoke of our purpose in going there, always with the idea we had been asked to come by the president of our Church, whom we feel is a prophet of God. "What would you think of missionaries being sent to the island of Iceland?" we asked, and explained what the missionaries did.

Every contact that we made evidenced a truly sincere welcome. We were privileged to meet with the president of the University of Iceland. This is always, I think, an especially good contact to make. We talked to him about the Brigham Young University and the educational program of the Church, the desire of our people to seek education.

In the course of our discussions, I even suggested that it might be possible that some scholarships could be arranged for some of the students of the University of Iceland to come to the Brigham Young University in the event that we had missionaries come to their island, so that such young men and women could attend our Church school and then go back to Iceland and become a part of the disseminating of information about the Church.

We finally ended up in the office of the mayor of Reykjavik. His name is Halgrimmson.

I have been greeted and welcomed in many places throughout the world in a very cordial manner, but never so much as here this day in the office of Mayor Halgrimmson. When I suggested that we might send missionaries there, if it was the will of the presidency and the presiding brethren of the Church, he said, "For me, I would like to see the Mormon missionaries here right now." He said, "What will you do with them when they come? Where will they live?"

I said, "They will find a place with the people."

He said, "Now I want this to be my responsibility. When they come, I will see to it that they have a place to live. Where will you hold your meetings?"

"Well, this is a little premature. We only have two members of the Church in Iceland—a Danish woman and her son."

He said, "You will need some place to meet. Let it be the responsibility of the city of Reykjavik to provide you with a meeting place at no cost."

I said, "Mayor Halgrimmson, you have been very friendly, and kind, and I would like to know the reason. Why are you so friendly to the Mormon Church?"

"Well," he said, "the answer is simple. Some years ago two Mormon missionaries came to the island of Iceland and they learned that many of the Icelanders left the island to go to Westmanna Island, some 150 kilometers off the coast of Iceland, toward the Arctic Circle. There, employed by others in one of the great fishing areas of the world, they would fish. So these missionaries, I suppose being fishermen at heart, got on a boat and away they went to Westmanna Island. While the men fished in the day, they fished at night and baptized 150 of these fishermen. They came back to the island and later, with their wives and families who were also converted, many of them emigrated to America. A good number of them, as many of you know, settled in Springville and Spanish Fork."

As he continued this story he said, "My uncle was among them. Last year (which would have been in the fall of 1960) my wife and I decided to come to America. We did not come in any official capacity, as the mayor of Reykjavik and his wife, but just as ordinary Icelanders. We told no one of our coming. We bought an automobile in Detroit, and toured America. We went of course to Utah, where we spent three weeks—three of the most wonderful weeks of my life. You ask me why I would like to see missionaries in Iceland. I lived among your people for those three weeks. I came to know them. I have never been so impressed with people, their educational inclinations, their industry, and, above all, their desire to abide by what they believe and what they were taught.

"We went to Salt Lake City for the last few days of our visit in Utah. We stayed in a motel near the temple. The manager of that motel was the kindest, perhaps the finest man I have ever met. He said he belonged to some kind of quorum, but this was a man who lived completely, in my estimation, the life of a Christian."

I thought then and there of the tremendous influence that we as a people, both individually and as a community, can wield upon the lives of other people if only we live the gospel. I think that when the time comes to open Iceland for the preaching of the gospel—and this is bound to come—probably this one man with the influence he wielded on Mayor Halgrimmson and his wife will be largely responsible for the opening of the doors of preaching the gospel in Iceland. I have not been able to find this brother as yet, and I have been looking for him, but when I do I will want to convey this glad news to him.

These are happenings that indicate how the spirit of God works in the minds of people to open the way for the spreading of the gospel.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Stand Up and Be Counted", March 20, 1963, p. 3-6.)
