Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Elder Kahne"

But there is one experience that came out of this that I want to mention this morning. As we traveled through the city we came to a certain area, and Dr. Novinski stopped the government car in the midst of a number of very wonderful buildings that had been recently constructed. These buildings were not ordinary structures. They were well built, indicating that the Polish people must have sacrificed other building needs to provide the materials for these, for there is a shortage of materials in Warsaw and in Poland. Dr. Novinski then explained that we were standing in the area once known as the Warsaw Ghetto—that infamous place to which the Jewish people of Europe were shipped from the conquered countries, there to await their eventual deportation to the exterminating chambers, which were not very far away.

As I stood there thinking of what the Polish people had done in erasing or endeavoring to erase from their memory the terrible experience of this place and the terrible inhumanities that had been brought upon the Jewish people, I thought of the experience of one of our young missionaries then serving in France who was in this ghetto with his mother and father. He is a Belgian Jew. The time had come for them to be taken to the gas chambers. He came out with his hand in his father's hand, but somehow, in some way that he is not able to explain, from his written testimony to me, he was taken by the hand by someone else and was not led to the truck that awaited them to take them to the gas chamber. Instead, in some way he was led out of the camp. How this was accomplished he does not even know. Maybe it was because he was too young and was not fully aware of what was transpiring. At any rate, he remained secreted in the environs of Warsaw and was not found.

After the war he returned to Belgium. His father and mother, of course, had both been exterminated that day. His foster father, who had given him a home, knowing his parents, endeavored to do everything for him, to give him the finest education that anyone could have. He was taught French. He was taught English. He was taught German. Because of the brilliance of his mind he became, I suppose, one of the finest young men that we have ever had in the Church with regards to the French language. But beforehand he was visited by the missionaries as he reached some age of maturity. He told me that he knew the first day that he heard the missionaries testify of the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ that this was to be his way of life. He was baptized shortly thereafter, although his foster father, a very kind and wonderful man, was not able to receive of the message. Elder Kahne was later called to be a missionary in the French mission, and today (if he has not been released, and at last word he had not been) he is one of our very excellent French translators, having just completed the translation of the Book of Mormon in French, and many other important manuals.

This is an indication to me of the preservation of this man's life for a purpose, and we found this to be true in the calling of many translators in Europe.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Gospel of Jesus Christ Is Not Theory," May 9, 1962, pp. 5-6.)
