Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER MARION D. HANKS

Biographical Sketch

Elder Marion D. Hanks, a General Authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was named an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve in April, 1968. Formerly he was a member of the First Council of Seventy.

Elder Hanks has been prominent in civic affairs, particularly in the field of youth development. In 1957 he was appointed a member of the United States President's Citizens Advisory Committee on Youth Fitness, on which he served for several years. In this capacity he has spoken at youth conferences throughout the United States and in foreign countries and was a featured speaker at the White House Conference on Children and Youth.

Among his civic services, Elder Hanks was the first chairman of the Utah Committee on Children and Youth, a board member of the national "Operation Fitness" program, member of the boards of Weber College and of the College of Southern Utah. He now serves on the board of trustees of Brigham Young University and is a member of the National Council, Boy Scouts of America.

He has been for many years a teacher and served for a number of years in the leadership of Temple Square. As a young man he filled a two-year proselyting mission for the Church in the northern United States. Recently he and his family spent several years in England and Europe in mission leadership there. Currently Elder Hanks serves as supervisor of the Eastern American Missions, which include the Canadian, Eastern Atlantic States, Eastern States, Cumorah, and New England Missions.

Born in Salt Lake City into a family of seven children, he was two years old when his father died. He was reared by his widowed mother. He attended the public schools and holds a Juris Doctor degree from the law school of the University of Utah. Formerly active in college and other amateur athletics, he is a handball and squash player.

During World War II Elder Hanks served aboard a submarine chaser in the Pacific. In recent years he has visited servicemen at their bases in many parts of the world. He has recently returned from his latest tour of military installations in Vietnam, Thailand, and Hong Kong and also spent time in Israel, Jordan, and Egypt.

Elder Hanks married Maxine Christensen in the Hawaiian Temple, and they are the parents of four daughters and one son.
