Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Look, You Can't Do This to Me"

At the high school I attended, they gave a medal and a watch to one student who qualified in various fields of activity—scholarship, athletics, leadership, etc. I learned a few days before graduation that I was a candidate for this honor. This pleased me, of course. I was especially concerned, therefore—knowing that I had a chance and knowing some fine people who also were candidates and whom I regarded highly—with the marks I got as I went from class to class on that last day. There was not anything to be done now about activities or leadership, but these marks I knew would be significant. So as they came and were satisfactory, I felt good and encouraged, until I got to the last class, which was taught by a marvelous little soul who had taught my oldest brother seventeen years before and all of the family members in between—I was the last.

Because this was a class in English literature, a field in which I had been particularly interested in boyhood, and because I had read most of the materials that were assigned for the class, I did not do very much in terms of contribution. I showed up occasionally, but I found many reasons to be away on athletic or newspaper or studentbody business. When the tests came, I passed them all—got good marks. I had A's down through the year and so I had no feeling that anything else would be forthcoming. But when the report card came back, it had a big fat E on it. Well, I sat shocked and stunned, and then laughed nervously and felt sure that she was playing a little joke on me.

When the class was over and people were showing each other their marks—and I was holding mine back—I found my way to her desk and said, "Look, Miss Young, (again laughing nervously) this is my report card. You made a mistake!"

"Oh," she said, "I know that it is your report card, and in fact I have made a mistake, but it was a deliberate one—I wanted you to think a little. I am not going to fail you in the class; that would put your graduation in jeopardy." She took the report card away from me and superimposed a big C over it.

I said, "Look, you can't do this to me."

"Oh, yes I can."

I said, "No, no, open your book." She opened it and we went across the page.

"Look at the marks—ninety, this and this—and compare them with the people you gave the A's to. My marks are better all the way. You can't do this."

She said, "Oh, yes I can. I am going to do it." I asked, "Do you know what this will do to me?"

She answered, "Yes, I know. Let me tell you something. I taught your oldest brother, and I have taught all the ones in between. When I knew you were coming, I was grateful that I would have the last of the Hanks tribe because I loved every one of them, and I wanted to love you. But you made it very hard. Do you think that I am stupid? Don't you think I knew what has been going on? Don't you think I know the excuses you have made and the unmanly way you have acted in this course? Oh, you made the grades all right. You had read most of the material before; I knew that. But you haven't been fair with me or yourself. I am not going to mark you this month on what you did in comparison with anybody else. I am going to mark you in comparison with what you should have done—and you get the 'C'."

I said again, "Do you know what this is going to do to me?" By now I was pretty close to tears—this seemed so unfair.

She said, "Yes, I know, and I would like you to know that I have been up most of the night thinking about it and that I love you too much not to do it."

"C"—and out I went. Well, I didn't get the medal or the watch. My name is not on the plaque. Another fellow's is, a fellow who came down here and became student body president at the BYU. He is a great and good man who deserved it, a better man than I was. But I lived long enough to stand in front of a group of elderly ladies, of which she was one, and tell them and her to her face that this was the most important lesson that I learned in school. There is not anything in this world worth having that you can get without working for it, without putting out, doing your best. Before God and wise men we are not going to be judged by what other people do, but by what we do with what we have.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Spiritual Constants In Our Changing Times", January 4, 1961, pp. 5-7.)
