Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"A Sacred Experience"

May I share a really choice, sacred, personal experience? I was in the missionary home in Salt Lake City, trying to help new missionaries get a sense of their great Christian responsibility, when I had a kind of little vision of my own.

There was a foundation to the vision. The night before in the Salt Lake Tabernacle a man had died of a heart attack while he listened to the choir. He was sitting next to his wife (you could not contrive a situation more emotionally charged) and turned to her as the choir practiced and said, "Martha, after all these years, imagine, we can be here while the choir practices. You know, I don't have to die to go to heaven to hear the angels. This is enough for me." He then sat so quietly that she respected his worshipful attention. But after the rehearsal, when all of the others were stirring and moving and she turned to him, he still didn't move—he had died there on that seat in the tabernacle.

Well, I was called, and that night I made a call. I found out that this lady—a crippled person who was quite elderly and walking with a cane—had come with her husband from Los Angeles in fulfillment of a dream. That night—alone and stricken with this tragic thing—she found a place to stay with a considerate choir member, and I tried to do what I could to be helpful. I found the schedules for her and helped her arrange a train departure and the carrying home of the body. Then I went about my day's activities.

The next day I was in the missionary home at four o'clock, talking to missionaries, as I have said. As I looked at my watch, I had this little vision—the vision of Mrs. Bernarfa, walking by the railing down the ramp at the railroad station, while along came a wagon with a box on it. I had a picture of her, all alone. So I said to the missionaries, "I am sorry, I must go. And I have to go now. God bless you. Work hard. Be happy." I ran out the door, got in my car, raced down to the Union Pacific station, left my car where I should not have left it, jumped over a railing, ran down the ramp and there saw the picture I had seen before. I saw this elderly woman with a package on one arm and a cane in her hand. Just then the wagon rolled by with the body of her beloved in a box. I took her by the arm and walked with her to her car, took her to her place in the train, expressed my love and sympathy (which is all that could be done), and went my way.

Let me tell you that this was one of the greatest blessings of my life, not simply because of the happy things that followed, even though many did. A great pastor down there, for instance, with a wonderful congregation, one of the greatest preachers in the United States, wrote me a letter and said, "I have never had anything good to say about the Mormons before, but I want you to know after what you did for Mrs. Bernarfa that I will never have anything but good to say about you and your people."

That is a little thing—I almost am uneasy saying it—or is it? The satisfactions and the sweet sense of relationship I felt at that moment when I did a little something for somebody were more important than any medal anybody ever pinned on me, any name on a plaque they ever put on the wall, or anything that has been said.

Let me tell you in all sobriety that if you would like to make it a happy day—a good day—get your mind off yourself. Look around you. At the moment of depression, if you will follow a simple program, you will get out of it. Get on your knees and get the help of God; then get up and go find somebody who needs something that you can help them find. Then it will be a good day.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Make It a Good Day!", September 27, 1966, pp. 6-7.)
