Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Say, Hanks, Do You Believe in Jesus Christ?"

The Christmas story that I want to mention occurred in the middle of the summer some years ago, at a naval training center. The man opposite me in the room had the many stripes on his arm that signified long and distinguished service; I was an apprentice seaman in boot camp. Nonetheless, Commander Hamilton, as he greeted me at the door, was most gracious—called me "Mr. Hanks," seated me with cordiality, and we talked as equals. He had invited me to discuss the possibility of a chaplaincy. I was quick to tell him that because of a mission, I had not finished an academic degree and didn't qualify under the Navy's standards. He as quickly responded that he felt he could do something about getting that requirement waived, all things else being favorable. After a little more conversation, this rangy, fine looking man, who had been over the bow of the Yorktown on a line when she was sunk shortly before, who had everything about him that was manly and attractive to a man and was a chaplain and servant of the Lord, not of our faith, said to me, "Before I recommend you to the Chief of Chaplains, do me a favor, please. Talk to me about your experience in your Church, about what you think may help me recommend you as qualified to represent the Lord in the military chaplaincy."

And so I began, and, I want to protest, with earnestness and honesty, to try to tell him what I felt, out of our common experience in the Church, might qualify me to serve in that very significant role. He who had been so courteous and so kind began to be fidgety, and I quickly knew, as we do when we seek to communicate person-to-person, that I wasn't making it, that I was losing. And I became a little more anxious, trying to tell him what there is, this stage-by-stage opportunity in the Church for a young person to develop the quality to be a servant of God. I told him from the beginning—the early two and a half minute talks, the scouting, the deacon opportunity, the Sunday School teaching, and the mission.

After a time his demeanor completely changed. He finally interrupted me. He said, "Say, Hanks, do you believe in Jesus Christ?"

I said, "Yes, sir. Everything I believe relates to Jesus Christ. The name of the Church that I belong to is his name. My faith revolves around him as my Savior."

He, looking at his watch, said, "Well, you have been talking seven minutes and you haven't said so." I think I have not made that mistake again.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Was He Relevant?", December 17, 1968, pp. 2-3.)
