Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Won't Stand Between You and God"

Once, long ago—so long ago that I would hope and pray no one could identify anyone involved—I went to a hospital in the middle of the night, called by a dearly loved friend of former years. I hadn't seen him for a long time. There had been an accident involving a member of his family who was dying. My friend called me to the hospital, sure that if I arrived something would happen that would help. When I got there, the person was in the operating room, doctors and nurses around him. He was dying, literally.

I sensed that my friend was not with me.

He said, "I'm not going in."

I said, "You can't be serious. Come on."

He said, "I can't go."

I said, "Look, I don't know what you're talking about, but come with me. This is your loved one."

He said, "I won't stand between you and God, and I'm not worthy to go in there."

I said, "Look, my friend, if being worthy means to be perfect, or free from sins or problems or bad memories, I can't go either, but that isn't the way it is! God has given us the commission and the authority. Come on!"

He said, "I won't go."

So I went alone. And before I could begin the administration, his loved one was gone.

I won't repeat the detail that followed, what he said. But I'd like you to put yourself in that position. Can you be that personal? The time will come, maybe not just that way, but I promise you in the name of the Lord, it will come, when you will have a chance either to lend the strength of your faith or to be unwilling to participate.

Oh, God bless you, as I earnestly pray He'll bless me, with sense enough to know that at the banquet of consequences, when we go with our loved ones, there will not be much that is satisfying at the table unless I am able to bow my head, not hang it, in the presence of God who will be there.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Banquet of Consequences," October 3, 1967, pp. 11-12.
