Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Gerry"

Let me give you a headline of an experience not unfamiliar to many of you. Some of you have made a different answer already I suppose. A fine girl whom we'll call Gerry, which wasn't her name, was invited by her other high school associates, she being a freshman, to attend a social which was to be the year's introduction of the freshmen girls of high social level to this particular group. Gerry went, thrilled. She had a natural desire to be appreciated and popular; she wanted to succeed. Her mother was equally pleased because the girls who had invited her were fine girls so far as she knew. She had a new dress, was all pretty and ready when they called. She went to the place and found that she, after a little time, was the only one in the whole room not smoking. This surprised her because some of the girls she knew to be from homes of Latter-day Saint affiliation, some active ones. She felt a little out of place, wondered whether it wouldn't be appropriate to just hold a cigarette though she never had.

But she put that away and was uncomfortable and yet able to associate to an extent, when the next step occurred. A sixteen-year-old girl broke out a case of champagne her dad had been thoughtful enough to provide, and they all began to drink it. Pretty soon, Gerry discovered that almost literally she was on one side of the room and they on the other. I don't want to suggest she felt very good about it, or noble, or heroic, or like Joan of Arc; she felt terrible. She was under a kind of pressure and with influences she was not used to. She wanted to succeed; she didn't want to be, right in the beginning, characterized as one who was foolish or prudish or ridiculous. She stood and thought, considered holding a glass—this wouldn't hurt—then decided she couldn't do that. And almost literally, I repeat, found herself isolated from them to the point that finally, in accompaniment to their jeers and sneers and laughter, she left the place, walked all the way down the canyon, got home sobbing and disconsolate, heartbroken.

Her mother talked to her for a time and then invited me to. I told her the story of Lehi's vision; do you remember it? Just a point or two. Lehi had a vision of a great tree on which was fruit more desirable than any other fruit in the world. You had to get to it by way of a path alongside of which ran a rod of iron. There were mists of darkness coming up to obscure the path from a big chasm running alongside. Across the chasm was a large and spacious building filled with people dressed in the most impressive finery, having a real big time pointing their fingers at and laughing at the people across the chasm who had eaten the fruit and knew the value of it, it being the tree of the love of God or the tree of life. Well, I talked to her a little, told her I was not a prophet and didn't pretend to be, but that I would be willing, knowing that life is made of not one decision but a lot of them, yet to tell her that in my opinion the decision she had just made was an heroic and a great one, and that the day would come when, with a husband worthy of her and children whom she loved as she then could not understand she would love them, she would kneel down and thank God for the decisions of that hour. Well, that day came.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Heroism," 1958-59.)
