Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Daddy, I Wish You Could Be with Me"

I will not forget the night when a fine, mature, successful, affluent man stood in a large congregation and bore his witness. It was a witness that testified to me that the thirty-second chapter of Alma also testifies and what my own experience has testified—that testimony and conviction and assurance and confidence about the truth can come with earnest search and the living of the life at whatever age.

The man told of his little boy who at age eight came to his bedside with a message. The man had been for seventeen years a cynical, critical, quite heartless critic of his wife and children who were members of the Church. His business partner was a Latter-day Saint bishop who found his life somewhat difficult because of this man's attitude. The man went on in his criticism through the years, while his wife, in spite of his problem behavior, dedicated herself and her children to the Church. But the time came when this man, having suffered a broken back in an automobile accident, lay in bed for seventeen months. His little boy came and announced that he was going to be baptized and said, "Daddy, I wish you could be with me." The man, mellowed a little under the circumstances of his recent experience, said, "I wish I could too, son, but you come and tell me about it when you get home."

The little boy came back. He said, "Daddy, I have been wanting to talk to you for a long time, and I'm going to do it now. I have just been baptized into the Church. You are a wonderful daddy, and I love you very much, but this is what I want to say to you: I have only been on this earth eight years, and I have a testimony of the gospel. You've been here forty-five years, and you don't know that it is true yet. And the reason is that you don't really want to. You won't read the books Mother has tried to get you to read; you won't listen to the missionaries or the teachers. You could know, but you just don't want to." The little boy went on his way, and this mature, successful, influential citizen, lay and wept and, according to his own account, acknowledged the charge. When he got on his feet again he continued to do what he had started to do while in bed, to pay the price of learning. He "searched diligently," and stood before us as an active stake missionary with some very successful adventures in service, to testify through tears and great emotion that he did now know the gospel was true.

There are all around us examples of excellence to indicate that going to Sunday School once a week, attending a class in MIA—even going to a religion class at this great institution—that these efforts alone are not adequate. If you would know your Heavenly Father, if you would understand his will for you, you must search diligently on your own and get some personal convictions. I commend that suggestion as being the Lord's direction to every one of us.

As to "praying always," this is a subject of frequent discussion among us. We should pray always, according to divine direction. We should pray over our flocks, our herds, our children, our homes, our books, our examinations, our ball games; over our problems, our joys, our gratitudes, our great experiences. We should be prayerful in attitude and in fact. I believe I have learned how to pray. The prayers that I have learned to offer are not literarily noteworthy, nor greatly involved, nor very long.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Seeking Thick' Things," March 26, 1957, pp. 4-5.)
