Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Wait a Minute"

The other illustration is from one of your stakes. In the early days of my service in the First Council of the Seventy, I observed in the records of a stake to which I was assigned that this stake had a very strong elders quorum. I was anxious to discover why. I asked the stake president in advance if we might hear from the three members of the presidency of that quorum at our Saturday night meeting. This was arranged.

The quorum president who spoke was a professional man who had been very faithful in the Church but whose duties had made it difficult for him to devote time to active leadership, and so he had really never before held an office. Now he had been called to be the president of the elders quorum by a wonderful man who believed in him and in his potential, and he took the assignment. He wanted to succeed in it, so he worked and prepared himself and got some good help and started out. He told us how he had divided the elders quorum area into certain segments. He and a companion had taken one segument, his counselor and a companion another segment, and the other counselor and the secretary, each accompanied by a companion, also took segments of the quorum area.

They had started out with what I understand to be the spirit of home teaching in our time, although they were working under a little different program in their elders leadership. They decided that an occasional visit just wouldn't do the job, because this quorum was quiescent, to say the best. In fact, when the leaders were chosen, there were scarcely any others they could count on. So the president and his counselors, with companions, visited these homes, humbly and earnestly trying to get involved in the lives of the men and their families. At the end of the quarter they shifted areas, so that at the end of the year (they hadn't quite finished the year actually) all of the members of the presidency had become deeply identified with every man in that quorum.

This choice leader bore his testimony of gratitude for the opportunity he had had and sat down in tears. I leaned to the stake president and said, "I understand." He said, "Wait a minute."

The first counselor was a young sales executive who had invested great imagination and creative ability in his leadership. He was charged under the program with the responsibility of the church service of the men, and this meant temporal and religious activity projects. Their temple attendance was high, their quorum attendance uniquely high, their sacrament meeting attendance wonderfully strong. They had projects of all kinds. I remember his mentioning one. They had assigned every man in the rural stake to grow a little porker to sell, but the market went down. He turned around and said to the president with a smile, "I forget how much money we lost on the project, president, but every single man in the quorum responded to the challenge and was involved."

When he sat down, I thought I knew why this quorum was what it was, so I leaned to the president and said, "I understand." He said, "Wait a minute."

We then had called to the pulpit a young farmer, married, with several children. I suppose he didn't have as much formal education as his companions, but he had a kind of Abraham Lincoln honesty about him that communicated quickly, and what he said I don't think I will ever forget.

He said, "When the stake president asked me to be the second counselor in this quorum of elders I said, 'Who are the others?' He said, 'Brother . . . and Brother . . .' And I said, 'I don't know those fellows very well. Do they intend to succeed, or are they going to fail?' The president said, 'We assume they intend to succeed.' 'If they intend to succeed, I will take the job. If they are going to fail I don't want any thing to do with it. I am not about to get associated with an outfit that starts out to fail.'

"Well," he said, "the president asked them and they said they intended to succeed, so I took the job. Now," he said, without the trace of a smile (and I think it was really a guileless statement, although all of us laughed a little), "I want to tell you that these are successful priesthood leaders. They are great, successful priesthood leaders; and the reason they are is me."

Let me quickly tell you again, he wasn't being immodest or arrogant. The people responded. They knew him. They knew he meant it and how he meant it.

(Conference Report, October 1, 1966, pp. 80-81.)
