Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Lord, Help Me Know"

A man came to Temple Square one day and stood outside the office door, wanting to come in. I knew as I saw him that he had a desperate need, and I'll confess, to my sorrow, that my first thought was that the need probably was economic. We have many occasions there to be blessed with such opportunities. Well, I looked at him just a little bit suspiciously, and then going to the door, I invited him in and saw immediately in his face that the need he had had little to do with economics. He had a kind of glaze over his eyes that comes with a deep shattering shock.

He was not a member of the Church, married to a fine Primary president. This lady and he were the parents of a beautiful daughter, age eleven. This man's parents lived in the eastern part of the country, and the family had decided in a little council, a sweet and fine thing as he discussed it, that the best Christmas present they could give his parents was to send Daddy to see them, because it had been so long and it being Christmas time, the best gift they could receive was a visit from their only son. So he had, although reluctantly, accepted this commission and had gone to see his parents. While there he had received word from people at home that his wife had been in an automobile accident. The little girl had been killed. Through fire that followed, her body had been destroyed.

This was, of course, a terrible shock to him. He was on his way home, and had several hours layover in Salt Lake, and had come to the Temple Square trying to find peace. He sat across the desk from me, and I tried to teach him. I have seldom been more frustrated because I didn't get by that shock at all. I talked of eternity; I talked of resurrection; I talked of the faith we need, of the strength and sustaining influence of the Lord; and nothing registered—nothing at all. I began to get desperate. He sat, ill at ease and getting ready to move, and I began to pray. My prayer, and I have repeated it so many times under similar circumstances, was, "Lord, help me now." "Lord, help me now." And for a reason I am sure of, and you will accept I suppose, I opened this book—perhaps I should have done it much sooner without the stimulus of the inspiration, but hadn't—the Book of Alma:

The Spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame. . . . (Alma 11:43.)

I turned to Alma 40, and read a little more of the resurrection, that ". . . even a hair of our heads would not be lost; . . ." [See Alma 40:23.] For the first time I saw the break come. I found as we talked that the thing that disturbed him most was that this beautiful little girl—and I have little girls; I know about how a father would feel, at least I think I can imagine—the thing that bothered him most was that he could not even see her again, that the beauty and perfection of her little life was gone, and he had no real hope for anything more. But he sat and listened, and the simple therapy was repeated. We read it as the word of the Lord. He accepted it as such. He sat in one of those little alcoves near the door and read it over and over for a long time. When I took him to the airport, the glaze in his eye was gone. He had wept, perhaps for the first time. He had talked and seemed reachable, and we had discussed the principles I had tried to talk of before.

A few months later I heard his voice at the counter. I hadn't heard a thing from him since our first meeting. He was standing there with two rather rough looking men. They turned out to be his wife's brothers, born in the Church. He had a copy of the Book of Mormon opened to Alma 11 and was reading to them those wonderful words, testifying of their truth, telling them that in his search through the record he had found it to be the word of God. He bought a book for them and sent them home to read, these men who had been born into the faith.

I thought then and have thought since many times of the statement that one who will not read is no better off than one who cannot.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Seeking Thick' Things," March 26, 1957, pp. 4-5.)
