Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Could We Wait Until Monday?"

I want to repeat a short incident about one of my children, the only boy and the youngest in the family. This has relevance to what I am about to say. Richard is a nice little boy; he is seven and reasonably normal and withal a fine friend and a good little fellow. He and I have had kind of a hard time since we are outnumbered at our house—there are four daughters there, all older than he, and his mother. The girls and he have sometimes, since ours is a relatively normal household, had minor contentions over the television set. Ordinarily, of course, he would lose and became inclined to whimper a bit about it. I have been trying to tell him this isn't what a boy ought to do. He must not hit his sisters, but he doesn't whine and whimper either. He has taken the lesson reasonably well. But the contention crept to the point where I am afraid I will just have to publicly acknowledge a reaction that would never pass in your family living centers.

I said, "Look, you five, if I hear one more word I'll chop it up!" Well, do you get the rest of the story? I came home not long after, and I heard a little disturbance downstairs. And then someone, apprised that I had arrived, quieted the others. The noise subsided and then I heard these resolute steps marching up from the downstairs family room to the little office door where I was sitting. My son appeared, resolute, clear of purpose.

"Dad," he said, "where is your ax?"

I said, "It's in the furnace room, Rich."

He said, "Go get it and let's chop it up." I won't repeat the whole conversation, just the headlines from there on.

I said, "Richard, you really mean it?"

He said, "Yes, sir."

I said, "If we do, if we chop this thing up, we are not going to get another."

He said, "I don't care. Let's chop it up."

"Well," I said, "it costs a lot of money. You know those ball games and those nice things we like to watch?"

Yes, he knew, but was resolute.

I said, "All right (we went through this awhile), if I said it, I'll do it, and we'll have the greatest ceremony since we buried the frog; but if we do, if we do, we will not get another. Is that clear?"

"Yes, sir," he said.

"No more ball games, no more movies, no more cartoons."

"Cartoons?" he said. "What is tonight?"

I said, "Friday."

He said, "Is tomorrow Saturday?"

I said, "Yes."

He said, "Could we wait until Monday?"

That is more than a pleasant and true little childish story. It gets pretty interesting when it gets personal, doesn't it? When it begins to mean me and my life, my comfort, and my desires, it gets pretty interesting and quite important.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Banquet of Consequences," October 3, 1967, pp. 2-4.)
