Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER GORDON B. HINCKLEY

Biographical Sketch

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, a member of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has devoted a major part of his life to Church services.

In addition to his Church duties, he is active in community and business affairs, being a director of KSL, Inc., which operates television and radio CBS affiliates; director of the Deseret News Publishing Company, owner of the largest evening newspaper and largest commercial printing plant in the Intermountain West; director of Beneficial Life Insurance Company; vice president and director of Recording Arts, Inc.; director of Zion's First National Bank; director of Bonneville International Corporation, and director of Deseret Management Corporation, all of Salt Lake City; director of KIRO television and radio, Seattle, Washington; and director of radio stations WNYW and WRFM in New York City.

Elder Hinckley was born June 23, 1910, in Salt Lake City, a son of Bryant S. and Ada Bitner Hinckley. After attending local schools, he graduated from the University of Utah in 1932.

In June, 1933, he was called to serve a two-year Church mission in Great Britain, and in March of 1934 he was assigned to the European Mission with headquarters in London. Within two years after returning to his home in 1935, he was named to the Deseret Sunday School General Board, on which he served for nine years, 1937-46.

For two decades, until he was called as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve on April 10, 1958, Elder Hinckley was secretary of the Radio Publicity and Mission Literature Committee of the Church, and for the last seven years of that time he also was executive secretary of the General Missionary Committee. He was called to the Council of the Twelve October 5, 1961.

He has filled numerous special assignments from the First Presidency of the Church, four of them being in connection with preparations for the dedication of four temples of the Church: the Swiss Temple, first Mormon temple in Europe, in September, 1955; the Los Angeles Temple in March, 1956; the New Zealand Temple in April, 1958; and the London Temple, September, 1958. He presently is responsible for the work of the Church in South America, including Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

He is the author of five books, has edited a number of others, and has written numerous Church study manuals, pamphlets, and radio and film scripts. In addition to these varied activities, he served as a member of the presidency of East Mill Creek Stake for ten years, and was stake president for two years just prior to his appointment as a general Church officer.
