Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"He Was Talking About My Boy"

There came into the office a while ago a man who wanted to take a car to his son in the mission field. He said, "My son is riding a bicycle and I am afraid he is going to get killed. Can I take a car to him?"

I said, "You can if the mission president feels he needs one."

Correspondence went back and forth, and finally approval was given for the young man to have a car. The father came in after he had taken the car and said, "I'm proud of my boy in the field. We had never been very close when he was at home. There had always been something of a gulf between us. I want to tell you what happened.

"I drove a thousand miles to deliver the car to my son. I went to his place of lodging and rang the bell. He came to the door, and said, 'Hello, Dad. Glad to see you. Is that the car? I'm late for a meeting. If you can come around eight o'clock tonight down at such and such an address where we are having a baptismal service, maybe I'll have a few minutes to visit with you.'

"I hadn't seen him for sixteen months and that's the kind of reception I got. I felt like getting in the car and driving back home. But I went out, had some dinner and took a little nap, and thought better of it. I went to the hall where the baptismal service was held. My boy was the supervising elder of the district.

"I arrived late and sat on the back row. They had just finished the baptismal service and were having something of a testimony meeting. A man stood up and said, 'I'm retired. I've made some money. I've traveled around the world. I thought I had seen everything and had everything. Then one day that young man who is sitting here came to my door. Time was heavy on my hands; I let him in; I listened to him. He intrigued me, and I listened again. He has brought something to me more wonderful than all I have ever seen or all I have ever known. And I want to bear testimony to the truth of what he brought, and before you people here, express gratitude to the Lord for having sent him to my door.'

"He was talking about my boy. I am not a sentimental sort of a man, but the tears began to roll off my cheeks. I've come closer to my boy in one day in the mission field than I came in twenty years at home. I have concluded to be a better man myself. I have changed my life so that I may be worthy of my son."

This is the kind of effect that missionaries have on some fathers and mothers.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Consequences of Conversion," January 28, 1959, pp. 3-4.)
