Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Will He Come Back?"

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 29: Elder Marion D. Hanks, President Keith E. Garner, and I boarded Cathay Pacific Airways for Saigon. We flew in a great circle that took us over Vietnam and into Pnom-Penh, the capital of Cambodia. From here we flew over the delta country of the Mekong River. It is a beautiful part of the earth, rich and fruitful—and terribly dangerous for those who would seek to rid it of the Viet Cong who rule it.

We were met at Tan San Nhut Airport by Major Allen C. Rozsa and his associates. He is president of the South Vietnam Zone of the Southern Far East Mission. Without leaving the front door of the airport, we were asked to sign a waiver releasing the government from all liability for our safety and welfare. We then boarded an old C-47, a "Gooney Bird," furnished by the Air Force. The sergeant in the cabin didn't bother to close the door; it was too hot. He said we needed the breeze. The plane climbed into the sky and we were off for a 3 1/2 hour ride to DaNang.

Some wag had painted on the rest room door at the rear, "The Guts Airline. God will understand the true situation." Camouflage coveralls and survival gear hung on a rack in the rear. We wouldn't have known how to use them had we been asked to. We were flying over Viet Cong territory. That seemed all right until the port motor began to lag and cough, and the propeller was feathered. Strange thoughts fill your mind under such circumstances. Our spirits lifted when the motor caught hold again.

C-rations afforded a good lunch as we flew over the towns and villages of South Vietnam, little pockets held by the Americans and Vietnamese amid the vast dark jungle controlled by the Cong.

As we approached DaNang, Major Rozsa said, "If we're going to get shot, this is where it will happen, as we come in for a landing." We made it all right, but as we were climbing out of the plane, an admiral landed in a similar aircraft. He had five helicopters flying shotgun about him, with marines fingering machine guns.

We were driven to the Marine base chapel where we met with our brethren. I shall never forget that picture or that meeting. What a sight they were! What a wonderful group, these young brethren of ours. We loved them the minute we looked into their eyes. Most of them looked so young. They were dressed in battle fatigues, with mud on their boots. They had come down from the Rock Pile and Marble Mountain along the DMZ, where the fighting has been rough and vicious, and where the smell of cordite and death are in the air. As they entered the chapel, they stacked their M-16 automatic rifles along the two back rows and sat down, many of them with a pistol on the right side and a knife on the left side.

This was district conference in the Northern District of South Vietnam. The program of the services contained the names of three who had been recently killed.

After the meeting we ate from a chow line and then stood about and talked for hours. It was an experience both wonderful and depressing to be so close to these good young men, men who hold and honor the priesthood, men who are valiantly doing their duty as citizens of this country, but who would rather be doing something else. I thought as I talked with them that they ought to be in school, at the BYU or Ricks or at any one of a score of other good institutions, acquiring creative and challenging skills rather than walking fearsome patrols in the dark of the Asian jungle where death comes so quickly and quietly and definitely. These are the kids who ran and laughed and played ball back home, who drove the highways in old jalopies, who danced with lovely girls at the gold and green balls, who administered the sacrament on Sunday. These are boys who come from good homes where the linen is clean and showers are hot, who now sweat night and day in this troubled land, who are shot at and who shoot back, who have seen gaping wounds in a buddy's chest and who have killed those who would have killed them. And I thought of the terrible inequality of sacrifice involved in the cause of human liberty.

There are no hotels in DaNang, where the population is growing as more and more men pour in. We were offered beds in an unfinished hospital, but we could not sleep. Every few minutes an F-4 Phantom jet roared overhead northbound, traveling at supersonic speed. With each one, the thought crossed my mind, "Will he come back?"

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Asian Diary, January 10, 1967, p. 5-7.)
