Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER JOHN LONGDEN

Biographical Sketch

Elder John Longden, age 70, died August 30, 1969 at his home in Salt Lake City, Utah, after a brief illness.

Elder Longden was a native of Oldham, Lancashire, England. He was born to Thomas J. and Lezzetta Taylor Longden on November 4, 1898. His family came to Salt Lake City in 1909 as converts to the Church, when he was only ten.

He was educated in Salt Lake City schools and attended the University of Utah.

Elder Longden joined Utah Power and Light Company in the sales department following his formal education. He left in 1934 to join Westinghouse Electrical Supply and for ten years was manager of the Salt Lake office. When he was called to be a General Authority, the firm named him special representative because of the press of his Church duties. In 1952 he was named district manager of the National Electric Products Corporation, a manufacturing and distributing firm.

His whole life had been devoted to the Church and to the work. He had been an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve since 1951, and was sustained at the semi-annual General Conference in October of that year. His other Church positions have included services as a missionary in the Central States, assistant superintendent of the YMMIA in the Salt Lake Stake, bishop, high council member, assistant servicemen's coordinator for the Church, and General Church Welfare Committee member.

He was a vice president of the Salt Lake Rotary Club; president of the Bonneville Knife and Fork Club, and a member of the Salt Lake Country Club and Alta Club. He served a term as president of the Intermountain Electrical Association and was a director of the Salt Lake Red Cross and a vice president of the Community Chest. He had also been a member of the Salt Lake City Chamber of Commerce for many years.

He was well known for his beautiful singing voice and gave freely of his talent at Church services, funerals and other gatherings.

He married LaRue Carr in 1924 in the Salt Lake Temple. The couple had three daughters.
