Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Tried to Speak English, and I Could Not"

I should like to give you in conclusion an experience that came to my attention two days after the passing of that great prophet of God, Elder Matthew Cowley. It was given to me by a man who some thirty-five or forty years before had been district president of Brother Cowley down in New Zealand as he labored with those Maori people. He had only been out for two and one half months, and a district missionary conference was called. In one of those sessions, the morning session, Brother Cowley had an opportunity to speak. As the story has been related to me, he spoke for fifteen or twenty minutes in a fluent Maori tongue, so much so that it amazed the older Maori people in the congregation.

After the meeting, the district president and Brother Cowley were walking to a Maori home to partake of food between the sessions, and the district president said, "How did you do it?" Brother Cowley asked, "Do what?" "How did you master this Maori language in such a short time?" A young missionary, seventeen years of age!

Brother Cowley said, "When I came here I did not know one word of Maori, but I decided I was going to learn twenty new words each day, and I did. But when I came to put them together, I was not successful." By this time they were passing a cornfield, and Brother Cowley said, "You see that cornfield? I went out there, and I talked to the Lord; but before that, I fasted. And that night I tried again, but the words just didn't seem to gel. So the next day I fasted again, and I went out into the cornfield, and I talked to the Lord. I told the Lord that I believed his Church and kingdom had been established upon the earth; that men had the authority to proclaim the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ which pertained to the salvation and exaltation of our Heavenly Father's children. I told him that I had been called by this same authority to fill a mission, but if this was not the mission in which I was to serve, to please make it known because I wanted to serve where I could accomplish the greatest amount of good."

That was the spirit of Brother Cowley. He said, "The next morning, as we knelt in family prayer in that Maori home, I was called upon by the head of the household to be mouth. I tried to speak in English, and I could not. When I tried in Maori, the words just flowed forth, and I knew that God had answered my prayer and this was where I should serve." A young lad seventeen years of age!

(Conference Report, April 4, 1955, p. 59.)
