Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Clarence Romeral, a Mormon Boy"

Some time ago, I heard the story of a young man who had an inventive mind. He had graduated from college and desired to get into the laboratory of one of the big companies in the United States which spend millions of dollars in research as our good friend here. Brother Harvey Fletcher, can confirm. This young man saw an advertisement in the newspaper and applied. He was one of twenty-seven. On the application blank it asked, "To which church do you belong?" That is quite a serious question. He thought to himself: "If I put down The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, they probably won't know which church it is. If I put down the Mormon Church, that will remove all doubt and probably the chances of getting this position will go out the window." Satan's whisperings. The young man thought: "What should I do?" So he did the intelligent thing. He deliberated. He prayed to God through Jesus Christ, for he knew that that channel of communication was open. He allowed the power of good to influence him and wrote on that application blank, "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," and in parenthesis so he would not be misunderstood, "commonly called the Mormon Church." He succumbed to the whisperings of the still small voice. He was the first one of twenty-seven applying for the position to be called in by the personnel manager. As he sat across the desk from the personnel manager, this gentleman said that he knew something about our Church and that is why he was called in. Some skeptics may say, "Oh well, that is 'happenstance,' it would have happened anyway." But you could not make this young man believe that.

The manager said, "I see you are a Mormon."

"Yes, sir, I am."

"Do you pay your tithing?"

"Yes, sir, I do."

"Do you keep the laws of chastity; are you morally clean?"

"Yes, sir, I am."

"Do you keep the Word of Wisdom?"

"Yes, sir, I do."

Isn't that wonderful, marvelous? I do not have to relate what would have happened otherwise—loss of faith in the individual and in the Church. He must have answered the other questions correctly to the satisfaction of the personnel manager because he was given the position. He was hired to work in the laboratories of the great Poloroid Company of the United States. This young Mormon boy is responsible for bringing out a camera that will take a picture and develop that picture within a minute or a few seconds thereof. Today many times a day this camera is demonstrated on television. Clarence Romeral, a Mormon boy, who had defined the two powers, the power of Jesus Christ and the power of Satan, and had taken advantage of the power of Jesus Christ. Today he is still an active Church member.

(Brigham Young University Miscellaneous Speeches, "Two Powers," December 10, 1957, p. 6.)
