Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Going to New Zealand"

I have had many rich experiences in the last few months as I have traveled in the South Pacific. In Suva, Fiji, last December, there was a group of sixty-nine who were returning from the temple at Hamilton, New Zealand—husbands and wives having been sealed for the first time, children having been sealed to them. As I visited with the leader of the group, I learned how they had traveled on boats—not luxury liners. They had sold their possessions in the first place, to raise funds to go down to the temple. They did not have lovely cabins. They had to take their food with them; they did not eat at the tables. Their leader was proud to tell me, "The captain likes our people so well that he gives us the best place on the deck." They had faith, recognizing the commandments of the Lord and applying them in their lives. Then, as we asked them, "What are you going to do? You have given up your work. You have sold your possessions. What are you going to do now when you get back home?" they replied, "The Lord will prepare a way, as we are willing to work. We have accomplished a great mission."

Then I reflect on the city of Perth, Australia, last Christmas Eve. (At 106 degrees, I tell you, it was rather warm.) We went to the railroad station to see another group of twenty-five or thirty, likewise going to New Zealand to perform temple ordinances for their families. I think of one little family—a young husband and wife with five children, sitting there on the hard seats, not cushioned chairs. There they use little old cars such as we discarded fifty years ago in this country (unless you go back into the hinterlands somewhere—I have not seen any for a long while). Then I noticed on the back platform (this little iron railing open, as they used to be here)—hanging there was a canvas bucket. I said, "What is that?" It was called to my attention that that was their culinary water to use on the trip, as, again, they were taking their food with them. They would have to change four different times because there were four states that they had to go through in Australia, and the tracks of the railroads in each state are of different gauge so they would have to change to other trains. Talk about the need of brotherhood! Yes, I witnessed and visualized all this. But I saw reflected from their faces the joy and the satisfaction and the anticipation that they were going to accomplish the commandments of the Lord. Oh, I am so grateful, as I travel around the Church, to see their faith.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Lord is My Shepherd I Shall Not Want," November 1, 1961, pp. 6-7.
