Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"A Little for Good Measure"

I don't suppose I would be standing here tonight were it not for the noble teachings and example of that father of mine. I grew up on a farm. When everything went dead wrong, as it did at times, I remember a hayrack we were trying to get the gears on; it tumbled down, and the worst swear word I ever heard my father use in all the years on that farm was "oh, fiddlesticks!" And I think the Lord will forgive him for that.

I can remember hoeing weeds out of the old corn patch—acres of it—when father would take rows and we would take rows, and he would keep calling to us and asking us Church questions: "What is the gospel?" I can remember that question when I was just a little fellow, my daddy asking it as we were hoeing the corn. You can't get away from things like that.

At the end of the year, he would gather us three boys around the table in the dining room. We each had a notebook, and we would figure out the tithing. You know, on the farm it isn't like getting a monthly check. We figured what the chickens had produced, and what the garden had produced; and if a calf was a year older than at the beginning of the year, than we would figure its growth and the added value. And then after we had gotten everything all figured out, Father would always throw in a little for good measure, so that we would be sure that we had paid a full tithing.

Do you suppose that any one of those three boys who sat around that table year after year with that kind of leadership would have ever ended a year without being a full tithe payer? Well, you know where I am. I am the middle one of the three; both of the others have been mission presidents; they are both patriarchs today. I tell you, there is no substitute for what you get from a father who sets the example. You know the little story that "he stepped in his father's footsteps all the way."

(Conference Report, September 30, 1967, pp. 110-11.)
