Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"The Lord's Blueprint"

By appointment from the First Presidency and at their request, I was privileged to meet with a group of ministers here in Salt Lake City who were holding a convention. They gave me two hours and a half to explain Mormonism to them.

I explained the great organization of the Church and how it came into existence and bore my testimony of its divinity. I thought of the Apostle Paul—if he had the scriptures, and was with us today, and had to convince publicly the people out of the scriptures—how much more he would have to explain to them pertaining to this latter-day gospel dispensation and the second coming of the Redeemer of the world than he had in his day.

I used this illustration with these ministers. I told them that when we built the Los Angeles Temple I was still the Presiding Bishop, and we took the plans and showed them to the First Presidency one day. And we had eighty-five pages about four feet long and two-and-a-half feet wide, and we did not have the plans complete for the electrical work or the plumbing, and yet there were eighty-five pages. Now I said to these men, "You could take those plans and go all over this world and try to fit them to any other building in the world, and you could not fit them. There is only one building that those plans will fit and that is the Los Angeles Temple." I said, "Of course, you could find heating plants, and light fixtures, and plumbing, and cement in other buildings just as you do in that temple, but you could not find a building that would fit perfectly those plans."

Then I took the Bible and I said, "The Prophet Isaiah tells us that the Lord declared his work from the beginning and he said that the 'grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall stand for ever.' (Isa. 40:8.) And as I see it, the Bible is the Lord's blueprint of his work from the beginning until the final winding up scene."

Of course, there is not time for me to go into details here today, but I took scripture after scripture that appeared in the Bible, and I said to these men, "Do you know anywhere in all the world where you can find a fulfilment of that promise? Take for instance Peter's statement to those who crucified the Christ that before his coming the heavens were to receive him, until the restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. (See Acts 3:19-21.) Do any of you know anywhere in this world, in the history of the world or the history of the people or churches, where that promise has had its fulfilment? And yet people look for his coming." But if Peter was a prophet of God, Christ cannot come until there is a restitution, and I had explained already to them the fulfilment of that promised restitution of all things.

Then I took the coming of the angel that John saw, flying in the midst of heaven. I said, "Do you know anywhere in the world that there is a record of the coming of an angel with the everlasting gospel to be preached in all the world, to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, since the time that prophet's promise was made?"

Then I went through many other of the passages of scripture pertaining to our day. Like the coming of Elijah the prophet, and so forth, and then I said this to them: "Now, that Bible is just as much the Lord's blueprint of what he intended to do in this world as the blueprint for that temple was the plan by which that building was to be built."

I said, "It is true that you can find some of the things that are in the Bible in the churches, that is why we have hundreds of them, but you cannot find any other church in all the world that has all of the things that the Lord has promised."

(Conference Report, April, 1960, pp. 104-105.)
