Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Am Afraid to Go Home"

When I was president of the Netherlands Mission I went to release one of the missionaries. I always had a little fatherly talk with them before they left. This one missionary said, "President Richards, I am afraid to go home."

I said, "Why are you afraid to go home?"

"Well," he said, "I had companions at home that were not what they should have been, and I am afraid that I might fall back into their company when I get home and drift away from what I have learned here in the mission field."

I said to this young man, "If you will make me a promise, I'll make you a promise. If you will promise me that you will never let a day start that you won't first get down on your knees and pray in the spirit that you have prayed here in the mission field and ask God to preserve you during the day from evil and to prosper you, and you will never let a day close that you do not get down on your knees and thank the Lord for having preserved you that day—you only live one day at a time; like Jesus said, 'Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof' (Matthew 6:34)—the Lord will give you the strength for each day if you just keep close to him."

He made the promise. I did not see him for several years. (This was during World War I.) I returned home and was in business. My desk was some distance from the front door in my office. One day the front door opened and a young man in uniform walked in with a smile all over his face. I got up and walked toward him, and as we took each other by the hand, he did not say, "How are you, President Richards?" He said, "President Richards, do you remember what you made me promise you before I left the mission field?"

I said, "I certainly do, and you have kept your promise. I can see it all over your face."

He said, "I am just as clean as I was the day I left you."

Now, brothers and sisters, there is help, an unseen power that we can get that will help us; and we need that help.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "How You Can Best Honor Your Parents," October 29, 1963, p. 7.)
