Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"You Can't Get Away from Love Like That"

I left home as a young man and came to the city here to board and go to school; and when my father came to town and stayed with me, he would put his arms around me and say, "My boy, I never thought I could trust one of my boys in the big city." (Of course, it wasn't as big then as it is now.) Then he said, "I would trust you anywhere I would go myself." It was just like putting a steel rod up my backbone. How could I let my father down?

One of my boyfriends said, "If I didn't believe there was a God and I didn't believe that some day I would have to answer for what I do here on this earth, I couldn't break the commandments because of the respect I have for my father."

Just another little thing about how Daddy trained us boys. You know, in the country town where I was raised, the greatest sport the boys had was to go buggy-riding in the afternoon on Sunday with their girls. Of course, my brother and I could never go buggy-riding because Father was a member of the stake presidency, and we had to set an example. One day we went to Father, and we said, "Now, man to man, Father, why can't we buggy-ride on Sunday like these other boys?" Father didn't want to deprive us of anything, but he said, "Now, I'll tell you boys what you can do. You can leave one of the best teams home any day of the week you want, and you can quit work at noon and come home and clean up, and then you can go buggy-riding." Wouldn't we have looked pretty buggy-riding around in the middle of the week when no one else was buggy-riding? Can you imagine our asking the girls to go buggy-riding with us under those conditions?

Well, these are just some of the little things that tied us together to that Daddy of ours. I walked into my father's apartment when he was just about ninety (he died just a few months before he would have been 90), and as I opened the door, he stood up and walked toward me and took me in his arms and hugged me and kissed me. He always did that. I received letters from all over the Church when I kissed Father here on the stand once after I became the Presiding Bishop. Taking me in his arms and calling me by my kid name, he said, "Grandy my boy, I love you." You can't get away from love like that, can you?

Now, that is what it takes to make families in which the children will all be married in the temple, and in which they will all serve the Lord. I thank God with all my heart that all of mine are active in the Church and holding positions of responsibility, because Mother and I have tried to set the example. And you have to do it. You can't go golfing on Sunday and then expect your children to go to church and expect to raise them in the Church. You have to go with them. You have to set them the example.

(Conference Report, September 30, 1967, pp. 111-12.)
