Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Our Hearts Have Been Comforted"

Here a few years ago, seven years ago to be exact, my wife and I laid away in the grave our oldest son, who was nearly sixteen years of age—the greatest sorrow that has ever come into our lives. We had four daughters before he was born. Less than a year prior to that we took him and his younger brother, only sixteen months difference in their ages, into the office of the patriarch of this Church, Brother Hyrum G. Smith, and he gave them each a blessing.

Now I ask you, suppose the patriarch had known that one of these boys was to die within a year, could he not promise him anything? What would it have meant to the eldest son, had he walked out of the Patriarch's office with no promise and no blessing, and the younger son had all the promises and the blessings? For the older boy truly loved God and kept his commandments. When that boy passed away, and I met with my counselors—for I was then president of the Hollywood Stake—I said to them: "There is just one thing. If God could only give us to understand that boy's blessing." I said, "I wish you brethren would help us, if you can, so that Sister Richards and I might be comforted."

A few nights after that I took Sister Richards for a ride. We asked the younger boy if he would like to go with us. He said, "No. I think I will stay home." The next morning was Sunday morning. He came in and crawled up on his mother's bed, holding in his hand the two patriarchal blessings. "Mother, while you were out riding last night I read these blessings." He said, "You see, you haven't understood them."

I think just for the matter of getting it clearly before you I shall read a few words from the two blessings, as they were given by the patriarch. In the oldest boy's blessing, the one who passed away, the patriarch said:

For it will be thy privilege to bear the holy Priesthood and to go even among strangers and in strange lands, in defense of truth and righteousness.

This we could not understand. And to the younger boy he said:

For thou shalt bear the holy Priesthood in defense of righteousness and truth, both at home and abroad.

The boy said: "You see, Mother, I am going to labor at home and abroad, but," he said, "LeGrand was to go to strange lands and strange people;" and he said, "They are not on this earth. We know all the lands of this earth and we know all the people that are here."

And to the oldest boy the Patrarich said: "And in due time thy home shall be a fit abode for the spirits of thy loved ones;" and to the younger boy he said: "Thou shalt enjoy the comforts of a happy home and the blessings of honored fatherhood, for thou shalt see thy posterity grow up around thee, to honor thee in the same kind of way in which thou hast honored thy parents." Now, reverse the blessings and give the younger boy's blessing to the older boy, and there would be no explanation. He said, "Mother, you see, LeGrand's home is to be the home of the spirits of his loved ones, and my home is to be here on this earth, where I will see my children grow up around me."

You cannot tell me that God, the Eternal Father, did not give that fourteen-year-old boy the inspiration and revelation to understand these blessings. And our hearts have been comforted.

(Conference Reports, October, 1939, p. 24.)
