Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"The Entire Maori Battalion"

Now I have something very personal to tell you in the time remaining, and I hope that I can do it in just a few minutes. I want to tell you again that the Lord moves in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform. He protects his people and he watches out for them. He is mindful of his own.

As I was being set apart for my mission about twenty-four years ago, Brother Rulon S. Wells, then of the First Council of the Seventy, laid his hands upon my head and said, "I bless you, Brother Simpson, with a knowledge of the language of the people amongst whom you will labor," and I was grateful for this blessing. So I went to New Zealand feeling elated that I was going to learn a foreign language and that this blessing had been given to me, and no one could take it away from me.

But as I got to New Zealand I did not do very much about learning that language. After about three or four weeks had gone by with not much activity on the Maori language, I had a dream. I would like to tell you about this dream. To me it is very real. To me it is one of the significant events of my life. In this dream I had returned home from my mission. I was getting off the boat down in Los Angeles harbor from whence I had left, and there were my bishop, my stake president, my mother and dad, and all of my friends. As I came down the gangplank of the boat they all started talking to me in Maori, every one of them—my mother, my father, my bishop—all talking in Maori, and I could not understand a word they were saying. I was so embarrassed. I was humiliated. I thought to myself, "This is terrible. How am I going to get out of it?" And I started making excuses. Right then I woke up, and I sat straight up in bed, and two thoughts came forcefully to my mind. The first message: "You will have to do something about learning this language. The Lord has given you a blessing, but, you are going to have to do something about it yourself!" Message number two: "You are going to need this language when you get through with your mission." These thoughts kept running through my mind all through that day. Arrangements were made and we had study time alloted each day to learn the Maori language. The Lord blessed me and I was able to bear testimony in the language after a short time.

Then, to make a long story short, the mission was finished, I came home and came into Los Angeles harbor. They were all there to meet me, but they all spoke English. Not one of them spoke Maori to me.

World War II had broken out. All of the missionaries had been called home. I thought, "Now if I am called into the Army, I am just sure that I will be sent right back down to New Zealand where I can also help President Cowley. Maybe the Lord will send me down there to help him with the mission activity between military assignments."

I went into the Air Force, and sure enough, when it came time for overseas processing, I was sent to San Francisco. All the Pacific processing was done here. I thought to myself, "Here I go right back to New Zealand." However, about two days before the ship was to sail with all of our groups consisting of several hundred men, they took out about five of us—that is all, just five—and sent us all the way back to the East Coast for shipment across the Atlantic. I thought to myself, "Well, I guess I can always preach to the Maori spirits in prison when I get on the other side!"

We joined a convoy and went across the Atlantic Ocean. I saw the Rock of Gibraltar go by, and finally the ship stopped in Egypt. We got off the ship in Egypt and we were taken to our American air base. There was a very small Air Force group in Cairo, Egypt. Of all the Air Force units throughout the world, this was one of the very smallest groups. Well, if you know anything about New Zealand, here is Cairo, Egypt, and here is New Zealand. You cannot get further away from New Zealand than Cairo, Egypt. I thought, "Well, I don't know what the Lord has in mind, but I'll just do the best I can, and I am sure that everything will work out all right."

I want to tell you young people that not more than forty-eight hours had gone by when I found that right there within the very shadows of this American air base was the entire Maori battalion—the entire Maori battalion was stationed there! This was their overseas base for processing, for all of their fighting in North Africa and Italy. For nearly two years I had the privilege of being there and meeting each Sunday with these Maori boys, bearing testimony with them in their own tongue, organizing them into small groups as they went up into the front lines in order that they might have their sacrament meetings and do the thing that they needed to do. They needed me. I needed them. I want to tell you that the Lord had a hand in writing military orders because of all of the places in this world that Air Force men were being sent, very few were sent to Cairo, Egypt. Why one of them should be selected who knew a few words of Maori and who had an abiding love for the Maori people only the Lord can answer.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "The Lord Is Mindful of His Own," April 4, 1962, pp. 9-10.)
