Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Bishop, Let's Ride to the Top of the Mountain"

Three or four years ago I stood before a large congregation in the little village of Laketown, Utah, on the shores of the great Bear Lake. The occasion was a funeral service for my friend, Hyrum Nebeker, a good citizen and a pioneer of that locality.

His daughter, Phoebe, had called me to advise about his funeral service. She told me that her father had selected some of the songs to be sung during the service. She didn't like them because she thought they were inappropriate. She indicated that they were not quite in harmony with the wishes of the family.

"What were the songs?" I inquired.

She said, "Well, the first song is 'We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet.'"

When he had named the song she had said, "Father, that isn't a funeral hymn. Can't you think of something better? Something more suitable?"

He had said, "Phoebe, this is my funeral, and I am going to have something to say about it."

"All right, Father, we'll put it down."

Then he had hesitated a minute, and he said, "I'm sure you won't like the next one. I am almost afraid to mention it."

"Go ahead, Father."

Then he said, "I want them to sing a cowboy song."

"Which one, Father?"

"Oh, give me a home where the buffalo roam,

Where the deer and the antelope play,

Where seldom is heard a discouraging word,

And the skies are not cloudy all day."

"Oh, Father! You'll have to change your mind about that! I don't think the choir will sing it."

"Well, I don't want the choir to sing it."

"Who will sing it?"

"You know those four young men up there from Bloomington who sing as a quartet? Well," he said, "they promised me a long time ago that they would attend my funeral service and sing that song. It might interest you to know that I have already made arrangements with the bishop. Now, the only reason I am telling you is to remind them. I don't want them to forget it."

I said to Phoebe, "They are good songs. They are appropriate songs all the way through. Why, you know when we sing that old hymn 'We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet' that we are calling attention to something that is very distinctive in our Church. Prophets—we believe in prophets. We believe from them came the light by which our faith has been guided in the past. These men called prophets were great men. They proclaimed their beliefs and admonished their people under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. And right now, it seems to me that the request for this grand old hymn coming from a pioneer like Hyrum Nebeker is most appropriate. And I think you will find that it will be fully enjoyed."

"But," said Phoebe, "he wants everyone to sing it. He has taken the choir and the audience and requested they sing it together."

I said, "That's all right."

"Then he was very particular to say that he wanted the mourners on the front bench to sing it. 'Now,' he said, 'You can't fool me. I'm eighty-nine. You are not mourning over me. You are sitting there because, perhaps, it is your duty. But I know you don't feel sorry, and I want you to know right now that I have reached the stage in life where I'm finished so far as the earthly cares and responsibilities are concerned, and I want to go. If I should remain I'd be more unhappy than if I went.'"

Well, I waited for two days for the funeral service, and then we gathered up in the little chapel in Laketown. The place was filled. There were fully as many on the outside as on the inside.

Bishop Weston arose, and he said, "It is the wish of Hyrum Nebeker that we all join in singing 'We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet.' That means he would like to have everyone here join in singing—the mourners on the front seats, the choir back of me, and this great audience on the inside and on the outside."

They sang the song. I want to say to you I have never heard that song sung with more feeling and gusto than on that occasion. Everybody sang. I looked down over the audience. I saw six or seven young men in uniform sitting near the back. I turned to my friend, Preston Nibley, who sat next to me, and I said, "Preston, those fellows will never sing 'We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet.'"

He said, "Oh, yes, they will. You know they have flown all the way from the Philippine Islands to be present here at the funeral service of Hyrum Nebeker."

Certainly a wonderful tribute.

Then someone gave a sermon. It was an appropriate sermon. It extolled the character of Hyrum Nebeker. The speaker told what he had done, and that he had been faithful to his trust, that he had been a successful cattleman, that in very deed, he was a cowboy in his own right.

And then came the announcement of the second song. The bishop arose. "The next song will be sung by a quartet from Bloomington, Idaho—four young men about twenty. They were contacted by Brother Nebeker months ago, and they promised to sing his favorite cowboy song."

They sang it, and I am here to say to you it was a proper and fitting tribute to this cowboy who had been brought up on the plains, who knew every foot of the country, who had herded the cattle in the summer and who had rounded them up in winter, and who had taken care of them in all kinds of weather. Hyrum Nebeker was a cowboy, and he did his work well. When all of his brothers left the cold and bleak Bear Lake country, Hyrum Nebeker remained and helped in the colonization of that land. Now, great people have come out of Bear Lake. I am sure in this audience there are many. Some of the great leaders in the state of Utah and Idaho began their lives in and around the Bear Lake.

So the funeral was finished. Hyrum Nebeker had made a great contribution, even to his relatives and friends. And when he left, he also left his testimony. He said that death is not the end. It is only the beginning. And he said if we pass away tomorrow, we will begin where we left off today. Someone speaking quoted his words of admonition to his family, delivered at a great family reunion held up there in the country of Bear Lake.

Then Bishop Weston continued. He said, "In the early spring when the snows were receding from the mountains on the east, Hyrum Nebeker would get on his fine saddle horse. He'd ride down to my home. He'd call at the top of his voice, 'Bishop, let's ride to the top of the mountain.'

"'When?'

"'Right now!'

"'Wait till I get my horse and saddle.'"

And soon they were together, riding up toward the mountain on the east. When they reached the summit of that mountain, Hyrum Nebeker turned his horse around. He took off his hat and he sat gazing over the stretches of prairie land—to the north, to the east, to the west. And then he turned to Bishop Weston and said, "Bishop, I feel singularly close to God when I come up here. I ride up frequently, and whenever I do, I pray. I think about my past, and I think about the future, and I try to make adjustments for everything that is apt to come. What do you say, Bishop, if we have a word of prayer?"

Both men on their horses prayed. They prayed for strength and enlightenment to guide them through their journey of life.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "A Funeral and a Mountain Top," November 1, 1966, p. 2-5.)
