Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"We Love to Sing"

During the dark days of World War II I drove my car one day from Salt Lake City to Ogden. As I reached the outskirts of Salt Lake City, I noticed a soldier boy standing at the roadside. I assumed he wanted a ride, although he gave no indication.

I stopped the car and said, "Want a ride?"

He said, "Yes, sir."

"Hop in."

Soon he was sitting at my side. I tried my best to engage him in conversation, but he was very quiet and taciturn. He had little to say. When I asked him a question, the answer was either, "Yes," or "No." Finally, I looked over his shoulder and saw in the lapel of his coat one of those colorful ribbons. I naturally assumed he had been overseas, although he was just a youngster—not very tall, a little fellow.

I asked him, "Been overseas?"

He said, "No, sir."

I expected him to comment, but he said nothing. Then I said, "Why the insignia?"

"Oh," he answered, "I got that for behaving myself—for doing something which ordinarily I did not have to do in the Army."

I waited a minute and asked, "What do you mean, by behaving yourself?"

He said, "Oh, just being decent."

"Do you smoke?"

He said, "No, sir."

"Do you get drunk?"

"No, sir."

"Are you a Mormon?"

"Yes, sir, and I am proud of it."

Well, I felt a little closer to the young man when he said that, so I turned to him and said, "What in the world did you do in the Army which you did not have to do?"

He said, "I led a group in singing."

I looked him over and said, "You don't say!"

"Yes, sir."

"How many?"

"Three hundred."

I turned to him again and asked, "Where do you hold your rehearsals?"

"In a churchhouse, out in Riverside, California."

"What do you sing?"

"Oh," he said, "we have a booklet and we sing every song in it."

"You do?"

"Yes, sir, we do. Every song."

And I said, "Do you ever sing any Mormon songs?"

"Sure."

"Do they all sing them?"

"Every one."

"What Mormon songs do you sing?"

He thought for a minute. He said, "Did you ever hear that Mormon hymn, 'O My Father, Thou That Dwellest'?"

"I've heard it a couple of times."

"We sing that."

"Well," I said, "that's pretty good. Do they all join in singing that great hymn?"

"Oh, yes, they all sing. They love to sing." He was loosened up a bit and began to talk a little more freely. "You know, yesterday when we were meeting out there in Riverside, we were just about to dismiss the boys (as he called them). Just then the commanding officer walked in and stood way down at the back.

"As the boys were about to leave, he shouted to me, 'Do you know that Mormon hymn, "O My Father, Thou That Dwellest"?'

"I answered, 'Yes, we know it.'

"'Let's have it.'

"We got them all together again and we began to sing. Then the officer walked up to the front, took a position at my side, and put his arm over my shoulder. He reached for the booklet, and as we finished the song he said, 'Wait a minute, men. I want to tell you something. You have just sung one of the greatest hymns in the world. I am going to ask you to do something about it. I want you to know it so well that when you get overseas—which you will—and perhaps on the field of battle, you can sing that song and think about it, because it is one of the finest philosophies in the world.'

"Then he took the booklet and he read from the hymn:

For a wise and glorious purpose

Thou hast placed me here on earth,

And withheld the recollection

Of my former friends and birth.

Yet ofttimes a secret something

Whispered, "You're a stranger here;"

And I felt that I had wandered

From a more exalted sphere.

Then the young man turned to me. "You know, he read the last verse too."

When I leave this frail existence,

When I lay this mortal by,

Father, Mother, may I meet you

In your royal courts on high?

Then, at length, when I've completed

All you sent me forth to do,

With your mutual approbation

Let me come and dwell with you.

My friends, can you think of a finer message for soldier boys who are on the battlefield and who are facing the issue of life and death? Don't you think that message is most reassuring and comforting? And what do you think of that boy who was leading three hundred men like himself in singing? You know, he is a product of Mormonism. He was letting his light shine before men. He was doing the thing which he wanted to do.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Let Your Light So Shine," January 24, 1962, pp. 2-5.)
