Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"Have a Good Time"

I have told this little story so many times, but I want to tell it to you today. As President Wilkinson said, we have five daughters. Four of them were courting at one time, or being courted. I do not know which it was. One of those girls had a girl friend in the house this evening and two young men called for them. I sat and talked to them. I just love young people. I really love young people. I have great confidence in them. I have great faith in them. I was so happy that while we were raising those five daughters I never lost faith or confidence in those girls. That is the way I feel about the young people today. There are a few who have been hurt—not because they wanted to, but because they had not decided to make up their minds what they wanted to do and set about to discipline themselves to accomplish it. That is all.

Anyway, while we were sitting there talking, and just before they were ready to leave, I said, "Now, have a good time." Then just as they were going out of the door I went over to my daughter and said, "Now, behave yourself."

She said, "Well, Dad, make up your mind."

Then I said, so they could all hear me, "Kids, have a good time tonight. Have the best time you have ever had. But have the kind of time that tomorrow night, next week, next year, or ten years from now you will still think you had a good time."

That is what I would like to leave for you to think about. Have a good time. That was the slogan we had in the West European Mission: "Have a good time." I would like you all to have a good time.

I said this to a group of missionaries in Germany one day. After the meeting, one of the missionaries came up to me and he said, "President Tanner, I don't think that it is quite fair for you to tell the missionaries to have a good time. You know, the only way they can have a good time is to do their work."

I said, "Well, go have a good time."

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Choose Ye This Day Whom Ye Will Serve," March 27, 1963, pp. 9-10.)
