Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"I Am Going to Report to the Lord Tonight"

I recall an experience while I was a deacon. I had a sister who had spinal meningitis, and a very severe case of it. We had been taught to pray. I remember so well how my father used to get us together in family prayer and how he would talk to the Lord. He just didn't say a few words and off we would go to the fields. He kneeled down with us and he talked to the Lord as one man would talk to another. He told the Lord about some of our weaknesses and some of our problems where we had failed, and he apologized for us. [He would say:] "Eldon didn't do exactly what he should have done today. We are sorry that he made this mistake. But we feel sure, Heavenly Father, that if you will forgive him, he will determine to do what is right. Let your Spirit be with him and bless him that he can be the kind of boy we would like to have."

My, that was a help! He used to say in the morning, "Let your blessings attend us as we go about our duties that we may do what is right and [we will] return tonight to make a report." I used to think of that: "I am going to report to the Lord tonight." It helped me materially in the kind of life I lived during the day. . . .

I started to tell about my sister who had spinal meningitis, and she was very sick. I remember one night as we (the family) knelt in prayer Father said to me, "My boy, you hold the priesthood now; I wish you would lead in prayer, and remember Lillie." She had been, and was at the time, very, very sick. They didn't know whether she would live or not. I remember as I kneeled down in prayer with the family and was mouth in that prayer the feeling that came to me, and the understanding, that she would be made well. My sister began to get better from that day forward. Today she is the mother of three children and grandmother of five children; she is working and enjoying good health.

(In His Footsteps Today, [Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1969], pp. 82-83.)
