Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

"That Is What I Am Saying to You Today, Mr. Armstrong"

One other experience that I had has meant a great deal to me, and I think it probably exemplifies what our missionary work is doing throughout the world. I had the privilege of meeting a very fine young man who had been directing plays in the city of London. One of his plays ran for nearly two years. But he had left this play business and had decided to go into the country and live and began to raise race horses. There is a person right here in your state who wanted to buy one of those race horses. He knew me and I knew him well and he asked me to go and see this horse and see if I would pass on it. He chose a poor judge but I accepted the assignment anyway. I had the opportunity of traveling with this man for a period of two and one-half hours. During that time, for some reason or other, we began to talk about the Church. I asked him what he knew about the gospel and he told me. I asked him if he would like to know more and he said, "Yes." And he knew something about it. I told him about Joseph Smith's experience and the Book of Mormon—that it is the record of God's dealings with the ancient people on the American continent—how he obtained that Book of Mormon, and how it was translated.

When we returned home I said, "Would you like to have a copy of 'Joseph Smith's Own Story,' in his own words?"

He said, "I would."

I said, "Would you like to have a copy of the Book of Mormon? I will be happy to give you one if you will read it."

He said, "I'll read it."

A few days later I received a letter from him saying, "I have read the Joseph Smith story. I found it very refreshing and interesting and I believe it. I am now with Mosiah in the Book of Mormon."

I had the opportunity of meeting him later. He lived in an area where we had no missionaries when I first met him. We spent some time with him. My youngest daughter was with me at this time. She was visiting there. I arranged it so that she told him about the gospel. I thought that he would listen to her better than he would to the old man. Getting it from her would probably mean more to him.

Then later Sister Tanner and I invited him and his wife and two children to have dinner with us. They are very fine refined young people. As we finished dinner, we sat and talked about the Church. He and I went into the office to talk for a little while. He said, "You know, because of the things you have taught me, the way you people live, your belief in God, I would like to have my children raised in your church. How is the best way to arrange it?"

I said, "There is only one good way to arrange it, and that is for you to bring them in."

He said, "My Tanner, I am not worthy to come into a church like this. I'm just not worthy."

I had the great opportunity of teaching to him one of the finest principles of our gospel—the principle of repentance.

He said, "You know, this show business is not a good life. I was living an immoral life. I am just not worthy."

I said, "Have you forsaken your ways?"

He said, "I certainly have. I did it before I got married."

"Have you kept clean ever since?"

He said, "I have."

"Do you regret what you did?"

He said, "I do."

I said, "You have confessed. You have forsaken. You are asking forgiveness of the Lord?"

He said, "Yes."

Then I told him how the Lord had said (paraphrasing), "If you will forsake, if you will confess, and if you will keep the commandments, I will forgive and forget."

I told him that the Savior said, when he was hanging on the cross. "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

And Peter said to those who had consented to the crucifixion of the Savior, "Repent . . . and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out . . . ." (See Acts 3:19.)

"That is what I am saying to you today, Mr. Armstrong."

He leaned over the desk and he said, "Mr. Tanner, do you really believe that the Lord would forgive me for the kind of life I have lived?"

I said, "All I can do is take him at his word. That is what he says; and he did not say anything that he did not mean. He made no promise that he is not prepared to keep." I said, "Would you like to have the missionaries come to your home?"

He said, "I certainly would."

While I was at conference last October I received a wire from the mission president because at that time the mission had opened that area and there were missionaries in that field. I received this wire, saying, "The Armstrongs would like to be baptized; have applied for baptism. They want you to baptize them. Can you do it?"

I accepted the invitation. This baptism took place Sunday, the only time we could get together.

(BYU Speeches of the Year, "Choose You This Day Whom Ye Will Serve," March 27, 1963, pp. 4-6.)
