Leon R. Hartshorn, Outstanding Stories by General Authorities, vol. 1 ( 1970)

ELDER A. THEODORE TUTTLE

Biographical Sketch

A devoted teacher and able administrator is Elder Albert Theodore Tuttle, who became a member of The First Council of the Seventy in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 10, 1958. From 1961 to 1965 he was president of the missions in South America with headquarters in Uruguay. Since June, 1968, he has supervised the Intermountain Indian Missions.

Elder Tuttle was born March 2, 1919 in Manti, Utah, a son of Albert Melvin and Clarice M. Beal Tuttle. He was graduated from Manti High School and Snow College. He continued his education at Brigham Young University where he received his bachelor of arts degree in 1943, and in 1949 he was awarded his master of arts degree from Stanford University. He has done further graduate work at the University of Utah.

In school he was a popular and effective leader, serving as president of his seminary class, high school student body president, and Snow College freshman class president. Upon returning from his mission he was affiliated with the Delta Phi returned missionary fraternity and was elected president of the BYU chapter. At BYU he was also a member of Blue Key National Honorary service fraternity and was selected in 1943 as the Outstanding Student in Religion at the University.

His leadership ability has been marked by continuous positions of responsibility in the Church. He fulfilled a mission in the Northern States Mission from 1939 to 1941 and has served as stake Sunday School superintendent of Park Stake, seventies quorum president of East Sharon Stake, and stake mission president of the North Box Elder Stake. He has also worked in the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and has taught classes in most of these organizations.

During World War II, Elder Tuttle served two and one-half years as a Marine line officer in the Pacific theater. During his military service he was also group leader for the Latter-day Saint servicemen of the Fifth Marine Division.

For thirteen years he was associated with the seminaries and institutes of religion operated by the Church at high schools and universities in the western states. He was an instructor or principal in seminaries at Menan, Idaho, Brigham City, Kaysville, and Salt Lake City, Utah; and director of the institute of religion at Reno, Nevada. He was appointed a supervisor of the Church-wide seminary and institute program in 1953 and served in this position until his call to the First Council of the Seventy.

He married the former Marne Whitaker on July 26, 1943 in the Manti Temple. They are the parents of seven children.
