Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

1

Uncommon Courage

Twins: A Boy and a Girl

The year was 1832. Joseph Smith was living in Hiram, Ohio. Although he was a prophet, he was not insulated from nor isolated from hardship, suffering, or sorrow. In the year 1828, Emma Smith had given birth to a child while she and the Prophet were living in Harmony, Pennsylvania. The child, a son, died the same day. In 1831, a year prior to our 1832 setting, Emma had given birth to twins—a boy and a girl. What joy there must have been in the Smith household that day, but how shortlived was that joy. Before the sun had set, both infants were dead. Strangely enough, on that very same day, Sister John Murdock, who lived nearby, also gave birth to twins; and they also were a boy and a girl. The twins lived, but Sister Murdock died. Can you picture in your mind the Prophet—a young man, a large man, a sorrowing man— visiting with John Murdock? They exchanged sympathetic expressions. If you have never read the story, you can guess the outcome. When John Murdock's twins were nine days old, they were brought to Emma—a boy and a girl. These babies, adopted by the Prophet and his wife, would in a measure replace those buried. These babies would ease Emma Smith's aching heart. [^1]

Preached a Sermon and Baptized Three

That same year, John Johnson, a successful farmer from Hiram, a small community located a short distance from Kirtland, came to that community to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith and to hear the message of the restored gospel. Before the meeting, John Johnson asked the Prophet if the gospel he espoused included miracles. The Prophet assured him that it did. It is probable that Joseph knew what prompted the question. Sister Johnson, standing at the side of her husband, had had a useless arm for many years. Joseph Smith preached the word of the Lord to those assembled; and then, apparently without warning, he crossed the room, took Mrs. Johnson's hand in his own and said, "In the Name of Jesus Christ I command thee to be made whole." [^2]

Shortly afterward, John Johnson invited the Prophet and his family to come to live with him in his spacious farm house at Hiram. The Prophet gladly accepted the invitation. At the time he was engaged in revising the Bible, and this assistance was most welcome.

The Prophet's children were subject to illness as were other children; and in March, 1832, both of the infants had the measles. This necessitated not just one but both parents' being up with the babies for several nights. Finally, near midnight one night, the Prophet insisted that his wife go into an adjoining room to get some rest. She was reluctant, but he was persistent. He assured her that he would listen for any outcry from their little son, who was the sicker of the two infants. She consented and retired to the next room. Joseph lay down on a small bed next to the crib of the little boy Joseph. He had intended to listen, but soon fatigue overcame him, and he was asleep.

Unknown to him, a mob of some forty men had gathered in the woods a short distance from the house, where they waited patiently for the lamps to be extinguished. After the house became dark, they continued to wait until they were certain that all of its occupants were asleep. They approached quietly and opened the door, and the Prophet, sleeping very soundly, was in their grasp and raised from his bed before the screams of his wife, Emma, awoke him. He fought desperately to free himself. He was an athletic man, powerfully built, six feet tall and weighing over 200 pounds. He managed to free one leg and kicked one of the mobsters with tremendous force. The mobster reeled back, landed on the frozen earth, and cried out, in essence, "Don't let loose of him, don't let loose of him. If you let loose of him, he'll run over the lot of us." He then choked the Prophet Joseph. The Prophet was carried several hundred feet from the house. His clothing was torn from him, and the mob tried to force acid into his mouth. He clenched his teeth and resisted. They cursed him and slammed the bottle against his teeth until they chipped one of his front teeth and spilled the acid on the ground. As they called for the bucket of tar, one of the mobsters was so filled with hate that he could not contain himself, and he fell upon the unprotected body of Joseph Smith and said, "G--D---you, I'll show you how the Holy Ghost falls on a person." He then began to scratch the flesh of the Prophet. Joseph Smith was then covered with the hot tar and left on the ground. [^3]

Eventually, he partially recovered his strength and started toward the house. In the meantime Emma had gathered up her sick babies and taken them out into the cold night to hide them, fearing the mob would return and do them harm. She returned to the house before Joseph did and was there to open the door when he called to her. As she looked upon her husband covered with tar and blood, she thought that he was completely covered with blood. The shock was more than she could stand, and she fainted. Joseph called out again, and Brother Johnson appeared with a blanket. Joseph wrapped it around himself and went into the house. The remainder of the night was spent removing the tar. The washing and scraping was done under the direction of Dr. Fredrick G. Williams, with others assisting.

At this point, Joseph Smith had an opportunity to exercise his moral free agency. He had little choice in the events of the evening, but he had complete choice in how he would react to that which had happened to him. He could gather a large group of men and abuse those who abused him. He could curse those who have injured him. He could lie in bed and feel sorry for himself, he could question God, or he could select a more noble kind of behavior. The next paragraph in the writings of the Prophet reveals not only the behavior that the Prophet selected, but also gives us tremendous insight into his nature. Joseph recorded the events of the night in a concise, objective, factual way. Then he said that with the rising of the sun it was the Sabbath day, and he records very simply, "I preached a sermon and baptised three." [^4] That is the end of the account. Some serve the Lord Jesus Christ when it is convenient; some serve when it is inconvenient. Joseph Smith served his Lord even when it was most inconvenient.

Five days later, one of the twins, the little boy, died, very possibly from the exposure to the cold night air. [^5] Many will read the story of Joseph and his wife Emma laying the little body of Joseph in a small grave and think to themselves, "The Murdock baby died." Others, including parents of adopted children, will consider the account and will say, "Joseph and Emma lost a son, a son they had named Joseph." They would know that a child, adopted or natural, shares exactly the same place in a parent's heart. Joseph and Emma Smith's hearts were breaking that March day in 1832, as they laid their tiny son to rest.

The Prophet Joseph Smith displayed great physical courage while being abused by the mob. However, the Prophet displayed an even greater kind of courage. Let's go back to that spring of 1820 in New York.

Joseph Smith Knew and Would Always Know

Young Joseph Smith walked slowly, thoughtfully, toward a grove of trees a short distance from the farm house where he resided in western New York State. For three years he had been searching to find the truth. In that period of time he had talked to many religionists but had received no satisfactory answers. He had come to realize after reading James 1:5—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him"— that the only place he could obtain his answer was from God. He made up his mind to approach the Lord.

Perhaps he hesitated momentarily as he reached the grove, to determine if he was alone, since this was his first attempt at praying vocally. As he prayed, he was literally attacked by an unseen power that nearly destroyed him. Then a brilliant light began to appear, and that light dispelled the darkness that had bound him. In the light's midst were two glorious heavenly beings. Joseph Smith, not yet fifteen years of age, was privileged to communicate with God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. He was told that he must join none of the churches and that he should wait for further word from the Lord. The remarkable vision closed, and when he regained his strength he returned to the house. [^6]

There would be those who would question his story and those who would totally reject it, and there would be others who would rebuke and persecute him. But he knew, and would always know, that he had seen a vision. How can one feel the power of darkness, and then behold in mid-day a light brighter than the sun, and see and hear and talk with two heavenly beings—the Father and the Son—and wonder if something unusual has happened? There were those who would never know, but Joseph Smith knew and would always know that he had, that day, beheld a remarkable vision.

A Fateful Meeting

Nearly three and one-half years elapsed, and Joseph had received no further manifestations. In the evening of September 21, 1823, Joseph Smith retired to his bedroom and knelt in prayer. He prayed and prayed and prayed. He said he didn't know how long he prayed, but all noise in the house had ceased. All had long since gone to sleep, and yet he continued in prayer. He supposed that it must have been midnight, or perhaps later, and still he prayed.

Suddenly the entire room was filled with light which was truly like lightning, except that it was more pure and refined. Joseph said that it caused him to lose strength in the extremities of his body; but immediately afterwards, a feeling of warmth and peace filled his being, and he was not afraid. Standing before him in a pillar of light was a glorious heavenly being, and Joseph Smith records that although the entire room was filled with light above the brightness of the sun, the light in the room was not nearly as bright as the light which surrounded the personage who stood before him. [^7] The heavenly visitor spoke and introduced himself as Moroni, an ancient inhabitant of the American continent. He told Joseph Smith of an ancient book which could bring eternal life. What a fateful meeting that September, 1823.

Moroni was his own best witness of the truthfulness of the message he was to deliver. He was an ancient prophet, a military leader, an author, a keeper of the sacred records, the last survivor of his nation, and one who had evaded his enemies year after year. He stood before young Joseph Smith as a glorious being who had just come from the presence of God. Moroni's very appearance bore eloquent testimony of his message. And then there was Joseph Smith, one whose birth had been announced by an ancient prophet, one who while yet of tender years had beheld the Father and the Son in the greatest vision ever given to man. Moroni had lived his earth life and was a proven valiant servant of God. Joseph Smith was just beginning his mission on earth, but his potential was astonishing. Yes, it was a fateful meeting. A meeting of such importance that it would be recalled and retold over and over by millions.

Joseph describes Moroni's appearance as follows:

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. . . . Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description. . . . [^8]

Joseph noted some additional interesting details. He described Moroni as being a little above the size of the average man of the day, and also, interestingly enough, said that Moroni's robe was apparently without seam—"without seam"—Joseph noted that detail. [^9]

Moroni told Joseph that there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants. [^10]

After the heavenly messenger had delivered his message, all of the light in the room gathered immediately into Moroni (a very brilliant angel in a very dark room), and a conduit of light opened above his head. He ascended and disappeared, and the entire room was dark. As Joseph pondered the remarkable manifestation and those things revealed to him, without warning the room was again filled with brilliant light, and the same messenger ascended. He did not say, "I have something additional to tell you," or "I want to emphasize," or "I forgot something." He just repeated all that he had said before, just as if he had never been there. Then, as before, the light gathered into the heavenly messenger and he ascended through the conduit of light; and again all was dark. You can imagine Joseph's surprise when the entire proceeding was repeated once again without warning or explanation. The angel told Joseph that his sins were forgiven and that his name would be had for good and evil and that he should tell his father all that had happened. After the third visit by the angel it was morning. The visits had consumed nearly the entire night.

Jesus taught persistence in prayer. [^11] I have often wondered what the outcome would have been if Joseph had only prayed five minutes, or fifteen minutes, or if he had prayed for an hour or two hours. If he had not prayed as long as he did, he would, I assume, have gone to bed and thought, "I wonder why God won't answer my prayer." I am grateful Joseph Smith persisted.

The Good and the Evil

Joseph arose to go to the field to work as usual. He was obviously tired. He had had little sleep, and he had an intense spiritual experience. Joseph was exhausted; and his father, seeing that his son did not appear to be well, sent him to the house. As he climbed the rail fence which surrounded the field, he fell; and the same messenger appeared again and related all that had been said the previous night, and also, according to the Prophet's mother said, "Why did you not tell your father that which I had commanded you to tell him?" Joseph replied, "I was afraid my father would not believe me." [^12]

Joseph Smith was seventeen years old. It would be somewhat hard for a young man of that age to approach his father and say, "Do you know what happened to me last night? An angel surrounded by light appeared three times and told me about golden plates buried," etc.

The hesitancy is understandable, but Joseph Smith was instructed to tell his father without delay, which he did; and his father assured him it was of God and that he should do all the angel had instructed him to do. The previous night he had seen the hill and the repository of the plates in vision. Now he walked to the hill, obtained a pole to use as a lever, and pried off the stone which was covering the cement box containing the ancient records. He reached out to take the plates, and as he did so, he thought of the great value of the contents of the box. As he touched the plates, he was shocked. He tried again and was shocked again, and the shock was greater than the first one. Undaunted, he tried a third time, and this time the shock was so great that it deprived him of his natural strength; and he was afraid to try again to remove the plates. He cried out, "Why can I not obtain this book?" I do not think he expected an answer, but he received one. The ancient guardian of the plates stood before him and said, "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord." [^13] He had not remembered the instruction of the previous night. Joseph sought God's forgiveness, and soon "his mind and soul were enlightened as they had been the night before, and he was filled with the Holy Spirit." The heavens were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone around about and rested upon him. As he gazed, enthralled, Moroni directed his attention to another vision by saying, "Look." And as Joseph turned, he was shown a vision of Satan and his followers. He was permitted to see the great contrast between the power of God and the power of Satan, and then the angel said:

All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and the impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that ye may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. Behold, whatever entices and leads to good and to do good, is of God, and whatever does not is of what wicked one: it is he that fills the hearts of men with evil to walk in darkness and blaspheme God; and you may learn from henceforth, that his ways are to destruction, but the way of holiness is peace and rest . . . You have now beheld the power of God manifested and the power of Satan; you see that there is nothing that is desirable in the work of darkness; that they cannot bring happiness: that those who are overcome herewith are miserable, while on the other hand the righteous are blessed with a place in the kingdom of God where joy unspeakable surrounds them . . . [^14]

What a startling lesson—a lesson which never diminished in vividness during the life of Joseph Smith.

Joseph's mother recalled this event and said of it:

The angel showed him, by contrast, the difference between good and evil, and likewise the consequences of both obedience and disobedience to the commandments of God, in such a striking manner, that the impression was always vivid in his memory until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this circumstance, not long prior to his death, he remarked, that ever afterwards he was willing to keep the commandments of God. [^15]

In less than 24 hours, Joseph Smith had seen the angel Moroni five times, and each time he had spoken to him at length. He had seen the ancient gold plates, and had seen the glory of the heavens and had also seen Satan and his associates.

Joseph Was the One—the Only One

As Joseph walked away from the hill, do you think there was any question in his mind that he had had some remarkable experiences? Do you think he doubted the reality of the angel, the ancient Book of Mormon record, the reality of God or Satan? He would be ridiculed, mocked, threatened, but this would not change the reality of the events. Joseph knew—he knew that he knew. The world would try to make him believe otherwise. Perhaps at this early time the die was already cast. Perhaps even this early in his life there were only two alternatives. Either Joseph Smith would have to deny what he saw and heard, or he would have to give his life for what he saw and heard.

Joseph Smith was to meet the heavenly messenger once each year for four years on the same date to receive instructions and to be prepared for his task of translating the Book of Mormon. On September 22, 1827, Joseph Smith received the golden plates from their guardian, Moroni. Many times Joseph Smith had been warned to be alert and protect the valuable plates from evil men. Joseph, therefore, fearful that he had been under surveillance, carefully deposited the plates in a hollow birch log in the woods before returning home. The next day Joseph went to a neighboring town to work. His mother sent for him, informing him that people in the area were plotting to get the plates. Joseph Smith returned to the woods and obtained the plates from their hiding place. On his way home, he was attacked three times. He was a strong man and needed all of his strength to overpower his attackers. So exhausted was he that he had to lie down and rest in the front yard before he could continue into the house. [^16]

Let us consider for a moment the interesting but difficult situation of Joseph Smith. He had seen the Father and the Son. He had seen the angel, not once, but many times. He had seen the glory of God and a vision of Satan on the hill; and he had the plates. But, he was the only one. No one else had seen the Father, the Son, a heavenly messenger, or Satan. He was alone—completely alone. It was not hard to imagine a conversation that may have gone something like this:

"Joseph, I believed you when you said you saw the Father, the Son, the angel; and now I believe you when you say you have the plates. You do have the plates, don't you?"

"Yes, I have them in a wooden chest in my room."

"May I see them?"

"No."

"Why not? I've supported you, believed you, helped you; why can't I see them?"

"Because the angel said I can't show them to anyone."

It's easy to see, is it not, how this sounded. How difficult the situation of Joseph was—how easy to ridicule his claims. Perhaps more than once the Smiths were greeted with: "Have there been any angels flying low over the Smith home lately?" And then there were bitterness, threats, and violence.

The Prophet's brother Alvin had passed away before Joseph Smith had received the plates. He was a great soul and had totally supported his younger brother, Joseph, as indicated by the following comment by Joseph's mother:

Alvin manifested, if such could be the case, greater zeal and anxiety in regard to the Record that had been shown to Joseph, than any of the rest of the family; in consequence of which we could not bear to hear anything said upon the subject. Whenever Joseph spoke of the Record, it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds, with all his zeal, and with all his kindness; and, when we looked to his place, and realized that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all with one accord wept over our irretrievable loss, and we could not be comforted, because he was not. [^17]

Events after the death of Alvin illustrate well the intensity of the persecution that had come upon the Smith family. Rumors were circulating around the area that Alvin's body had been dug up and desecrated. This was apparently so disturbing to the family that Joseph's father, Joseph Smith Sr., felt he must do something about it. The account of what he did was published in the form of a public statement in the local newspaper on September 25, 1824.

TO THE PUBLIC:

Whereas reports have been industriously put in circulation, that my son, Alvin, had been removed from the place of his interment and dissected; which reports every person possessed of human sensibility must know, are peculiarly calculated to harrow up the mind of a parent and deeply wound the feelings of relations—therefore, for the purpose of ascertaining the truth of such reports, I, with some of my neighbors this morning, repaired to the grave, and removing the earth, found the body which had not been disturbed. This method is taken for the purpose of satisfying the minds of those who may have heard the report, and of informing those who have put it in circulation, and that it is earnestly requested they would desist therefrom; and that it is believed by some that they have been stimulated more by desire to injure the reputation of certain persons that a philanthropy for the peace and welfare of myself and friends.

(Signed) Joseph Smith [Joseph Smith's Father] [^18]

How difficult it was for Joseph Smith to bear the burden! Joseph was the one—the only one—who had seen and heard, but never did he mention it. I like that quality in him—quiet courage and dignity, even at that early age.

A Burden Lifted

Finally a long-awaited day came. The translation was completed. Joseph Smith wanted those who cared for him to be present at the Whitmer farm in Fayette. His father was there, his mother, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and the Whitmers. He must have electrified the small group when he told them that this was the day when three others would behold the plates besides himself. He told Oliver Cowdery he would be one of the witnesses and David Whitmer would be another. And then, approaching Martin Harris, in essence he said, "Martin, you have got to humble yourself before God this day. If you do, you will also be privileged to be one of the witnesses."

The four left the house and went to the woods. They knelt and began to pray, praying vocally in turn. After each one had prayed twice, Martin Harris arose and said, "It is my fault that our prayers are not answered," and then he left. Shortly after his departure, a brilliant light appeared and an angel stood before them holding the plates and turning some of the leaves. They all heard the voice of God speak from the heavens, bearing witness that the translation was correct. As the vision closed, Joseph Smith went to find Martin Harris. He found him praying. He knelt with him, and they prayed together. The same vision was opened to them. They beheld an angel, saw the plates, and they heard the voice of God. Martin Harris was soon so overcome with joy that he cried out, " 'Tis enough. 'Tis enough. Mine eyes have beheld. Mine eyes have beheld." [^19]

Joseph had been gone from the Whitmer home for a long time. As he entered the house, he did not speak. He sat down by his mother. He laid his head on his mother's breast. So much had happened to the young prophet in the past decade, though he was not yet twenty-four years old. He in essence said, quietly, reflectively: "Mother, you don't know what a burden has been lifted from me this day. Now people will know that I don't go around to deceive them. The Lord has caused that the plates have been shown to three others besides myself, and they must be witnesses with me." [^20]

"You don't know what a burden has been lifted." Persecuted, hated, forced to move several times, and not one mention of it. How difficult it was until others shared it with him. Courage—call it moral, mental—but what courage! Joseph Smith demonstrated extreme courage the night he was abused and covered with hot tar, but the exercise of courage in the face of overwhelming opposition had become a characteristic of Joseph Smith long before that March evening in 1832.

Chapter 1 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 15:6. Hereafter referred to as D&C.
[^2] D&C 18:15.
[^3] Journal of Discourses 4:54. Hereafter referred to as JD.
[^4] Ibid., 8:206.
[^5] Ibid., 12:71-72.
[^6] Ibid., 23:348-49.
[^7] HC 1:422.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 88-89.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 88-89.
[^10] 4 Nephi 10-18.
[^11] Moses 7:18.
[^12] Moses 7:13-23.
[^13] Ether 13:3-6.
[^14] D&C 37:3.
[^15] HC 1:146.
[^16] Roberts, B. H., A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930), 1:254-55. Hereafter referred to as CHC
[^17] HC 1:197.
[^18] Conference Report,April 1956, pp. 59, 60. Hereafter referred to as CR.
[^19] Autobiography of Parley P Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 187.
[^20] HC 3:190-91.
