Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

2

Portrait of a Prophet

A Great Missionary

The majority of the residents of New York rejected young Joseph Smith as a brash upstart. There were a few, however, who believed and were excited with the opportunity to do God's will in this day and age and to receive instructions from him. The believing few approached the Prophet with a simple, humble, worthy request: "Joseph, would you please inquire of the Lord and see what he would like me to do; I would like to do the will of the Lord."

Those who came represented a rather diversified group. Some were relatively wealthy and some were poor; some were well educated by the standards of the day, and others were largely untutored; some were older, and some were not yet out of their teens. Yet the answer was always the same to all of these requests: "I say unto you, that the thing which will be of most worth unto you will be to. . . bring souls unto me." [^1] And further: "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" [^2] The message should not be surprising when we consider the value that the Lord has always placed upon the worth of a soul.

Joseph Smith was commanded by the Lord to take the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; and he immediately started out to do it. He was a missionary from the beginning. His first converts to the restored gospel were members of his own family. They believed that their son and brother was a youth of integrity; and when he spoke, he spoke the truth. Soon friends of the family and neighbors heard of the unusual experiences of Joseph Smith—they listened, they learned, they believed.

Joseph Smith sought for opportunities to preach and bear witness of the gospel, and he apparently had a great capacity to interest and inspire. Brigham Young said:

What a delight it was to hear brother Joseph talk upon the great principles of eternity; he would bring them down to the capacity of a child, and he would unite heaven with earth, this is the beauty of our religion. [^3]

On another occasion, Brigham Young also referred to Joseph's remarkable ability as a teacher:

The excellency of the glory of the character of brother Joseph Smith was that he could reduce heavenly things to the understanding of the finite. When he preached to the people—revealed the things of God, the will of God, the plan of salvation, the purposes of Jehovah, the relation in which we stand to him and all the heavenly beings, he reduced his teachings to the capacity of every man, woman, and child, making them as plain as a well-defined pathway. This should have convinced every person that ever heard of him of his divine authority and power, for no other man was able to teach as he could, and no person can reveal the things of God, but by the revelations of Jesus Christ. When we hear a man that can speak of heavenly things, and present them to the people in a way that they can be understood, you may know that to that man the avenue is open, and that he, by some power, has communication with heavenly beings; and when the highest intelligence is exhibited, he, perhaps, has communication with the highest intelligence that exists. [^4]

Daniel H. Wells was also impressed by the teaching of the Prophet. Brother Wells was not a member of the Church during Joseph Smith's life but later became a prominent Church leader. He recalled Joseph as follows:

I knew nothing at all about Joseph, except what I had heard from his enemies or read in the papers. . . . I was introduced to Joseph Smith. . . . He was a fine looking man . . . I soon learned that he knew more about religion and the things of God and eternity than any man I had ever heard talk. . . . I obtained them [principles of the gospel] from Joseph, and it seemed to me that he advanced principles that neither he nor any other man could have obtained except from the Source of all wisdom—the Lord himself. [^5]

Elder Charles W. Penrose was impressed with the Prophet's ability to not only receive from God for himself, but to assist others in also obtaining knowledge from God:

For he [Joseph Smith] received blessings to a greater degree than are poured out commonly upon the children of men . . . his mind was enlightened far beyond the condition of his fellowmen, for God bestowed upon him at the proper time the gift of the Holy Ghost. . . . And Joseph Smith learned how to obtain that glorious and heavenly gift not only for himself but for others, and he was enabled to instruct the inhabitants of the earth how they could obtain it . . . how they could come to a knowledge of His existence through this heavenly gift, so that they might be guided in his ways and know that they were walking in his paths. [^6]

The Prophet Joseph Smith never missed an opportunity to preach the gospel. He was almost continually a missionary. When he visited Washington, D. C., he told the president of the United States about the gospel. While in prison, he taught the gospel to the guards. He also went on many missions. Following are a few representative entries from the Prophet's Journal.

Thursday, 24.—At the house of Mr. Beman, in Colburn, whence we left for Waterford, where we spoke to a small congregation; thence to Mount Pleasant, and preached to a large congregation the same evening, when Freeman A. Nickerson and his wife declared their belief in the work, and offered themselves for baptism. Great excitement prevailed in every place we visited.

Saturday, 26.—Preached at Mount Pleasant; the people were very tender and inquiring.

Sunday, 27.—Preached to a large congregation at Mount Pleasant, after which I baptized twelve, and others were deeply impressed, and desired another meeting, which I appointed for the day following.

Monday, 28.—In the evening, we broke bread, and laid on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and for confirmation, having baptized two more. The Spirit was given in great power to some, and peace to others.

Tuesday, 29—After preaching at 10 o'clock A.M., I baptized two, and confirmed them at the water's side. Last evening we ordained F. A. Nickerson an Elder. [^7]

Joseph Smith's unceasing efforts to bring people to the Lord resulted in the organization of several little branches in the same year the Church was organized. Those new converts experienced persecution just as their prophet had, but they felt joy in their hearts and hoped for a better life for themselves and for others.

A Dream of Zion—a Better Life

A little group of Saints and several candidates for baptism approached a stream of water which had been previously dammed so the water would be deep enough to perform the ordinance. They were dismayed to find that the dam had been removed. This was only one in a series of harassments. The services were of necessity postponed. The dam was replaced; and under cover of darkness, the new converts went into the water of baptism. [^8] This incident took place in the latter part of the year 1830 in Colesville, New York.

The Saints were further harassed. On one occasion Joseph Smith was arrested after delivering a sermon to a gathering of the Saints. The sheriff, in reality, was in league with a group of individuals who disliked the Prophet Joseph intensely, and he (the sheriff) was to meet them outside of Colesville and deliver Joseph Smith into their hands. He was, however, so impressed with the Prophet after being in his presence just a few minutes that he realized that he had been deceived concerning the character of the man he had arrested. When they approached the mob, he whipped his horse and raced by them. They, stunned momentarily by the unexpected turn of events, then recovered and gave chase, shouting for the sheriff to stop. Because the mob was on foot, they were left in the distance. Just at that inopportune moment, however, a wheel came off the buggy. They retrieved the wheel, replaced it and secured it. The mob drew closer, shouting for the sheriff to stop. Just in time, the sheriff and his prisoner leaped into the wagon and outran their pursuers. When they arrived at an inn, the sheriff gave the Prophet the bed. He lay with his feet against the door, with his pistol in hand to assure the safety of the man whom just a few hours previously he had thought to be a despicable individual. [^9]

The members of the Colesville branch were acquainted with persecution. They were also familiar with hunger, poverty, and suffering. They were not unacquainted with the teachings of the Book of Mormon. They had read in the book of the wonderful conditions among the early inhabitants of the continent after the visit of the Lord Jesus Christ to them. There was no contention in all the land, and the people could not have been happier. There were no dissensions among them, and they were blessed of God and prospered. [^10]

Now the Prophet gave to them and others in 1830 some of the most remarkable revelations ever given to man; these were concerning Moses and Enoch. He taught that Enoch had established a holy city called ZION. In it there was an absence of sin, suffering, and poverty—and an abundance of joy. "And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^11] The Lord gave Enoch such strength that his people were miraculously protected from their enemies as Enoch moved mountains and changed the course of rivers and they came up no more against them. Then the entire city and all of its inhabitants were taken up into heaven. [^12]

We can imagine how impressive this must have been to the little group of persecuted, beleaguered Colesville Saints. How excited they also must have been with an additional teaching of the Book of Mormon that in the latter days a Holy City (Zion) would be established on the American Continent. [^13] Perhaps they asked Joseph Smith, "What about Zion for us? May we also, as God's people, have a righteous place and be protected from our enemies? Can we have a happy existence, where there is no poverty or suffering?"

In the latter part of 1831, the Lord said to Joseph Smith that it was His will that the Saints "assemble together at the Ohio." [^14] The Lord had spoken, and the Prophet prepared for the move. When the Colesville Saints learned of the revelation, they sold their property and moved as a group to Ohio.

Joseph Smith's arrival in Kirtland was most interesting. Near the first of February, a sleigh containing four persons stopped in front of the Gilbert and Whitney store. Joseph got out of the sleigh and entered the store and said, "Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!" As he and the Prophet shook hands, Newel Whitney said, "You have the advantage of me. I could not call you by name as you have me." "I am Joseph, the Prophet. You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?" Brother Whitney said, "So I have." He then invited Joseph and Emma to reside in an apartment above the store. [^15]

Shortly after Joseph arrived in Ohio, the Lord revealed that twenty-eight elders, including the Prophet were to travel through the western country preaching the gospel and meet in a conference in Missouri. In obedience to the Lord, the Prophet set out on the nearly one thousand mile journey to Missouri. After he arrived, he petitioned the Lord to learn the exact location of Zion; and the Lord said that he was now in Zion, that the center place of Zion was Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. [^16] Joseph Smith was delighted with Zion and wrote:

. . . As far as the eye can reach, the beautiful rolling prairies spread out like a sea of meadows; and are decorated with a growth of flowers so gorgeous and grand as to exceed description; and nothing is more fruitful or a richer stockholder in the blooming prairie than the honey bee. Only on the water courses is timber to be found. There, in strips from one to three miles in width, and following faithfully the meanderings of the streams, it grows in luxuriant forests. The forests are a mixture of oak, hickory, black walnut, elm, ash, cherry, honey locust, mulberry, coffee bean, hack-berry, box elder and basswood; with the addition of cottonwood, butterwood, pecan and soft and hard maple upon the bottoms. The shrubbery is beautiful and consists of plums, grapes, crab apples and persimmons.

The soil is rich and fertile; from three to ten feet deep, and generally composed of a rich black mold, intermingled with clay and sand. It yields in abundance. [^17]

Joseph Smith and his followers had a dream of Zion. Joseph had sought to know the location of Zion, and after traveling several hundred miles over a period of many weeks, he finally received the answer. What a fascinating example of exercising faith in the Lord Jesus Christ!

To the Edge of the Light

President David 0. McKay told the following story in a general conference in 1936. The story was repeated by Elder Henry D. Moyle in 1956:

There is a story that has oft been told by President McKay, particularly during the early days of the welfare program that I should like to repeat. It is the story of an engineer who pulled his train into a station one dark and stormy night, and while the engineer was going calmly about oiling his engine, getting ready for the next run, a timid passenger from the coach came up to him and asked him if he were not afraid of going out into the dark. Without looking up, the engineer said, "I'm not pulling my train out into the dark tonight." "Oh, I beg your pardon, I thought you were going to be our engineer," said the man. "I am, but I wouldn't be in the dark tonight." He said, "Why, I should think you would be very nervous with the lives of all these men and women on this train depending upon you." For an answer, the engineer pointed up to the headlight that threw an intense white light several hundred yards ahead on the track and said, "When I pull out and when I get there, that light will be extended several hundred yards ahead, and I shall run to the end of that light and so on throughout the night. I'll be running in the light all the way." And the man replied, "Thanks for the lesson, faithful engineer."

President McKay continued: "I can say this to you: The first circle of light we have seen is October 1, 1936, when by that date we shall see to it that we have sufficient food, fuel, clothing, etc., to see every needy family through this coming winter, and by the time we get to October 1st, the light will have extended sufficiently far to permit us to see the next move we should make. I can promise you one thing, that we'll be running in the light all the way through this dark night." [^18]

What marvelous description of faith!

Run to the edge of the light. If we sat and waited until the light shone to the end of the road, we would wait a long time. Faith is going to the edge of the light.

Joseph Smith desired to know the location of Zion. The Lord said, go to Ohio; that was the edge of the light, and Joseph went to the edge of the light. He prayed again and was led to Missouri; again, he traveled to the edge of the light and ultimately received his answer. What a lesson in faith for all of us.

A Broken Dream

When the Colesville Saints learned that the centerplace, Zion, was in Missouri, they moved as a group to Missouri. The Lord had revealed a Zion location. He also revealed the physical plans for a Zion City, with wide streets and large lots. They were also to have a new kind of economy, a Zion economy, called the "law of consecration."

If ever a people had a dream, if ever a people had high expectations, it was the Latter-day Saints moving to Independence, Jackson County, Missouri in the year of 1831. They were going to build a city where there would be no sin, no poverty, no injustice. They would build a city, a temple—a place for the Lord to dwell. They would prepare for the ushering in of the Millennium, a thousand years of peace.

How excited they were about Zion—no sickness, no evil, no poverty, no persecution. How great were their dreams. Never did a leader and a little band of followers have higher expectations.

After two years, disaster struck, and those who had gone to build the City of God had now been cruelly driven from their homes and were huddled north of the Missouri River enduring sleet and snow. Only hopes that had been built so high could be dashed so low. But still there was hope; the Lord had given them Zion. Joseph Smith gathered a group of faithful and fashioned them into an army of over 200 men and marched with them the 1,000 miles to Missouri—tortuous miles, miles punctuated with blistered feet and tired muscles and strained nerves. But it was worth the effort because the governor of Missouri had said that if he had sufficient assistance, he would reestablish the Mormons to their legally owned lands. He, however, when the opportunity arrived to be of help, did not keep his word, and the men, disappointed, returned to Kirtland. Many were even more loyal to the Prophet. Others were disenchanted with Joseph Smith and the restored gospel. The long journey extracted from them more than they could endure for any cause. Joseph Smith remained firm and immovable in his belief that the Saints would be reinstated in Jackson County.

The Saints relocated in several counties in northern Missouri. At Far West, Caldwell County, corner stones for a temple were laid. The old bitterness, however, continued. Saints were abused and driven from their homes, and Joseph told the Saints to gather at Far West for their mutual protection.

The Betrayal of the Prophet

Finally the destruction came at Far West, and the Prophet was betrayed into the hands of his enemies by Colonel George Hinkle, a trusted associate. Joseph was one of the several Church leaders to be so betrayed. Parley Pratt wrote of that first abusive night when he, Joseph Smith, and others were prisoners:

We were placed under a strong guard, and were without shelter during the night, lying on the ground in the open air, in the midst of a great rain. The guards during the whole night kept up a constant tirade of mockery, and the most obscene blackguardism and abuse. They blasphemed God; mocked Jesus Christ; swore the most dreadful oaths; taunted Brother Joseph and others; demanded miracles; wanted signs, such as "Come Mr. Smith, show us an angel." "Give us one of your revelations." "Show us a miracle." "Come, there is one of your brethren here in camp whom we took prisoner yesterday in his own house, and knocked his brains out with his own rifle, which we found hanging over his fireplace; he lays speechless and dying; speak the word and heal him, and then we will all believe." "Or, if you are Apostles or men of God, deliver yourselves, and then we will be Mormons." Next would be a volley of oaths and blasphemies; then a tumultuous tirade of lewd boastings of having defiled virgins and wives by force, etc., much of which I dare not write; and, indeed, language would fail me to attempt more than a faint description. Thus passed this dreadful night, and before morning several other captives were added to our number. . . . [^19]

The Prophet's life was spared only by the courageous act of Alexander Doniphan. Brigadier General Doniphan received an illegal order from his commanding officer Major General Samuel D. Lucas to take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square at 9:00 the next morning and shoot them. General Doniphan wasted no time in sending the following bold reply to his superior officer:

It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning at 8:00; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God.

(signed) A. W. Doniphan Brigadier General [^20]

The Latter-day Saints were disarmed by the Missourians and were left defenseless before soldiers who, when dismissed, became a raging mob. Few were spared; the mob rode relentlessly through the streets of the Mormon city shooting animals, looting, beating the men, and raping the women and girls. As the prophet later reflected upon the brutality of their adversaries, he wrote:

. . . The inhumanity and murderous disposition of this people! It shocks all nature; it beggars and defies all description; it is a tale of woe; a lamentable tale; yea a sorrowful tale; too much to tell; too much for contemplation; too much for human beings; it cannot be found among the heathens; it cannot be found among the nations where kings and tyrants are enthroned; it cannot be found among the savages of the wilderness; yea, and I think it cannot be found among the wild and ferocious beasts of the forest—that a man should be mangled for sport! Women be robbed of all that they have—their last morsel for subsistence, and then be violated to gratify the hellish desires of the mob, and finally left to perish with their helpless offspring clinging around their necks. . . . [^21]

The prisoners were to be taken southward to Jackson County to be imprisoned. Prior to their departure, they were premitted a brief visit to see their families. Joseph records:

. . . We were led into the public square, and after considerable entreaty, we were permitted to see our families, being attended by a strong guard. I found my family in tears . . . they clung to my garments weeping. I requested to have a private interview with my wife in an adjoining room, but was refused; when taking my departure from my family, it was almost too painful for me. My children clung to me, and were thrust away at the point of the swords of the soldiery. . . . [^22]

The prisoners were placed in a wagon, and a jeering mob gathered around them. The parents of Joseph and Hyrum made their way through the crowd and grasped the hands of their captive sons. They were not permitted to speak. The Prophet, his brother Hyrum, and others were displayed in various communities and imprisoned temporarily at Richmond, Missouri. The Prophet records that they had to sleep on the floor with only a mantle for their covering and a stick of wood for their pillows. The Prophet also commented on the food: "Our victuals were of the coarest kind, and served up in a manner which was disgusting." [^23]

The Prophet's Anguish

The conditions were almost unbearable, and the poignant messages that the Prophet received from his friends telling of the things they had to endure, combined with wicked, obscene boasts of his captors, brought anguish to his soul. He reflected upon the injustices which were taking place as the saints were being driven from the state in cold weather. The hours slowly passed, and then a change of the guard. They arrived boasting loudly of new deeds of robbery, rape, and murder. The Prophet Joseph listened, as he had countless times before, to that which had and was taking place outside the prison. The vile harangue continued into the night. Finally Joseph could endure it no longer. Following is Parley Pratt's vivid description of what followed.

In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards . . . as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the "Mormons" while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters, and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice, that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or anyone else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still. I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!"

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked down upon the quailing guards . . . whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended upon a breath in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri. [^24]

Let us remember that the anguished man in jail was Joseph Smith. Not yet 33 years of age, he was a prophet of God and he was the president of the Church of the Lord and Savior of the world, Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith was by nature an active man. His knowledge of the importance of man's probationary period called "earth life" equaled or surpassed the knowledge of any man, except Jesus, who had ever lived on this earth. He had beheld Satan, outer darkness, and had seen this vividly contrasted with God and the celestial kingdom. He had seen the pre-existant life and knew of the destruction that would come upon the world if the people did not repent. He knew of the beautiful reality of the one-thousand-year reign of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the earth and that those who qualified would be with their Lord. He knew of impending war and death and destruction that would come upon the United States unless repentance came and changes were made. [^25] With this kind of knowledge, combined with sensitivity and love, we can perhaps gain some insight into the fantastic motivation which Joseph had. He threw himself relentlessly into his task. He attacked the problems of sin, of evil, and sought to establish peace and salvation for all people of the world. Fortunately, Joseph Smith, not by accident, possessed a superior physical body and had great physical strength and endurance. This permitted him to carry out his ambitious desires—to curb wrong and establish right.

Now let us consider for a moment what it must have been like for this rightly, highly motivated prophet to remain confined day after day, week after week, month after month in a small cell—confined for no just or reasonable cause. He was innocent, with a burning desire to do good, to teach, direct, bring principles of salvation, build the kingdom of God, and prepare the earth for the millennial reign—and with the setting of the sun each night felt the sheer frustration of senseless restraint brought by another day of confinement. How does one adapt to it month after month? This added to the obvious concern for his homeless, suffering followers, and the foul conditions of the prison were almost too much for the young prophet of the Lord.

The Prophet's Lament

The Prophet's longest imprisonment was in Liberty, Missouri. The Liberty Jail, an unlikely place with an unlikely name, was a small stone jail divided into two rooms. The cellar room was 14' x 14 1/2' and the ceiling was 6 1/2' high. The upper room was of the same dimensions, except that the ceiling was slightly higher. [^26]

It is in the Liberty Jail that we have a remarkable opportunity to examine what the Prophet Joseph Smith is really like. We view a distressed prophet, still young. We view a prophet who feels anguish because of the poor, and much-injured Saints.

Joseph Smith had experienced life, not always good, sometimes bad; not always pleasant, sometimes painful; not always successful, sometimes unsuccessful. He had moved from Palmyra to Harmony, from Harmony to Fayette, to escape the bitter persecution. He had a dream of Zion and pursued that dream. He tried to establish a holy city in Jackson County, a city based upon the new economic principle, the law of consecration. He observed the Saints being driven from Jackson County. He envisioned a financial institution, the Kirtland Safety Society, which would bring security to the Saints. He saw the collapse of the Society and felt the wrath of some of those who were hurt by the failure. He hoped for a place of refuge for the Saints in Northern Missouri. He experienced the dashing of that hope. In my opinion, this was a climactic disappointment in a series of disappointments. The defeat at Far West was a crushing one. Joseph Smith was imprisoned, his Saints were turned out of their homes, hellish fury was unleashed. The result was great hardship, and this was almost more than the great soul of the Prophet Joseph Smith could bear. He reacted as a man—as a good man—but as a man. The first epistles from the Liberty Jail reflected this. He condemned the injustices. He named and condemned the apostates. He was indignant, and the tenor of his letters was injustice and the need for justice. Conditions did not improve. December passed and imprisonment continued. The harshness of February came, and still the crimes continued—still suffering, still death, still overwhelming injustice. The Prophet continued to ponder; and finally in March, it seems as though he was almost beside himself with grief because of the sufferings, the intense sufferings, of the much-injured Saints. He cried out in anguish to God:

O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them. [^27]

The Return of Hope

Even with this anguished cry to God, the answer was not forthcoming. The Prophet Joseph Smith's mind was filled with the events of the present and distressing thoughts of the future and fears of what it might hold. It is interesting that that which needed to go into his mind, which would act as a catalyst, came apparently from three letters—one from his wife, Emma; one from his brother, Don Carlos; and one from his friend Edward Partridge. The Prophet Joseph Smith read and reread these letters filled with love, kindness, and hope; and then the Prophet said:

. . . We received some letters last evening—one from Emma, one from Don C. Smith, and one from Bishop Partridge—all breathing a kind and consoling spirit. We were much gratified with their contents. We had been a long time without information; and when we read those letters they were to our soul as the gentle air is refreshing, but our joy was mingled with grief, because of the sufferings of the poor and much injured Saints. And we need not say to you that the floodgates of our hearts were lifted and our eyes were a fountain of tears, but those who have not been enclosed in the walls of prison without cause or provocation, can have but little idea how sweet the voice of a friend is; one token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling; it brings up in an instant everything that has passed; it seizes the present with the avidity of lightening; it grasps after the future with the fierceness of a tiger; it moves the mind backward and forward, from one thing to another, until finally all enmity, malice and hatred, and past differences misunderstandings and mismanagements are slain victorious at the feet of hope. . . . [^28]

His mind moved forward and backward with the intensity, and finally "all enmity, malice, and hatred and past differences, misunderstandings, mismanagements are slain victorious at the feet of hope." Joseph continues:

When the heart is sufficiently contrite, the voice of the spirit steals along and whispers:

My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes.

Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands.

Thou art not yet as Job: thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job. [^29]

In his persecution, his anguish, his torment, he reached out to God. He had reached out ever so many times before. The Lord spoke not in the manner which Joseph Smith pleaded for—not in the way that he had initially wanted, an awesome display of power; he had wanted God's wrath to be shown. He had wanted vengence upon the wicked. One can petition God, but one cannot dictate to God. One cannot direct God. Yes, the Lord answered after Joseph Smith had fulfilled the law upon which the answer and the blessing were predicated. But the Lord characteristically selected when and how he would answer. He would not answer with a voice of thunder, but with a small voice, a whisper. He did not answer with destruction upon the heads of the wicked, but he answered with "peace be unto you." He did not destroy the enemies of Joseph Smith, but whispered tolerance, understanding, love, and hope to the heart of the Prophet. Yes, Jesus Christ had experienced suffering in the flesh so that he could succor his people; and the wise, gentle Jesus whispered hope and peace to the heart of a much maligned servant. With that message of hope and peace, and with the power, the gentle, loving power of God in his being, Joseph Smith emerged from disappointment and darkness into hope and light—what a transformation it was. It is remarkable to behold how Joseph Smith acted with courage, resolution, hope, love, and strength. It should encourage all who are disappointed and frustrated by the events of life to, in like manner, turn to Him who has all power and infinite love.

Joseph had relearned a sacred truth that the Lord requires of all, even a prophet, a "broken heart and contrite spirit."

In the Book of Mormon, the Lord instructed all of his followers that at his resurrection animal sacrifice was done away with, but he would now require a new sacrifice, the sacrifice of a "broken heart and a contrite spirit." [^30] Assisted by reading those kind, loving, encouraging letters, the Prophet Joseph Smith became mentally and spiritually receptive to the promptings of the Holy Ghost; and there was a marvelous transformation in him. In my opinion, prior to this moment, Joseph Smith had been acting like a man, he had been reacting to his circumstances in a reasonable way, a just way and an expected way; but he had been reacting like a man—a good man, a great man—but a man. Now as we read the account we see, as so many times before, the Prophet Joseph Smith emerging. And what a transformation takes place as the Lord Jesus Christ, so well qualified, with all of the necessary credentials to stand at the head of the Church, inspires the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Joseph Smith Spoke with Power and Authority

Joseph spoke out with remarkable power. No more was he pleading and lamenting about the past, but he was now looking to the future; and he declared that nothing will stop the work of God. The kingdom will roll forth and fill the whole earth; and even if earth and hell combine against the Church, the Church will stand.

. . . Hell may pour forth its rage like the burning lava of mount Vesuvius, or of Etna, or of the most terrible of the burning mountains; and yet shall "Mormonism" stand. Water, fire, truth and God are all realities. Truth is "Mormonism." God is the author of it. He is our shield. It is by Him we received our birth. It was by His voice that we were called to a dispensation of His Gospel in the beginning of the fulness of times. It was by Him we received the Book of Mormon; and it is by Him that we remain unto this day; and by Him we shall remain, if it shall be for our glory; and in His Almighty name we are determined to endure tribulation as good soldiers unto the end. . . . [^31]

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote that three things are responsible for the hellish conditions that he and his people were suffering:

. . . But I bed leave to say unto you, brethren, that ignorance, superstition and bigotry placing itself where it ought not, is often-times in the way of the prosperity of this Church; like the torrent of rain from the mountains, that floods the most pure and crystal stream with mire, and dirt, and filthiness, and obscures everything that was clear before, and all rushes along in one general deluge; but time weathers tide; and notwithstanding we are rolled in the mire of the flood for the time being, the next surge peradventure, as time rolls on, may bring to us the fountain as clear as crystal, and as pure as snow, while the filthiness, floodwood and rubbish is left and purged out by the way. . . . [^32] (Italics added.)

I do not think it would be fair to say that all of the ignorance, superstition, and bigotry was outside of the Church. The Lord, on occasion, had to rebuke the Latter-day Saints. Joseph compared the Church to a muddy stream but envisioned a day when ignorance, superstition, and bigotry would be done away with and the stream would be crystal clear. He then wrote this famous scripture:

How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints. [^33]

Joseph continued his remarkable epistle with a strong admonition for the Saints to treat others in a way that they have not been treated.

Our religion is between us and our God. Their religion is between them and their God.

. . . There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because it is like God, or Godlike. [^34]

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, also defended the Constitution and wrote of the greatness of the Constitution to all of those who are underprivileged.

. . . Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner, it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun.

We, brethren, are deprived of the protection of its glorious principles, by the cruelty of the cruel. . . .

But notwithstanding we see what we see, and feel what we feel, and know what we know, yet that fruit is no less precious and delicious to our taste. . . .

. . . Neither will we deny our religion because of the hand of oppression; but we will hold on until death. [^35]

The Prophet's Great Influence

Will you picture with me for a moment one Levi Hancock, a representative Mormon refugee. He and his family left Missouri to make their way to Illinois. They had inadequate food, clothing, and shelter. Rags were wrapped around their feet as a protection against the cold. [^36]

With Missouri behind them, they crossed the Mississippi River and found shelter. I have often wondered what the impact would have been if at that moment Levi Hancock could have read Joseph Smith's great epistle. I think a tired, weary, discouraged Levi Hancock would have drawn up a little taller, would have set his face to the future, and would have quietly said, "Yes, Brother Joseph, nothing can stop us from building God's Kingdom." This is the very thing that happened to individual Saints—as a body they were inspired by the amazing faith and strength of the Prophet. The Joseph who emerged from the Liberty Jail after almost five months of imprisonment was an even greater Joseph than the one who had entered. Why? Because under trying circumstances the greatness of his mind, the greatness of his soul, became apparent; and he communed with God.

What would have been the consequences if Joseph had manifest less strength, less hope, and less courage in a time of crisis? In my estimation, if in a few moments one wants to really come to know Joseph Smith, the best place to find out is from that remarkable general epistle written from the Liberty Jail in March of 1839. The Prophet concludes it with the powerful testimony which was then and still is a source of strength and inspiration to the Saints of God.

. . .We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true; that the Bible is true; that the Book of Mormon is true; that the Book of Covenants is true; that Christ is true; that the ministering angels sent forth from God are true, and that we know that we have a house not made with hands eternal in the heavens, whose builder and maker is God. . . . [^37]

This experience in the life of Joseph—though not as impressive or dramatic as the first vision, or the visitation of Moroni, or the coming of Peter and James and John, or the vision in the Kirtland Temple—in an unusual and remarkable way, shows clearly the faith, courage, and greatness of Joseph Smith, his attitude, his behavior, and his example which had a profound influence upon the Church in 1839 and has had lasting influence upon the Church and its members from that day to this.

There were those who were predicting that the Church could not survive the destruction in Missouri. I have often wondered what the outcome would have been if Joseph Smith had been a lesser man, a lesser prophet.

Chapter 2 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 6:468.
[^2] Ibid., p. 469.
[^3] JD 7:176.
[^4] Ibid., p. 101.
[^5] 1 Samuel 16:7.
[^6] Luke 6:45.
[^7] HC 5:107.
[^8] Ibid., p. 307.
[^9] Ibid., p. 360.
[^10] Ibid., p. 525.
[^11] Ibid., p. 21.
[^12] Ibid., p. 92.
[^13] Ibid., 2:290.
[^14] Ibid., 5:139.
[^15] Ibid., 6:170.
[^16] Ibid., p. 274.
[^17] Ibid., p. 326.
[^18] Ibid., 5:166.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Ibid., p. 167.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Ibid., p. 168.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] Ibid., p. 169.
[^27] Ibid.
[^28] Ibid., p. 182.
[^29] Ibid., p. 183.
[^30] Ibid., 5:182.
[^31] Ibid., 2:297-98.
[^32] Ibid., 5:369.
[^33] Ibid., p. 515
[^34] Ibid., 2:345.
[^35] Ibid., p. 405.
[^36] Ibid., 5:500.
[^37] Ibid., 2:45.
