Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

4

He Asked If I for Him Would Die

A City Beautiful

As the weeks continued to pass after the majority of the Latter-day Saints had fled from Missouri, the presence of Joseph Smith and his associates in Missouri prisons became an increasing source of embarrassment. The Mormon leaders were innocent of any crime, and the public officials finally determined that the best way out of this dilemma would be to permit the prisoners to escape. As Joseph and his companions were being conveyed from one jail to another, the guards indicated that in the evening would be an excellent time for the prisoners to escape because they had some "jugs" and were going to do some drinking. The prisoners protested the necessity of escaping on foot. The guards were most obliging and offered to sell horses to them. The prisoners had only enough personal belongings to purchase one horse and they insisted they needed at least two. The guards were most cooperative and said, in essence, "We know we can trust you. Give us your note and you can have another horse." [^1]

Joseph, free again, determined to gather the scattered Saints to a plot of ground situated on a horseshoe bend of the Mississippi River. It was a beautiful sight, being surrounded on three sides by the same river. The city was visible for miles to those who traveled up and down the great river. Under the direction of the Prophet Joseph, the swampy area, renamed Nauvoo, was soon to rapidly be transformed into a lovely city. As the work of draining the swampy area where the City Beautiful would be built progressed, many, almost all, became ill with fever. The Prophet was nursed day after day. Finally, as he learned of the number of those ill, he called upon God to make him well and to permit him to be God's instrument in restoring others to health. The Prophet was made well; he arose from his bed, and went into his own dooryard where numbers of his followers were gathered. He laid his hands upon them, one after another, and through God's power they arose. He called members of the Twelve to follow him and assist him. They visited the ill in Nauvoo. As they came to Elijah Fordham, the Prophet took hold of his hand and looked at the unconscious man for a few moments and then commanded, "Brother Fordham, in the name of Jesus Christ arise and walk." He immediately arose from his bed, got dressed, called for some food, and went with the Prophet to bless and heal others. [^2]

The Quorum of the Twelve was dispatched to England to teach the gospel more fully in that land, and corner stones were laid for a new and impressive temple overlooking the surrounding countryside.

The people of Illinois had kindly welcomed the persecuted Saints with open arms, and this kindness continued. It looked as though this time a dream could at least be partially fulfilled, and the Saints could gather and build a beautiful city, build a temple to their God, and live and worship without fear.

Once again this was not to be. For numerous reasons, opposition increased, and soon there were those who were calling for the overthrow of Joseph and the removal of the Mormons. And there were some who would prefer to see Joseph Smith dead. Finally, on Friday, June 7, 1844, the first and only issue of a slanderous paper was issued in Nauvoo. It was titled "The Nauvoo Expositor." The authors were apostate Mormons who were collaborating with hateful non-Mormons. Joseph Smith was mayor of the city, and immediately the city council was called into session. They met that evening, again all day Saturday, and they were in session again early Monday morning. They finally concluded, after the study of the law books, that they had a right to declare the paper a public nuisance and also had the right to abate the nuisance. They sent the city marshall to stop publication. The publishers of the Expositor immediately raised a resounding cry of obstruction of freedom of speech and freedom of the press, and a cry went up from all quarters condemning Joseph Smith and calling for his speedy trial in Carthage. Joseph Smith knew that if he went to Carthage he would never return alive. Citizens of the surrounding communities clamored for Joseph and the other members of the city council to be tried at the county seat. [^3]

A Place In The West

Joseph Smith was young, strong, and vigorous. He was filled with energy and hope. He had always dreamed big dreams, very big dreams, and worked tirelessly to bring those dreams to reality. His heart and mind were still filled with dreams—dreams for his children: Julia, thirteen years old now; Joseph III, his first surviving son, eleven years old; Frederick, age eight; and Alexander, just six years old. Also, he had dreams for a child yet unborn. He had said to Emma, in essence, "If our baby is a boy, let's name him David Hyrum." Dreams, worthy dreams for his children. The older ones, as young as they were, had already experienced the terror of a mob. Their mother had walked with them across Missouri to Quincy, Illinois, in 1838 while their father was imprisoned. Joseph wanted to raise them, play with them, teach them, and have for them a place to live where there would be no hunger, no terror, but peace and safety. No, there was much to live for—so many wonderful, so many exciting things. Joseph Smith had no desire to die. He loved life. He relished it and its experiences. But it was evident that a circle of apostasy, bitterness, and hatred which threatened his very being was drawing ever tighter. At this time the Prophet said: "I told Stephen Markham that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a prophet of God." [^4]

Joseph, in the presence of several of his brethren, read a letter for Governor Thomas Ford, the governor of Illinois. As the Prophet put the letter down he said, "There is no mercy—no mercy here."

Hyrum said, "No; just as sure as we fall into their hands we are dead men."

Joseph replied, "Yes; what shall we do, Brother Hyrum?"

He replied, "I don't know."

All at once Joseph's countenance brightened and he said, "The way is open. It is clear to my mind what to do. All they want is Hyrum and myself; then tell everybody to go about their business." [^5]

Joseph determined at that point that he and Hyrum would go to the west and prepare a place for the Saints. What an exciting thought this was, not to be at the end of life, but the beginning of a joyful and almost limitless new experience. Joseph Smith had known for some time that the Church would move to the west. He had learned of this in a vision on August 6, 1843. Anson Call was present and wrote the following:

I had before seen him in vision, and now saw while he was talking, his countenance change to white. . .a living, brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing upon the valleys of those mountains. This was followed by a vivid description of the scenery of these mountains as I have since become acquainted with it. . . .There was a force and power to his exclamation, of which the following is but a faint echo; "Oh the beauty of those snow capped mountains! The cool, refreshing streams that are running down the mountain gorges. . . ." [^6]

Now that which had been seen by him—which was so thrilling, so filled with promise—would be realized. He and Hyrum would go west to find the place of refuge and safety for the Saints where they would be free from hurt. The Prophet's mind was working rapidly now. There would be much to do. He would have to have supplies and equipment, make arrangements for his wife and children. It would take money, and all of this would have to be accomplished immediately. The Prophet borrowed $1,000 and made arrangements with loyal friends to take his wife and children to a place of safety and await word from him. He crossed the river that very night to gather the supplies together and prepare to leave. The next morning messengers came from Nauvoo. The Prophet was ill prepared for the word that they brought. He had never shirked his responsibility as a servant of the Lord from the time he had had a vision that spring day twenty-four years before. He had been arrested, beaten, and harassed, and he had almost never faltered. Hadn't he been an example to his followers—hadn't he been faithful to the Lord Jesus Christ? Shouldn't his followers know that? He was stunned as the messengers asked him to return. As they did so, they gave him a letter from Emma which also entreated him to come back and face the charges.

A Prophet's Last Goodbye

The Prophet had been packing as the messengers entered the room. He stood stunned, and he was told that he was like a shepherd deserting his flock in the face of danger. [^7] Joseph Smith was being accused of cowardice. How does one who has hardly known fear react to a charge of cowardice? He turned to Porter Rockwell and said, "Porter, what shall we do?" Perhaps the Prophet, now broken-hearted, was trying to gain perspective and balance in a situation which had almost totally devastated him. Porter said, "I do not know. You are older than I. You will have to decide." He then turned to Hyrum, the one who had always been able to help him, and said, "Hyrum, what shall I do?" Hyrum said, "Let's go back. I think all will be well with us." Joseph's reply was significant: "If my life is of no value to my friends, my life is of no value to me." And preparations were made for the return to Nauvoo.

It was a melancholy Joseph Smith who returned to Nauvoo to make the arrangements to go to Carthage. He knew, he was the only one who knew that this would be the last time he would look on his beloved city, Nauvoo. He rode to his farm and said, "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens." He looked upon the temple which was now up to the square, and he went to say goodbye to his wife and children. He was solemn and thoughtful. He embraced them. Perhaps they wondered why it was so hard for their father to leave them and why he returned again and embraced them each once more and again told them goodbye. He knew why the parting was so difficult for him. They did not know. How does one say goodbye to his wife and children for the last time—the very last time? Finally he was astride his horse and rode with his brother and others away from his house and toward Carthage. A faint wave of his arm, and he was lost from view. As he rode he soberly said, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and it shall be said of me, 'He was murdered in cold blood!' " [^8]

Carthage

Joseph and Hyrum rode together toward Carthage. It was a fateful ride. Joseph had tried in vain to persuade his beloved brother to remain behind, but he would not. S. Dilworth Young portrays in poetry the bond between the brothers.

. . . Hyrum rides with me. His loyalty transcends, Exalts, the common blood We share. . . . He is not sure, not yet, Of what we face, as I am sure, And that is best. Why don't I send him back? Command in God's own name? He might obey me and find rest Safe rest, Among the saints. But no, we're bound Together now with bands Like steel: The banks of love, The banks of blood, The bands of waking and of Sleeping, The bands of sorrow and of Weeping, The bands of happiness and joy. He stays with me, though he Is free To go, And he will be with me Eternally. [^9]

It was late, very late, when Joseph, Hyrum, and other members of the city council arrived at Carthage, the county seat of Hancock County. It had taken Joseph a long time to say his goodbyes.

The following morning, Governor Ford arranged to have the Prophet pass before the troops so that they could all see him. Later in the morning, a delegation of officers came to visit the Prophet and his fellow prisoners. During the interview, the Prophet in essence said, "Tell me, gentlemen, do I look like the desperate character that I am proported to be?" The reply: "No sir, you do not, but we cannot see what is in your heart"; to which Joseph gravely replied, "That is true, gentlemen, but I can see what is in your hearts, and will tell you what I see. I can see blood, and nothing but my blood with satisfy you." [^10]

The hearing was held, and the prisoners were bound over for trial and released on bond. Joseph and Hyrum, however, were immediately charged with another crime—the charge was treason and they were not permitted to leave for Nauvoo, but were returned to the jail. The charge of treason stemmed from the fact that Joseph, as Mayor of Nauvoo, had declared martial law and had called out Nauvoo Legion troops to protect the city. This had only been done after extensive correspondence with Governor Ford, and the governor was the person who had suggested that if the situation deteriorated, martial law might have to be declared. Now Joseph and Hyrum were detained for following that suggestion. Governor Ford gave Joseph Smith his solemn pledge that if he left Carthage, Joseph Smith would go with him. The governor left for Nauvoo without Joseph Smith, even though he had been told, and was retold as he left the city, the great danger the Prophet would be in if he did not accompany him. Governor Ford, however, did not heed the warning.

While imprisoned, Joseph bore a powerful testimony to those who guarded him. He told them of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the gospel, and the visitation of angels. [^11] As Joseph retired to bed, he again stated that he was to die and said, "I would like to see my family again" and "I would to God that I could preach to the Saints in Nauvoo once more." [^12]

Samuel Smith sought desperately to get to Carthage to assist his imprisoned brothers, but he was turned back by those who guarded the road. He finally returned to his house, took almost all he had and traded it for an extremely fast horse, and approached the guards again at a leisurely pace. Suddenly he whipped his horse, dashed past the astonished guards, and soon outdistanced his pursuers; but he did not arrive in time to assist or comfort his brothers. [^13]

That Fateful Day

It was late in the afternoon of a sultry summer day, June 27, 1844. Joseph had sent a final message to his wife:

Dear Emma, I am very much resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified, and have done the best that can be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends. [^14]

There were only four who now remained: Joseph the Prophet; his ever devoted brother Hyrum, assistant president of the Church and presiding patriarch; John Taylor, the stalwart convert from Canada, an apostle; and Willard Richards, also a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, a physician and the Prophet's secretary.

John Taylor was asked to sing. He sang "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief." Apparently the message of the song—the words about the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ—were comforting and strengthening to Joseph Smith, because a few minutes later Brother Taylor was requested to sing the song again. The third from the last verse is particularly significant:

My friendship's utmost zeal to try He asked if I for him would die The blood ran chill, but the free spirit cried "I Will." [^15]

Joseph did not want to die. There was so much to live for. Just as the Savior's response was "not my will, but thy will be done," so Joseph Smith's response to the Lord and Savior in life and in the face of death was, "not my will, but thy will be done."

A noise was heard outside. Over one hundred men with blacked faces stormed the jail. Some remained below and shot through the windows; others rushed up the stairs. The prisoners tried to hold the wooden door against the onslaught. Hyrum was shot in the face, and as he fell, he uttered, "I am a dead man." His brother, Joseph, sprang to his side and kneeling said, "Oh my poor dear brother Hyrum." John Taylor was shot repeatedly and fell. Joseph ran toward the window, was shot, and fell from the window. His last words were, "My Lord, my God." [^16]

The Latter-day Joseph was dead. A cry went up from the mob that the Mormons were coming. The information was incorrect, but they and all the residents of Carthage fled in terror, fearing that the Mormons would come to avenge the death of their leader. But once again, as so many times before, the feelings and attitudes of the followers of Joseph were misunderstood. A message, brief and pointed, was sent by the surviving, unhurt companion of Joseph, Dr. Willard Richards:

Carthage Jail, 8:05 o-clock, P.M., June 27th, 1844.

Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded. . . I am well. Our guard was forced as we believe by a band of Missourians from 100 to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled towards Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens here are afraid of the Mormons attacking them. I promise them no!

W. Richards, John Taylor [^17]

The Bodies Returned to Nauvoo

When the Mormons came it was to mournfully claim the bodies of their two fallen leaders, not to seek revenge and bring destruction to Carthage and its people.

The morning after the tragedy, Willard Richards and Samuel Smith came from Nauvoo with the bodies of the martyrs. The bodies were covered with brush to shelter them from the sun. A great multitude of people met them on Mulholland Street, about a mile from the temple. It was now 3:00 P.M. The bodies were washed and prepared for burial. Joseph had been shot in the right side of his chest, also under the heart, and in his abdomen, and had also been shot from behind through the right hip. One ball had come out through the right shoulder blade. Cotton soaked in camphor was placed in each wound, and the bodies were dressed in white. [^18]

After this was done, the wives and children of the Prophet and patriarch were permitted to see the bodies. When Emma saw the body of Joseph, she screamed and fell back; she was caught and supported. She kissed the Prophet, called his name, and begged him to speak to her once more. Mary, Hyrum's wife, was calm and composed. [^19]

Thousands gathered the next day to view the bodies of the fallen latter-day prophet and his faithful brother. What a poignant scene that must have been on the memorable day. With little effort I can picture what could have taken place. Imagination combined with facts can produce insights.

What Manner of Man Was This Joseph Smith?

It was a warm day—the date, June 29, 1944. A boat is approaching a horseshoe bend in the Mississippi River. Situated prominently on that bend is a city. A traveler seeks to identify the city from his map, but the map which was printed a few years previously shows no such city. Upon inquiry the interested traveler is told that the city is Nauvoo and that the boat would make a brief stop there.

As the boat docks, the traveler becomes curious as to why long lines of people are waiting to enter a large home on the river front. He, being in no hurry to reach his destination, informs the captain that he is going to remain in this Nauvoo for a few hours, or perhaps overnight.

As the visitor approaches the end of the line, it becomes apparent that these are grief-stricken people. All of the ladies and many of the men are weeping. He approaches one of the mourners and inquires, "Excuse me, but what are these lines for; what are you waiting to see?"

The mourner looks at him in amazement, "You mean you don't know?"

"I'm a stranger here. I just arrived on the boat," he answers, pointing in the direction of the pier.

"Oh, I see," replies the mourner. "These people and myself are waiting to view the bodies of Lieutenant General Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum Smith who were killed two days ago."

"Lieutenant General Smith?" the visitor says questioningly.

"Yes, he was the lieutenant general of a legion of five thousand men, most of them uniformed and equipped."

"How many others were killed with them?" asks the stranger.

"None," replies the mourner. "This is perhaps one of the reasons why Joseph died. He believed that it was his life that was wanted and that if he died, the lust for blood would be satisfied and others would not be killed. He wanted his brother Hyrum to live, but Hyrum insisted that he be by the side of his brother. 'In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated.' "

The traveler asks, "How did the trouble that lead to their deaths begin?"

"The most immediate cause was the destruction of the printing press of the Nauvoo Expositor," replies the mourner. "The Expositor was owned by the enemies of Joseph Smith, and they published a libelous paper. An order to close the paper was issued by the city council and the mayor, Joseph Smith."

"Joseph Smith was the mayor of this city?"

"Yes, he was," comes the reply.

"This is a very new city, isn't it?" says the stranger. "Why, it isn't even on my map."

"Yes, Yes, it is new. Why, just six years ago this was nothing but a swamp."

The traveler says, "It is a beautiful city. I noticed as I came up the river that most of the farms and corrals were outside of town."

"Yes, this is the way Joseph planned the city."

"Joseph planned this city?" repeats the stranger.

"Yes, so that the people, who are mostly farmers, could have the advantages of city life by all living together—so that we might associate together and learn from each other."

The traveler comments on the wide, straight streets and the well-built houses. He also tells the mourner that he has seen a large white building apparently under construction. The building is on the most prominent rise of land in the city. The mourner informs the visitor that the building is the temple and that Joseph Smith had designed it to be the dominant landmark in the city.

"Joseph Smith designed the temple!" the stranger exclaims.

"Yes, Joseph designed it," comes the reply.

The traveler then remembers, "You were telling me what led to the death of this Joseph Smith."

"Oh, yes, the Expositor incident. But the trouble began a long time ago, long before that incident, even before Joseph translated the ancient record."

"He was a translator of ancient languages?" repeats the visitor. "How many languages did he know?"

"I am not certain," replies the mourner, "but he knew Hebrew, German, and Egyptian."

"What happened to this translation of the ancient record?" questions the traveler.

"It has been published and it is called the Book of Mormon."

The traveler continues to question, "Has he published any other books?"

"Oh, yes, as president of the Church— — —"

"President of the Church?— — —"

"Yes, president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Almost everyone here in Nauvoo is a member of the Church.

"As I was saying," continues the mourner, "as president of the Church he published the Doctrine and Covenants."

"What kind of book is that?" asks the amazed visitor.

"It is a book of revelations which were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith by the Lord."

"The Prophet Joseph Smith!"

"Yes, he was a prophet. God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him and conversed with him. In fact, it was after Joseph, full of joy and boyish enthusiasm, told his neighbors that he had seen a vision that the persecution first began. Not only was Joseph persecuted, but also all of his followers. Why, many of the people you see about you here were driven from homes in Missouri. None of us were paid for our losses. Joseph tried in vain to obtain redress, but we were refused. That is the principle reason that Joseph became a candidate for the presidency of the United States."

"A candidate for the presidency of the United States!" the bewildered traveler replies.

The mourner continues: "It was four days ago that Joseph bid a reluctant farewell to his family, looked longingly at the temple and then at his farm, and said, 'This is the loveliest place and best people under the heavens,' as he rode toward the county seat at Carthage to turn himself over to his enemies. He said to those who accompanied him, 'I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am as calm as a summer's morning.' He was promised protection and a fair trial, but two days ago, on June 27th, a band of over one hundred men with blackened faces stormed the Carthage jail. A few moments later they retreated, and Lieutenant General Joseph Smith and his faithful brother Hyrum lay dead."

The traveler and the mourner have now come to the door. They cease talking. The visitor strains to see the bodies. He sees two coffins, and in each, directly over the face of the occupant, is a piece of glass. The visitor looks questioningly at the mourner, who with a gesture indicates that the nearest casket contains the body of Joseph Smith.

As the stranger views the body, his face registers surprise and disbelief. He speaks almost silently, "This is Joseph Smith!" He sees a young man, a handsome man with a prominent nose and a slightly receding forehead. He is stunned; he had expected to see an old man with white hair and a long, flowing beard, and a face drawn and wrinkled with age. He quietly whispers to the mourner, "How old was he?"

In a subdued tone comes the reply, "He was thirty-eight years of age."

As the traveler looks almost in disbelief, he thinks, "Lieutenant general, linguist, translator, author, mayor, prophet, president, city planner, architect, presidential candidate—WHAT MANNER OF MAN WAS THIS JOSEPH SMITH?"

The silence is interrupted as a man in the corner of the room asks for the attention of the group and says, "My dear brothers and sisters, it is five o'clock. We would like to clear this room so that the loved ones of those deceased can view the bodies alone for the last time."

As the traveler and the mourner make their way out through the open door, the traveler stops to shake the mourner's hand and to thank him. When he reaches the gate he turns and begins walking in the direction of the temple.

As he walks, the same question escapes his lips: "WHAT MANNER OF MAN WAS THIS JOSEPH SMITH?"

He continues up the street and is lost from view.

Perhaps there was no stranger, but again, it could have happened on that warm June day in 1844.

The Unknown Grave

After the loved ones viewed the bodies for the last time, trusted friends removed the bodies from the caskets, weighted the caskets, and took them solemnly to the public cemetery for burial. The bodies were then buried secretly in the basement of the uncompleted Nauvoo House. This precaution had been made necessary by the rumor that $1,000 had been offered for the head of Joseph Smith, and the digging up and desecrating of dead bodies by their enemies was not unknown to the Saints. It had been done many times by their enemies. As time passed, the bodies were relocated. The years seemed to obscure the location of the graves, and David Hyrum, who had been born five months after the death of his father, as a young man wrote a poem honoring his father. It is entitled "The Unknown Grave."

THE UNKNOWN GRAVE There's an unknown grave in a green, lowly spot, The form that it covers will ne'er be forgot, Where haven trees spread and the wild locusts wave Their fragrant white blooms o'er the unknown grave,— O'er the unknown grave. And nearby its side does the wild rabbit tread, While over its bosom the wild thistles spread, As if; in their kindness, to guard and to save From man's footstep, intruding, the unknown grave,— Guarding the unknown grave. The heavens may weep and the thunders moan low, Or the bright sun shine, and the soft breezes blow; Unheeding the heart, once responsive and brave, Of the one who sleeps there in the unknown grave,— Low in an unknown grave. The prophet whose life was destroyed by his foes Sleeps now where no hand may disturb his repose 'Til the trumpets of God drown the notes of the wave And we see him arise from his unknown grave,— God bless that unknown grave. The love all-embracing that never can end, In death, as in life, knew him well as a friend; The power of Jesus, the mighty to save, Will despoil of its treasure the unknown grave,— No more an unknown grave. —David Hyrum Smith [^20]

I Wish It Could Have Been the First Prophet

Joseph did not shirk life, nor did he try to avoid its experiences. He was "a front line" leader, a "forefront-of-the-battle" prophet.

He marched, built, sawed, hewed, plowed, planted with everyone else. His muscular body was a result of physical exertion. His mind was "an IDEAL" of unrelenting seeking. His soul yearned for truth, and his personality reached out tenderly to encourage, cheer, and revitalize his fellow Saints. This permitted Joseph Smith to be measured by others, to be evaluated. He was not at a distance, but always close as a handshake.

Those who demonstrated by their lives that they had the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ demonstrated it by faithfulness in the Church during the life of Joseph Smith and in the years after. They liked what they saw; they sought to be like him.

For those who judged him by the standards of the world, Joseph Smith often came off "wanting." These left him, and some fought against him.

How could he build the kingdom of God in the last days unless he had intimate associations with his followers? Jesus had demonstrated in fishing boats and on hillsides and in cities that one, by closeness of proximity, makes enemies; but more important, one makes friends and converts.

The risk was great. Jesus was betrayed by one of his own, Judas. Joseph as well was betrayed from within by one of his own counselors.

But success must be counted in friends.

Peter, James, John, and others emerged to greatness. Peter, when brought before the Sanhedran was threatened and abused but emulated his Lord.

Brigham Young's decisive take-charge attitude in Nauvoo and his striking success emulated the vastness of dreams and hopes that Joseph had displayed. His courage in trials rivaled Joseph Smith.

Joseph Smith is the epitome of the whole, well-rounded man. Only one person would determine what he was and would be, and that was the Lord Jesus Christ. Social convention was not that which determined his behavior.

He had a zest for life. He could absorb all it had to offer and still hunger for additional experience. He faced it head on, and took its full impact and relished more, and prior to his death wanted to swing his large frame into a saddle and explore the West to find that place in the Rockies that he had seen in vision—the place of refuge for his oft-persecuted followers. Often in my mind's eye I have envisioned Brigham Young looking from Wilford Woodruff's carriage in that most dramatic moment and saying, "This is the right place, drive on." What a thrilling moment in history as the Saints had found their haven in the mountains.

Sometimes in quiet, reflectful moments, I wish it could have been the first prophet of the last dispensation, the tall young prophet not yet forty years old. I can see vividly in my mind how it might have been. He would have been dusty and tired from a long ride. He would be erect in the saddle, drinking deeply of every new object in his surroundings. And then, as he ascended the top of another mountain, another of too many to remember, he would look over the valley and know. He would swing down from his tired horse, remove his travel worn hat, and kneel reverently, thankfully before God. And how his eyes would flash as he spoke in excited terms about building a place where "the Saints could grow as large as they had a mind to." But it was not to be. How he could have liked it to be! But he had prepared well those who followed him. The same determination, the same genius, the same inspiration from the same God would be theirs.

The melancholy Joseph had to set his eyes back across the Mississippi, back toward hatred and disloyalty and death. For a fleeting moment—an unrealistic moment, and all too brief a moment—his eyes had been looking west to freedom, to adventure and to a continuation of building the kingdom of God on earth.

The resolute prophet returned—others guessed what might happen and hoped it would not.

Joseph knew what would happen and wished it would not. Again, as so often before, Joseph reached deeply into a reservoir of courage. Never before had he needed to reach so deeply, and never again would he.

In a matter of weeks, Samuel Smith joined his brothers in death. He never recovered from the exhaustion and exposure of that fateful June day.

Hyrum Smith's loyalty to his brother Joseph had caused his death. This may also be said of Samuel. Though his death was less dramatic, it came as a result of loyalty to his brother Joseph Smith. Samuel was the first missionary of the Church; and while on that first mission in the year 1830, he had borne witness that his brother Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. Now, fourteen years later, in 1844, he bore witness with his life, as had his brother Hyrum.

When Joseph bade farewell to the people in Nauvoo and started toward Carthage he was young, strong, vigorous; and it had not entered the minds of his followers that he might die. He had been in danger before, many times. Since he was fourteen he had lived with danger, but hadn't he always returned to them? This time he did not return. The people were stunned as they viewed his bullet-riddled body. Many were not only stunned, but confused. Joseph had been their leader; and now he and Hyrum, the assistant president of the Church, were dead. Some thought that Joseph would be immediately resurrected and come back to them to continue as their leader. [^21] Some felt that the Church could not survive without Joseph.

Here Is Brigham

Sidney Rigdon, the member of the first presidency whom Joseph had unsuccessfully tried to remove from his position, returned from Pittsburgh. He asked that he be appointed guardian of the Church. An open-air meeting was called, and Sidney Rigdon, with William Marks at his side, ascended to the stand. The wind blowing toward them was so strong that they mounted a wagon behind the congregation, and the people turned and faced them. Sidney, who had been the great orator of the Church, was ineffective that day. Brigham Young and most of the twelve had been in the mission field when Joseph and Hyrum were killed; they returned to Nauvoo and took their place on the stand. As Sidney was speaking, the wind ceased blowing. When he had concluded, Brigham Young began to speak; and the people turned to listen. [^22] Brigham Young literally devastated Sidney's claim to leadership with one sentence. He said: "Here is Brigham—have his knees ever faltered?" [^23] In 1839 Brigham Young had risked his life to return to Far West to the midst of his enemies so that a prophecy made by Joseph Smith could be fulfilled. In the autumn of that same year, he left for a mission to England where he had to be lifted into a wagon because he was so ill. Well could he say, "Have his knees ever faltered?" In contrast, Sidney's knees had faltered almost continuously since the Saints had left Missouri. What Brigham Young was, was known to the Saints. As he spoke, numerous beheld a miracle which was a witness of their faith. Before them again was the Prophet Joseph. Brigham Young looked and sounded like Joseph Smith. As surely as the mantle of authority which Elijah had fell upon Elisha, so surely had the mantle of Joseph Smith fallen upon Brigham Young.

The Lord in his mercy had again in an unmistakable manner directed his people. It was not the church of Joseph Smith. It was the Church of Jesus Christ. He had directed his Prophet Joseph to bestow the keys of authority upon the Twelve, and now he showed his followers that the Twelve, with Brigham Young as the president of that quorum, were to lead the Church. Brigham Young asked the thousands assembled if they would sustain the Twelve. The voting was unanimous. A few days later Sidney Rigdon left Nauvoo for Pittsburgh, drawing a handful of followers with him. The Twelve renamed the City of Nauvoo the City of Joseph, and they encouraged the Saints to complete the temple as a monument to the name of Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith was dead, but the Church of Jesus Christ was very much alive.

Chapter 4 Notes

8.

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in Evans, John Henty, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), pp. 117-18.
[^2] Quoted in Joseph Smith, an American Prophet, p. 9.
[^3] HC 6:485-86.
[^4] From a consideration of incomplete historical records, following is what I believe took place relative to the presentation of a new book of scripture and its ultimate acceptance. See also William E. Berrett, Teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961) pp. 2-6.
[^5] D&C 67:5-8.
[^6] HC 4:226-32.
[^7] JD 3:511.
[^8] Pratt, pp. 45-46.
[^9] Evans, pp. 178-79.
[^10] HC 5:260.
[^11] Ibid., p. 302.
[^12] Ibid., p. 307.
[^13] D&C 128:19, 20, 22, 23.
[^14] HC 5:134-35.
[^15] Ibid., 6:286.
[^16] Ibid., 5:241.
[^17] Ibid., p. 20.
[^18] JD 23:362.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] McGavin, E. Cecil, The Family of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), pp. 165-66.
[^21] JD 23:363-64.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Young, S. Dilworth, Here is Brigham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 361.
