Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

5

Joseph Smith: An Evaluation

Joseph Smith Relished Life

I have mentally rehearsed the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, trying to think of an incident that would even give a hint of cowardice. I know of none. On the other hand, incidents of courage are almost endless. Joseph Smith seriously accepted the responsibility of restoring the kingdom of God to the earth. It was a large task, but God was the author of it. Joseph was totally dedicated to the building of the kingdom and the achievement of its ultimate destiny of filling the entire earth.

He was completely involved in the progress of the Church. He was consumed by an idea, and what others may have perceived as devastating if not fatal blows to the kingdom, Joseph Smith saw as temporary setbacks to a cause which could not be stopped. Joseph Smith refused to be placed on the defensive, although the odds against success often seemed insurmountable. He retained the initiative.

In spite of brutal treatment and heartbreaking defeats, his mind was ever active, planning a new phase of the development of the kingdom of God in the last days: a temple in Kirtland, Zion, Nauvoo the Beautiful, a gathering place in the west, a thousand years of peace.

Joseph knew only one direction—that was forward. Joseph Smith at his death was still building Nauvoo into a major city of the West, devoting energy to a campaign for the presidency of the United States, and organizing explorers to seek out a location in the West where the Saints could move and become a mighty people.

Courage, remarkable courage—a visionary man, a creative and energetic man, an optimistic man, an enthusiastic man-how can you help but be impressed with someone who is irrespressible?

A leader, to be successful, must be courageous. Joseph asked his people to do nothing he would not do himself. Joseph Smith experienced life. The good and the bad literally came tumbling upon him from all directions. He met life and its experiences head-on with uncommon courage and literally absorbed all of it. On occasions he was taken back, but only momentarily, and then he was again surging forward as though he were searching, hungering for additional experiences. He relished life as few men have. All of his senses—physical, mental and spiritual—were so atuned that little was missed.

Joseph Smith had developed the attributes to prepare him to experience life to the fullest. He had developed an amazing spiritual capacity, remarkable physical body, a keen mind, and a delightful sense of humor.

By example he showed his people how to live.

Joseph Smith could not have succeeded if he had not had remarkable courage. Few have ever been faced with the fierce hate and determined opposition that Joseph faced. As great as his courage was, a courage that only a few have known, if it had been any less than it was, he would have failed.

Joseph Smith was completely unselfish. He gave of himself spiritually, intellectually, physically, and emotionally.

He was completely honest in all aspects of his personality. Joseph Smith honestly and openly expressed love. He honestly and openly expressed joy. He honestly and openly made public his weaknesses. He honestly and openly expressed his remorse. Contrary to the will of the Lord, Joseph Smith allowed Martin Harris to take the first 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript that had been translated. Martin lost them, and the Lord chastized Joseph severely. Joseph made no attempt to hide his error or the Lord's rebuke. In fact, if one wants to read the account, it is in Sections three and ten of the Doctrine and Covenants—readily available for all the world to read. This tells us something about Joseph. He did not try to hide his weaknesses. His reason for such honesty was that he desired to show his people how to live, how to love, how to feel, and how to react. He was more concerned with helping another by example than he was with improving his own image or building his own ego.

Joseph Smith was concerned only with serving his Savior, Jesus Christ, just as Jesus was concerned only with serving his Father in Heaven. This attitude of Joseph's taking his work seriously but himself lightly permitted him an attitude of freedom, a relaxed condition. He could be himself; sometimes carefree, sometimes intense, sometimes sad, sometimes lifted up in spiritual ecstasy. There were many dimensions to his personality—always sensitive, always concerned, always seeking to assist, in some way to bless another.

The Prophet's cousin, George A. Smith, observed Joseph on the Zion's Camp march and wrote:

The Prophet took a full share of the fatigues of the entire journey. In addition to the care of providing for the Camp and presiding over it, he walked most of the time and had a full proportion of blistered, bloody and sore feet, which was the natural result of walking from twenty-five to forty miles a day, in the hot season of the year.

But during the entire trip he never uttered a murmur; while most of the men in the Camp complained to him of sore toes, blistered feet, long drives, scanty provisions, poor quality of bread, bad corn dodger, frowzy butter, strong honey, maggoty bacon and cheese, etc. Even a dog could not bark at some men without their murmuring at Joseph. If they had to camp with bad water, it nearly caused a rebellion. Yet we were the Camp of Zion, and many of us were prayerless, thoughtless, careless, heedless, foolish, or devilish, and we did not know it. Joseph had to bear with us and tutor us like children. There were many, however, in the Camp who never murmured and who were always ready and willing to do as our leaders desired. [^1]

Young though he was, he was like a father to Saints of all ages—a wise father, a loving father, filled with wisdom.

Yes, Joseph was a worthy model then and today because he was selfless. He did not have time for petty thoughts. His mind was occupied with principles of salvation. The greatness of the thoughts crowded out self-pity, jealousy, meanness, and pride.

He knew the truth and the truth made him free—free from fear, free from doubt, free from pessimism. Joseph said:

If I were sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia, with the Rocky Mountains piled on me, I would hang on, exercise faith, and keep up good courage, and I would come out on top. [^2]

In a letter to John Smith the Prophet wrote:

. . . I wrote these few lines to inform you that we feel determined in this place not to be dismayed if hell boils over all at once. We feel to hope for the best, and determined to prepare for the worst. [^3]

Joseph Smith could look any man in the eye. This gave him power. There was no pretense in Joseph Smith. He was what he was and grateful to the Lord for what God had brought him to be. The credit was to the Lord, and Joseph praised his name. Joseph Smith looked upon himself first as a servant of his Lord Jesus Christ, and this caused him to react to situations in a way which is unusual to the people of the world. Let us consider one example:

The Prophet's Astonishing Humility

The revelations came rapidly to Joseph Smith in the years 1829-31. They were important revelations. They were revelations pertaining to the establishment and governance of the kingdom of God restored to the earth. A conference was called in the latter part of 1831, and the brethren of the priesthood assembled in the home of John Johnson in Hiram, Ohio. The Prophet Joseph Smith presented to those assembled a number of revelations and asked them to consider them and approve of them as worthy of being published as a latter-day book of scripture to be titled the Book of Commandments. [^4] Those assembled quickly demonstrated that they had minds of their own, and in essence they confronted the twenty-five year old prophet with the challenge: "How do we know that the revelations are of God? The language sounds so very much like the language of Joseph Smith."

Here is an excellent opportunity to view historically another incident that gives insight to what Joseph Smith was like. He did not appear to be offended. He took the question in stride. I feel he was honestly perplexed. He knew the revelations were from God. I have wondered if he truly ever thought of why they sounded as they sounded. He did not become defensive. He did not rebuke them for questioning a prophet of God. But he very simply suggested an approach to the problem which he had utilized numerous times before. In essence his reply to the question was a candid "I don't know" followed by the words, "Let's ask the Lord." They knelt with him and he petitioned God for the answer. The answer was received in an effective, forceful, but most unpretentious way. No angel appeared; no audible voice was heard. The Prophet simply said to his scribe, "Please record the following." And then, speaking in measured sentences slow enough for a man to record the revelation in longhand, Joseph dictated the revelation as given to him by the Lord. But the answer sought is part of a comprehensive revelation of both warning and hope to the whole earth—a revelation which was to be known as the preface to the Book of Commandments and today is Section One of the Doctrine and Covenants. Verses 24-27 are the verses that directly answer the question Joseph asked of God:

Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding.

And inasmuch as they erred it might be made known;

And inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed;

And inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent. . . .

One would think that this amazing demonstration of the receiving of such a reasonable and satisfying answer would have silenced his questioners. But it did not, at least not all. William E. McLellan had had more formal education than any of the others. He was an impressive man. He continued to question Joseph. Again the Prophet sought the help of God. The revelation he received is a classic example of the principle stated by the Lord in the first revelation given that day to his servant. The Lord is interested in communicating with his children so they can understand and, if necessary, change their ways. The second revelation of the day is also in the Doctrine and Covenants and says rather simply:

Your eyes have been upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and his language you have known; and his imperfections you have known; and you have sought in your hearts knowledge that you might express beyond his language; this you also know.

Now, seek ye out of the Book of Commandments, even the least that is among them, and appoint him that is the most wise among you;

Or, if there be any among you that shall make one like unto it, then ye are justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true;

But if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do not bear record that they are true. [^5]

William E. McLellan was selected as being, by the standards of the world, the wisest in the group, and his assignment was to write a revelation that would sound as good and make a contribution equal to the "least" revelation presented by Joseph Smith. Brother McLellan was a complete failure; he could not write anything that sounded like a revelation. The next day he manifested an attitude of meekness as he offered his sustaining vote and his apologies to the youthful prophet. Now, with the approval of the body of the priesthood, plans were quickly made and put into action for the publication of the new book of scripture.

Mob intervention delayed the publication of the book. By the time publication could be resumed, additional revelations had been received, and it was determined that a new title, "The Doctrine and Covenants," would be more descriptive of the volume of modern day scripture. Joseph Smith's humility in the foregoing situation is astonishing. His humble attitude is further reflected in a letter written by Joseph to the members of the Quorum of the Twelve while they were laboring in England.

How pleasing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. Let the Saints of the Most High ever cultivate this principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only to them individually, but to the whole Church. . . .

. . . There are many things of much importance, on which you ask counsel, but which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon, as you are more conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am; and I feel great confidence in your united wisdom; therefore you will excuse me for not entering into detail. If I should see anything that is wrong, I would take the privilege of making known my mind to you, and pointing out the evil. (Italics added.)

Beloved brethren, you must be aware in some measure of my feelings, when I contemplate the great work which is now rolling on, and the relationship which I sustain to it, while it is extending to distant lands, and thousands are embracing it. I realize in some measure my responsibility, and the need I have of support from above, and wisdom from on high, that I may be able to teach this people, which have now become a great people, the principles of righteousness, and lead them agreeably to the will of Heaven; so that they may be perfected, and prepared to meet the Lord Jesus Christ when He shall appear in great glory. Can I rely on your prayers to our Heavenly Father on my behalf and on all the prayers of all my brethren and sisters in England, (Whom having not seen, yet I love), that I may be enabled to escape every strategem of Satan, surmount every difficulty, and bring this people to the enjoyment of those blessings which are reserved for the righteous? I ask this at your hands in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. (Italics added.)

In conclusion the Prophet says:

. . . Let every selfish feeling be not only buried, but annihilated; and let love to God and man predominate. . . .

Let us realize that we are not to live to ourselves, but to God; by so doing the greatest blessing will rest upon us both in time and in eternity.

. . . Give my love to all the brethren and sisters and tell them I should have been pleased to come over to England to see them, but I am afraid that I shall be under necessity of remaining here for some time; therefore I give them a pressing invitation to come and see me.

I remain, dear brethren, yours affectionately,

JOSEPH SMITH [^6]

Joseph Smith's submissive nature permitted him to enjoy the companionship of the Spirit of the Lord and the resultant blessing of such a companionship.

A Voice of Gladness

One would expect, and almost rightly so, that with so much adversity Joseph would almost always be sober, serious, and perhaps overly pious. This might be expected, but it was not the case.

Joseph did not fit the stereotype, the usual image of a prophet. He was a large, muscular young man who loved athletics and had a keen sense of humor. He was an impressive, memorable individual. Brigham Young said, years later: "I feel like shouting hallelujah all the time when I think I ever knew Joseph Smith the Prophet." [^7] Joseph's balance, his perspective, his enthusiasm in the face of opposition and tragedy were remarkable. He acted and reacted in a manner which was peculiar to himself. He did not confine his behavior to that which was conventional, nor to that which was expected by society.

Parley P. Pratt wrote a vivid description of Joseph Smith and among other things emphasized the fact that Joseph Smith was "affable, had an unconscious smile and was cheerful."

President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of a light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence; mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile, or cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens, and comprehend all worlds. [^8]

Among other things, a St. Louis reporter wrote:

. . . The Prophet's most remarkable feature is his eye. . . . His voice is low and soft and his smile, which is frequent, is agreeable. [^9]

The fact that Joseph loved athletics and often relaxed by engaging in athletic contests is evident from entries in his journal such as the following:

Played ball with the Brethren a short time. [^10]

I wrestled with William Wall, the most expert wrestler in Ramus, and threw him. [^11]

Rode out in the afternoon . . . and afterwards played ball with the boys. [^12]

Why was Joseph able to be cheerful, hopeful, pleasant, and engage in fun-filled activities? I think his own pen reveals the reason:

Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of good things, that say unto Zion: Behold, thy God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend upon them!

And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfillment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book!

Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel. . . .

Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King; And ye rivers and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy. And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever. [^13]

Perhaps it would be well for us who also on occasion have difficult decisions to make and have burdens to bear and occasionally have sorrow come uninvited into our lives—perhaps we should consider that which permitted Joseph to be cheerful, optimistic, and joyful. He had eternal perspective. He had viewed the eternal worlds and had seen the eternal possibilities of the patient, faithful person. He knew with certainty the reality of God and His Son. He knew the necessary price had been paid for our sins, and that through obedience we could dwell with God. That knowledge filled him with joy. Through the revelations of God to Joseph, and through his writings and teachings, we may also know and be filled with joy. How unfortunate that on occasions we lose sight and perspective of our eternal opportunities and, as a result, experience unhappiness. Joseph wrote the following concerning the purpose of our existence:

Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. [^14]

The Prophet knew that happiness was not necessarily the by-product of an undisturbed life—that happiness did not necessarily come because of the absence of difficulties. Rather, happiness is the result of a commitment to the Lord Jesus Christ and the privilege of being a recipient of the Holy Spirit, which brings peace, hope, and joy. This knowledge is not secret; it is attested to in the scriptures and in the teachings of prophets of God. But sometimes the reality of this truth is obscured by false philosophies and the enticements of the world. Some have the idea that the truly religious life is dull, drab, uninteresting. It would be difficult to find anything dull, drab, or uninteresting in the life of Joseph, the Prophet. His life from the beginning to end was literally crowded with excitment and challenge. The Lord does not direct his servants to the periphery but to the forefront of the battle of life. Everyone who truly wants to follow the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will find a most interesting, meaningful, vital life. If the follower of Jesus will permit the intercession of the Holy Spirit into his personal life, that follower will immediately discover that his life will not be wasted in a meaningless expenditure of energy. The servant of God will be directed to participate in that which is truly meaningful—not meaningful by the consensus of a group or a committee, but meaningful by the witness of God who is the possessor of all knowledge. Happiness, it would seem, would almost of necessity have to result from a sure knowledge that one is engaged in something of importance to God, his fellowmen, and himself. It would also follow that such a person would have confidence in himself and have purpose in his life. Joseph Smith is a remarkable example of one who captured those things of most importance in life.

Thy Will and Not Mine Be Done

The greatness of Joseph Smith was his greatness as a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith, following in the footsteps of his Savior, Jesus Christ, learned the meaning of persecution. Joseph experienced the blind, irrational behavior of some ignorant human beings. He knew what it was to be hurt again and again by unkind remarks. He knew the feeling of being laughed at, ridiculed, and insulted. He knew the discomfort of physical abuse and the unfairness of corrupt public officials. It seems apparent that these continual adverse experiences increased the Prophet's awareness of the feelings and needs of his fellow human beings. He appreciated deeply any display of kindness or any word of encouragement. While in the Liberty Jail, he thanked Mrs. Norman Bull for visiting him and said of his imprisonment: "It seems to me that my heart will always be more tender after this experience than ever before." [^15] On another occasion he said, "God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them." [^16] To the members of the Relief Society he cautioned:

I have one request to make of the President and members of the society, that you search yourselves—the tongue is an unruly member—hold your tongues about things of no moment.

. . . Put a double watch over the tongue. . . . The object is to make those not so good reform and return to the path of virtue that they may be numbered with the good. . . . [^17]

Joseph Smith was given great responsibility in life, responsibility that brought him in contact with mean and vile people—people who often showed no mercy. This treatment did not deaden the Prophet's sensitivity to good and right, but increased it.

The power of God was in Joseph Smith, the surging power that can come only to a man who has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and has proven his devotion in the fires of adversity.

George Q. Cannon said of Joseph Smith:

Think of what he passed through! Think of his afflictions, and think of his dauntless character! Did any one ever see any lack in him of the power necessary to enable him to stand with dignity in the midst of his enemies, or lacking in dignity in the performance of his duties as a servant of the living God? God gave him peculiar power in this respect. He was filled with integrity to God; with such integrity as was not known among men. He was like an angel of God among them. Notwithstanding all that he had to endure, and the peculiar circumstances in which he was so often placed, the great responsibility that weighed constantly upon him, he never faltered; the feeling of fear or trembling never crossed him—at least he never exhibited it in his feelings or actions. God sustained him to the very last, and was with him and bore him off triumphant even in his death. [^18]

Joseph never let the Lord down and faltered rarely and only momentarily. Joseph bore witness of God under the most trying and dangerous circumstances and did the work of the Lord when it literally cost him tears, sweat, and blood. Joseph Smith would translate when his body cried out for food; the voice of his great spirit cried out stronger for knowledge and truth. His dedication, proven in several states, was not to go unrewarded. When Joseph Smith stepped into the presence of a man, that man knew that here was a representative of God. When Joseph Smith stood before a congregation, his muscular body pulsed with the spirit of God and his eyes penetrated the very souls of those who sat before him—friends and enemies.

People speak of greatness of Joseph Smith. What greatness? The greatness of a prophet, an intellectual, a leader of men, a husband and father, a son, a humanitarian—yes, all of these. But his true greatness lies in his relationship with his God.

Joseph Smith, the representative of Jesus Christ, whose reaction from the first time he knelt in the grove of trees as a boy not yet fourteen years of age until he died a martyr by a mobster's bullet when he was not yet thirty-nine years of age, was "Thy will and not mine be done."

He did not enjoy persecution. He did not enjoy bearing burdens alone. He did not enjoy suffering, his own suffering or the suffering of loved ones. He did not enjoy privation, hunger, or hardship. He did not want to die. He had a relish for life. He cherished it perhaps as few men have. He did not want to leave his farm, his city, his wife, his unborn child. But Joseph's response to all of this was "not my will, but thy will be done."

Chapter 5 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Exodus 3:3.
[^2] Exodus 3:5.
[^3] Exodus 4:12.
[^4] Exodus 4:15-16.
[^5] JD 3:318.
[^6] Alma 48:11, 17.
[^7] Alma 46:9, 10.
[^8] See Whitney, pp. 120-21.
[^9] JD 6:65.
[^10] Whitney, p. 206.
[^11] Ibid., p. 276.
[^12] JD 24:53.
[^13] Ibid., 1:82.
[^14] Doxey, Roy W., The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.) 4:214-15.
[^15] HC 6:152.
[^16] JD 4:77-78.
[^17] HC 4:162-64.
[^18] D&C 121:41-42.
