Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

6

The Role of a Prophet

A Spokesman for the Lord

Moses said, "I will now turn aside and see this great sight," [^1] and he approached a burning bush which was not being consumed. God spoke to him, "Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground". [^2]

Moses, though reluctant, was called to be a prophet. When Moses protested because of his weaknesses, the Lord said, "Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say". [^3] Moses was still hesitant, and the Lord agreed to give him his brother Aaron as a spokesman. The Lord said Moses would be to Aaron as God was to Moses. That is, Aaron would speak only what the Lord told him to speak. [^4] The Lord leaves no question as to the role of a prophet. He is directed by God, and he is God's spokesman on the earth and is responsible to God. Speaking on this subject, Brigham Young said:

I was speaking about this matter last night, about the feelings of the people towards the Prophet Joseph. The mass of the people never realized, to the day of his death, but what Joseph was made by them. They actually believed that he was amenable to the people, that he did not know it all, and that other men knew things which he did not know concerning the Kingdom of God on the earth. . . .

As I have already observed, comparatively few learned, in the days of Joseph, that he was placed between the people and God, and that they had no more right to dictate him than they had to dictate the angel Gabriel, that they had no more business to interfere with him, or call him to an account, than we have to call to an account the angel Gabriel. [^5]

A prophet is a teacher of eternal truths. He is an example of righteousness, a condemner of wickedness, a forseer of the future, and an inspired leader of men.

Two Kinds of Men on the Earth

A battle was waged in heaven to guarantee that God's children when they came to this earth would have individual moral free agency. He who would have taken that away was cast from heaven with his followers, and those who followed the plan of the Lord Jesus Christ wept for them.

The children of God on this earth may select good or evil, and often the selection effects more than just the individual. An example is Moroni, that great military leader spoken of in Alma in the Book of Mormon:

And Moroni was a strong and mighty man; he was a man of a perfect understanding . . . if all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men. [^6]

Amalickiah, on the other hand, brought sorrow, destruction, and death to two nations because of his desire to do extreme wickedness. The Book of Mormon says of him:

Yea, and also see the great wickedness one very wicked man can cause to take place among the children of men. Yea we see that Amalickiah, because he was a man of cunning device and a man of many flattering words, that he led away the hearts of many people to do wickedly. . . . [^7]

In Joseph Smith's day there were both kinds of men—righteous and evil. Joseph Smith was blessed with many friends and associates who elected to do good and to be faithful and loyal supporters. Numerous people have testified of the goodness of the Prophet of the last dispensation by their works. Word tributes are needful, but a testimony of deeds is preferable. Many followers of Joseph bore eloquent testimony of him and the God he represented and the gospel he espoused by their actions.

Faithful Followers of the Prophet

At the height of bitter apostasy in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1837, Joseph Smith and Heber C. Kimball were sitting near the sacrament table in the Kirtland Temple, and the Prophet said: "The Lord has whispered, let my servant Heber open the door of the Gospel to the people of England." Heber C. Kimball was stunned and replied, "Can Brother Brigham go with me?" "No," the Prophet replied, "the Lord has other work for Brigham." [^8] The Prophet was asking much of Heber. Heber was convinced that Joseph spoke for God. He would be required to leave his family in a near destitute condition. He laid his hands upon his wife and then each of the children in turn and invoked God to care for them. He wept as he blessed them. Later Heber recalled his assignment to England:

I have seen the day when it was as much as our lives were worth to sustain Joseph Smith—the apostates were so thick around us, and persecution was so great.

Brigham said, "Go, brother Heber, and in the name of Israel's God you shall be blessed, and it shall prove the salvation of thousands."

John Boynton, one of the Twelve, came to me and said, "If you are such a damned fool as to listen to Joseph Smith, the fallen Prophet, and go to England under these perilous circumstances, if I knew you were shipwrecked on Van Dieman's Land I would not assist you to get you from that land."

I will speak to Lyman Johnson's credit: I will give every man credit for the good he does. Lyman Johnson steps up and says, "Brother Heber, I do not feel so. I am sorry you are going, and consider you are foolish; but if you are determined to go, I will help you all that is in my power; and he took from his shoulders a good, nice camlet cloak and put it on to mine; and that was the first cloak I ever had.

Those circumstances were the most trying circumstances that ever I was brought into. Joseph had to flee from that land to save his body from being slain, and so had brother Brigham and every other man who would sustain the Prophet, the apostacy was so great; and they were most hellish in their wickedness.

I went and performed the mission according to the words of the Prophet of the Living God. . . . God had blessed and prospered me exceedingly, and the words of Joseph and Brigham were all fulfilled to the letter. . . . [^9]

Heber C. Kimball was permitted to stay in England for only eight months, and then he was needed at home by his leader, Joseph Smith. He had baptized 1,500 people in those eight months. He described the scene and his feelings as he bid farewell to those in England who had come into the kingdom of God. Children took hold of his hand or coat and wept. Parents stood by the door or leaned out of the windows and called out their goodbyes. They said, "Oh how can we get along without our dear Elder Kimball." And Heber said, "As I left them and walked along the country road, I wept and I went to the stream of water three times to bathe my eyes"; and he records, "I thought mine eyes were a fountain of tears." [^10]

He performed his mission "according to the words of the Prophet of the living God," and what a mission it was! It seems that part of the cost of success in the Lord's work is a willingness to serve when it is inconvenient.

Joseph had learned this lesson and learned it well, and gave his associates the opportunity to learn the important lesson for themselves. Never again would Heber C. Kimball be the same Heber C. Kimball; at the cost of personal sacrifice for a higher cause, his soul had been enlarged, his capacity increased, and his faith strengthened beyond that which it had been. Heber C. Kimball would never falter as a servant of God. Joseph Smith not only had the capacity to serve the Lord himself, but he had the capacity to help create dedicated servants.

The Prophet Joseph Smith prophesied on July 4, 1838, in Far West, that on that same day one year later, the Quorum of the Twelve would take leave from Far West. Brigham Young, by his own admission had, since his removal to Kirtland in 1832, stayed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, studied him, and attempted to emulate him. Brigham Young's behavior in 1839 during the Prophet's imprisonment certainly did credit to the name of Joseph Smith. Far West was in the hands of bitter enemies in 1839, but Brigham Young would not have a prophecy of Joseph Smith's go unfulfilled. At the peril of his own life and the lives of those who travelled with him, he returned to Far West to fulfill the prophecy. They literally infiltrated enemy lines, held a meeting at the temple site, and took leave for their mission. There were some who protested that it was not reasonable. It was not expected, it was difficult to do, it was too inconvenient.

The faithful apostles returned to Nauvoo. Prior to their departure to England, they were overcome by illness and postponed leaving. As weeks passed, it became obvious that when the Lord called them through his servant Joseph, no "conditions" had been placed on that call. They were to go whether well or ill. When Brigham Young, who lived in Montrose, Iowa, started on his mission, he was assisted into a boat and crossed the river to Nauvoo. He was so weak that he could not walk the short distance to Heber C. Kimball's house, but lay by the river until Israel Barlow came along and helped him onto his horse and took him to Heber's house. Heber was also ill, as were nearly all the members of his family. Prior to the day of their departure, Mary Ann Young, Brigham's wife, came to be with him. On the appointed day of their departure, they were assisted into a wagon. Their wives were ill with fever, and both were in bed. Also both had given birth to babies within the previous two weeks! Heber recorded the farewell as follows:

It was with difficulty we got into the wagon, and started down the hill about ten rods; it appeared to me as though my very inmost parts would melt within me at leaving my family in such a condition, as it were almost in the arms of death. I felt as though I could not endure it. I asked the Teamster to stop, and said to Brother Brigham, "This is pretty tough, isn't it; let's rise up and give them a cheer." We arose, and swinging our hats three times over our heads, shouted: "Hurrah, hurrah for Israel." Vilate, hearing the noise, arose from her bed and came to the door. She had a smile on her face. Vilate and Mary Ann Young cried out to us: "Good bye, God bless you." We returned the compliment, and then told the driver to go ahead. After this I felt a spirit of joy and gratitude, having had the satisfaction of seeing my wife standing upon her feet, intead of leaving her in bed, knowing well that I should not see them again for two or three years. [^11]

At approximately this same time Wilford Woodruff departed for his mission. He was suffering from chills and fever, and he was so weak that he had to rest after only walking to the Nauvoo post office. Joseph Smith came by and gave him some "parting advice" and bade him farewell.

Wilford Woodruff, referring to this incident, makes an interesting observation concerning the Prophet Joseph. ". . . His demeanor in parting was something that I had never noticed or experienced before." [^12] He does not explain his observation of the Prophet, but the Prophet must have had deep feelings of empathy and sympathy seeing his brethren depart in such difficult circumstance, though he knew that it must be so.

Inconvenient Service Continuing Example

Today advertisements in brilliant color on television and in magazines attempt to persuade us that we owe it to ourselves to have more and more conveniences. I am certain that all of us desire, and in many cases it would be desirable for us, to be able to accomplish routine tasks in life with less difficulty and with less expenditure of time. I am especially certain that all of us are pleased to travel by automobile or airplane rather than by horseback or carriage. I am certain that we like to turn a thermostat to heat our home rather than carry in wood by the armload and coal by the bucketfull. We like to touch a switch to light the house, and vacuum instead of sweeping the floors—conveniences, good, worthy, helpful conveniences!

But with all these things we must be on guard that we as individuals do not respond only when it is convenient. The Lord has always insisted that his disciples serve not just when it was convenient, but even when it was most inconvenient. Joseph Smith exemplified that spirit of service from that spring day in 1820 until that June day in 1844. This kind of dedication he also requested of others who followed the Lord Jesus Christ; and they most often, struggling to exercise faith which would match the Prophet Joseph's, responded even when they were in the most trying of circumstances. We will note that as we turn the pages of Church history from that date (1839) forward, the names Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Wilford Woodruff appear many times. As we read these same Church history books, the names of those members of the Twelve who found it too inconvenient to return to Far West or to go to England are conspicuous only by their complete absence. The principle taught by the words and deeds of Joseph Smith all his life is also in great evidence among his followers today. Though the passing years have brought great conveniences in our way of life, we ourselves have learned that today, as in all days past, we serve our Lord even when it is inconvenient.

The Great Cost of Disloyalty

Joseph Smith had many worthy, dedicated followers who lightened his burden; but, on the other hand, Joseph's life was made more difficult, and he had to endure much hardship and suffering, because of those who had made covenants at baptism that they would bear his and the other Saint's burdens, and then did not live up to those covenants.

Brigham Young said:

There are many witnesses here, not only witnesses of Joseph and his career, but witnesses of the disaffected spirits that have come into this Church and gone out again. Are there witnesses of men trying to rise up and usurp Joseph's place in his day? Yes, there are many witnesses, that many men tried it. Are there witnesses here, of the rise and fall of men in this kingdom? Yes plenty of them. I have witnessed more than has been pleasing to me. It delights me to see men come into the Church and magnify the holy Priesthood, but it is a grievious matter to see men turn away from the whole commandments delivered unto them.

Let me ask this congregation, that portion of it that was in Jackson County; and again that portion that was in Kirtland in the days of Joseph, and in leaving Kirtland; and then those that were in Caldwell and Davis counties, Missouri; then ask those who were in Nauvoo in his day, and after he was slain; these portions of my congregation which I have mentioned, I will ask, what has produced your persecutions and sorrow? What has been the starting point of all your afflictions? They began with apostates in your midst; these disaffected spirits caused others to come in, worse than they. . . .

That has been the starting point and grand cause of all our difficulties, every time we were driven. Are there not witnesses of this, here? Yes, a good portion of this congregation are witnesses of these things. [^13] (Italics added.)

As one reads the list of early Church leaders, the intimate friends and associates of Joseph Smith, it is astonishing how many were disloyal to the Prophet and either permanently left the Church or left it on a temporary basis.

Each of the three witnesses left: Martin Harris, friend and benefactor of Joseph Smith; Oliver Cowdery, who wrote almost the entire Book of Mormon as Joseph dictated it—assistant president of the Church, capable, intelligent, scholarly Oliver—lost in apostasy; David Whitmer, who with Joseph and Oliver beheld an angel holding the plates and heard the voice of God speaking from the heavens. David Whitmer and Joseph Smith had resided in the same home for months. To have any one of these three personal friends, fellow witnesses, leave the faith and reject Joseph's prophetic calling would have been distressing, but how difficult to lose all three. Of the eight witnesses, half apostatized; some became very vocal in renouncing Joseph Smith. As one glances through the names of the original Quorum of the Twelve selected in 1835, no less than half apostatized. Some left briefly and then returned repentant; some were never to return. Wilford Woodruff, speaking of this apostasy, said:

I passed through that scene [great apostasy in Kirtland], as did some others who are now with us. . . . Even Apostles took occasion to rise up and endeavored to dictate and direct the Prophet of God. Those who testified to the Book of Mormon were led away through not keeping the commandments of God and thinking that they themselves were great men. Some of them were learned men; some of them considered themselves very smart men, and they were so smart that they wanted to dictate and direct the Prophet of God. The consequence of all this was that they turned aside from the commandments of God. Some of them had been true and faithful in their labors in the ministry. I have heard Oliver Cowdery testify of the Book of Mormon by the power of God, when it seemed as if the very earth trembled under his feet. He was filled with the Holy Ghost and the power of God while he was faithful, and so were many of these men. But Oliver Cowdery yielded to the temptation of the evil one, and we may say he apostatized. So did Martin Harris, and several others connected with them. They left the Church, they turned against Joseph and they said he was a fallen prophet, and they themselves wanted to direct the Church. Several of these men called upon me in that time of apostasy and asked me to join them against the Prophet; the Prophet was fallen, they said. Now, I had seen enough myself of the Prophet of God and I had read enough of the revelations of God through him, to know that he was a Prophet of God, and not a fallen Prophet. I saw that these men were yielding to the devil, and I told them so. Said I: "You will all go to hell unless you repent. Joseph has been raised up by the power of God and to the Church and kingdom of God here on the earth." [^14]

Joseph Smith knew the danger was not from designated enemies but so-called friends. At a meeting of the city council in December, 1843, the subject of the menace to the city and the mayor was under consideration, and Joseph said among other things:

. . . I am exposed to far greater danger from traitors among ourselves than from enemies without, although my life has been sought for many years by the civil and military authorities, priests and people of Missouri; and if I can escape from the ungrateful treachery of assassins, I can live as Caesar might have lived, were it not for a right-hand Brutus. I have pretended friends betray me. All the enemies upon the face of the earth may roar and exert all their power to bring about my death, but they can accomplish nothing, unless some who are among us, who have enjoyed our society, have been with us in our councils, participated in our confidence, taken us by the hand, called us brother, saluted us with a kiss, join with our enemies, turn our virtues into faults, and, by falsehood and deceit, stir up their wrath and indignation against us, and bring their united vengeance upon our heads. All the hue and cry of the chief priests and elders against the Savior could not bring down the wrath of the Jewish nation upon his head, and thereby cause the crucifixion of the Son of God, until Judas said unto them, "Whomsoever I shall kiss he is the man; hold him fast." Judas was one of the Twelve Apostles, even their treasurer, and dipped with their Master in the dish, and through his treachery, the crucifixion was brought about, and we have a Judas in our midst. [^15](Italics added.)

It would be surprising to find a prophet who was without opposition. Joseph Smith, at age seventeen, was informed that he would not escape it. He was told that his name would be known throughout the world for good and also for evil.

On this subject, Brigham Young said:

I never preached to the world but what the cry was, "That damned old Joe Smith has done thus and so. I would tell the people that they did not know him, and I did, and that I knew him to be a good man; and that when they spoke against him, they spoke against as good a man as ever lived.

I wish you all to understand that no Elders go to any place among the world, but what the wicked find fault with the people of God. They found fault with Joseph Smith, and at length killed him, as they have a great many others of the Latter-day Saints. What for? Because of his wickedness? No. But the cry was, "Away with him, we cannot do with this man nor with his people." Did they hate him for his evil works? No. If he had been a liar, a swearer, a gambler, or in any way an evil doer, and of the world, it would have loved its own, and they would have embraced him, and nourished and kept him. If he had been a false prophet they never would have lifted a hand against him, because he could have spread still more delusion through the world around him. [^16]

Had It Been an Enemy, We Could Have Borne It

The loss of friends hurt Joseph deeply, and when he learned in Nauvoo of a secret plot to overthrow him, he wept. We get insight into the Prophet's poignant feelings by reading the following letter written to W. W. Phelps, who had been in apostasy and had written to the Prophet to ask forgiveness and to be reinstated into the Church. Brother Phelps's defection had hurt Joseph deeply:

Dear Brother Phelps:—I must say that it is with no ordinary feelings I endeavor to write a few lines to you. I am rejoiced at the privilege granted me.

You may in some measure realize my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's, when we read your letter—truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion when we ascertained your resolves, and etc. I can assure you I feel a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the approbation of Jehovah (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed; and inasmuch as long-suffering, patience, and mercy have ever characterized the dealings of our Heavenly Father towards the humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example, cherish the same principles, and by so doing be a savior of my fellow men.

It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your behavior—the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord—"Had it be an enemy, we could have borne it" . . . however, the cup has been drunk. . . . (Italics added.)

Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously, RESOLVED, that W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

"Come on, dear brother, since the war is past, For Friends at first, are friends at last."

Yours as ever,

JOSEPH SMITH, JUN. [^17]

The Mouthpiece of the Almighty

It hurts to take action against one's friends and members of one's own family, but when action must be taken there can be no hesitancy. This is part of the role of a prophet.

The Prophet Joseph, imprisoned, wrote:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy and without guile. . . . [^18]

Regardless of circumstances, the prophet must lead, must maintain authority. He has no choice in this because he has been called by the Lord. On occasions the task at hand is so monumental that even with the utilization of all the excellent qualities described in the preceeding scripture, there may still remain a difficult problem, the solving of which will hurt some and offend others. It may even stir up anger, resentment, and bitterness. But the responsibility to move forward is still there. The weak leader will hedge, postpone, procrastinate and compromise; the strong leader, one who follows the spirit of the Lord, will do what is right and accept the consequences. Joseph Smith was a strong leader. After the exercise of all good and kind principles, problems still remained; and still, for the sake of the kingdom of God, action—difficult, heartbreaking action—had to be taken. Joseph Smith, as much as any man who has lived, knew well the responsibility that comes when one has God's authority upon him. How courageously he exercised it! Joseph was the one who held the keys, all the keys. He was the one who had to act. Others, his counselors and associates, could plead for more time, a less drastic course; but Joseph, as the leader, could not afford the luxury of procrastination, nor misplaced mercy, nor the idle hope that a situation might right itself in some unforseen way if no action at all were taken. Brigham Young said, on the subject:

Joseph Smith . . . was the mouthpiece of the Almighty, and was always ready to rebuke them when requisite. You who were acquainted with him know his course and life. He had a word of comfort and consolation to the humble and faithful, and a word of rebuke to the forward and disobedient. [^19]

Heartbreak, Yes—Compromise, No

Joseph Smith, the very teacher of gentleness and long suffering, often found that bold action was necessary. His close friend and advisor, Frederick G. Williams (the Prophet had named one of his sons for him), had to be removed from his place as a member of the First Presidency. Sidney Rigdon, first counselor to Joseph Smith, knowledgeable and articulate—yet Joseph could not afford to let sentiment for the past blur the reality of the present nor obstruct the vision of the future. How painful it must have been to recommend to the Saints congregated in conference in 1844 that the venerable old gentleman, the pillar of strength of the past—President Sidney Rigdon, whose name was almost synonymous with the restored gospel—must now be removed from his place. Others could allow mercy to overcome judgment and justice, but not the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. The people overwhelmingly voted to reject Joseph Smith's counsel and voted to retain Sidney Rigdon. Many must have felt they did the right thing. After all, kindness and mercy are teachings of the Savior. But they were wrong, their assumptions were false, and their reasoning was incorrect. They had not supported their Prophet, and he was called and inspired of God. Gone was the opportunity to strengthen Joseph in a time when strength was most important. How much, just how much does a strong counselor mean to a president? How much did Heber C. Kimball mean to Brigham Young? Joseph pleaded, "Remove the weak, give me strength," but the plea fell on unresponsive ears. There were too many who felt that compassion at any time, at any price, was a virtue. They were wrong. Hurt—of course Joseph was hurt; he had been hurt before, and he would be hurt again.

Members of the Prophet's own family hurt him. His brother William accused Joseph of a lack of feeling because in a high council hearing he rejected his own mother's testimony because it was out of place. Joseph would take the abuse of members of his own family rather than compromise. The Prophet records the hurtful incident as follows:

After supper I went to the High Council in company with my wife and some others that belonged to my household. I was solicited to take a seat with the Presidency and preside on a trial of Sister Elliot. I did so. My mother was called upon for testimony, and began to relate circumstances that had been brought before the Church and settled. I objected to such testimony. The complainant, Brother William Smith, arose and accused me of invalidating or doubting my Mother's testimony, which I had not done, nor did I desire to do so. I told him he was out of order, and asked him to sit down. He refused. I repeated my request. He became enraged. I finally ordered him to sit down. . . . I joined Brother Hyrum in trying to calm his stormy feelings, but to no purpose, he insisted that we intended to add abuse to injury, his passion increased, he arose abruptly, declared that he wanted no more to do with us. He rushed out at the door. We tried to prevail on him to stop, but all to no purpose. . . . He went home and spread the leaven of iniquity among my brothers, and especially prejudiced the mind of Brother Samuel. I soon learned that he was in the street exclaiming against me, and no doubt our enemies rejoiced at it. And where the matter will end I know not, but pray God to forgive him and them, and give them humility and repentance.

The feelings of my heart I cannot express on this occasion, I can only pray to my Heavenly Father to open their eyes, that they may discover where they stand, that they may extricate themselves from the snare they have fallen into. [^20]

How hard it is to be misunderstood by the ones whom you love most, to be accused wrongly, to have attributed to you mean and low motives that had never been a part of your thinking—things that had never for an instant entered your mind. And the accusations are not being made by a stranger, an enemy, but by a loved one, an individual who is more than a friend—one of the same flesh and blood. How does one react? In anger? No. In bitterness? No. In sorrow? Yes. But does one compromise with principle, with right, with truth? No. There is no compromise and never shall there be—not even when the companionship of one's own flesh and blood is at stake. A few days later, William wrote a letter acknowledging that he was in error and was too ashamed to see the Prophet in person. He asked Joseph Smith to forgive him, which the Prophet gladly did.

If Joseph Smith could have had loyalty and support from those who at one time or another professed to be his friends, how it could have changed things. An evil man in a high and holy calling can cause distress and destruction that an outsider could never cause. How much different the history of Joseph Smith would read if all had been loyal.

The Prophet Did Not Cease to Be a Man

Joseph Smith was what he was. Then why did some in the past and why do some people today try to make him something he was not? He was a great individual. Yet, many of his associates were not satisfied. They arbitrarily assigned perfection to him and then inwardly felt regret when they found weakness in Joseph and openly expressed disappointment because of that which Joseph yet lacked.

Prophets must be "sensitive"—sensitive to the Spirit of God, sensitive to the needs of their people, and sensitive to personal strengths and weaknesses.

Nephi lamented his inability to be as righteous as he thought he ought to be. He marveled over his weakness after that which he had beheld, and pleaded with God to help him to be better. Nephi honestly recognized his imperfections and wrote of them. [^21] Moroni lamented his own inabilities and in essence prayed to God that his personal limitations would not be a "stumbling block" to the Gentiles. Yet God accepted their efforts as sufficient and put the responsibility on the Gentiles. [^22] These prophets shared in common certain characteristics of all prophets—human imperfections and a desire to be better. So it was with the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Joseph Smith was a man who was called of God to be a prophet. When he received that call, he did not cease to be a man. In essence, he humbly said of himself: "I am a rough stone. The sound of hammer and chisel were never heard on me until the Lord took me in hand." [^23] He was near the end of his eventful life when he made this statement, and the hammer and chisel had been applied to him extensively prior to this time. Yet with all of the shaping and smoothing that had been done, he still saw himself as a "rough stone," but a rough stone in the process of becoming a polished shaft one day.

Joseph never hid his weaknesses. He permitted others to view them and ever wrote of them as had other prophets before him. Yet ever so many have considered it a remarkable discovery when they found weaknesses in the Prophet.

In spite of Joseph's candid evaluation of himself, there were those who rejected his description of what he was and wanted him to be something else, a perfect individual. From the days of Symonds Ryder, who apostatized because Joseph misspelled his last name, there have been those who have determined what Joseph ought to be and then reviled him because he was not what they had designated him to be. This continues today. There are those who feel that they have made a remarkable discovery when they find a weakness in the Prophet. Joseph Smith was what he was. He was a great Prophet and a great man. He was acknowledged as such by the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his faithful associates in the kingdom of God, and by many honest men outside the kingdom.

In fairness to Joseph Smith, we ought to view him as he was—partly polished, partly rough, the polished portion becoming ever more extensive. If we consider carefully the life of Joseph the Prophet, we cannot overlook the polishing process, and we can see the emerging of a great individual. If we view the life of Joseph Smith as a continual reducing of the rough areas and a continual enlarging of smooth areas, we shall not be disappointed in what we see, but will never cease to be astonished with the greatness of the man who was called of God.

The excitement in studying the life of Joseph Smith is in seeing a dynamic, emerging Joseph in the process of becoming one who is responding to the touch of the hammer and chisel in the hand of God. Many view his life in this way and make applications as needed in their own lives so that they may also decrease the rough places and enlarge the smooth places.

A Lesson from History—Follow the Lord's Prophet

I suppose that if one were to lose the spirit of the Lord and begin to think of himself as superior to many of those who had been called to positions of prominence, it would be quite natural for such a person who had not been called to assume that the Prophet had fallen and was no longer in communication with God; otherwise he obviously would have received revelation to call "superior people." The "superior" person in his own way of thinking now has an obvious duty to work against the Prophet for the good of himself and other members of the Church. Hence, the apostate, lifted up in pride, seeing things from the viewpoint of his own egotism, might consider himself almost noble in opposing rather than supporting the Prophet. Such fatal errors can be avoided by following the humble example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Jesus on occasions made such statements as ". . . Why callest thou me good? There is none good but one, that is, God." [^24] "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." [^25] He also taught that unless we humble ourselves and become as a little child, we cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. [^26] Jesus in his life always exemplified meekness and submissiveness to his Father.

Heber C. Kimball has given the following wise counsel:

I consider those trees in the forest which have the largest and highest tops are in the greatest danger: they are blown down; and there is no way of restoring them but to cut them off. Let the stump grow back, and new sprouts come out. Those who have most responsibility are in most danger. We must be careful how we treat God's officers. [^27]

He continued:

No man ever fell, unless it was through rejecting counsel. I as well as my brethren see this. My superior knows more than I, because he is nearer the fountain. To get knowledge, begin at the foot of the stream, and drink all up till you get to the fountain, and then you get all the knowledge. [^28]

Elder Kimball was in a key position to view the consequences of disloyalty to the individual, to the Prophet, and to the Church: hence, he gave wise counsel and sounded a warning voice on many occasions. Following is another insightful quotation from him:

I will give you a key which Brother Joseph Smith used to give in Nauvoo. He said, that the very step of apostacy commenced with losing confidence in the leaders of this Church and Kingdom, and that whenever you discerned that spirit, you might know that it would lead the possessor of it on the road to apostacy. If then you have got this spirit in your hearts, . . . I say, there is the spirit of apostacy, there is a place where the Spirit of God does not abide in its fulness.

It is for us to learn to be obedient in our callings and to the Priesthood, in our several quorums and families, and in all circles where we associate together. This is a lesson which must be learned, and when you learn the doctrine of obedience, you will have power to control the weaknesses of your nature, to control yourselves in every respect. But you never will learn this lesson, and gain this knowledge, until you are willing to be controlled by those who lead you in this kingdom. [^29]

On this same subject a modern day apostle and a member of the First Presidency, Harold B. Lee, says:

I remember the prophetic pronouncement that was made from this stand by President George Albert Smith eighteen months ago when he said:

. . . Many have belittled Joseph Smith, and those who have will be forgotten in the remains of mother earth and their infamy will be ever with them, but honor, majesty, and fidelity to God attached to Joseph Smith's name and exemplified by him will never die.

I wish that statement could be heard to all ends of the earth.

I want to bear you my testimony that the experience I have had has taught me that those who criticize the leaders of this church are showing signs of a spiritual sickness, which unless curbed, will bring about eventually spiritual death. I want to bear my testimony as well as those who in public seek by their criticism, to belittle our leaders or bring them into disrepute, will bring upon themselves more hurt than upon those whom they seek thus to malign. I have watched over the years, and I have read of the history of many of those who fell away from this Church and I want to bear testimony that no apostate who ever left the Church ever prospered as an influence in his community thereafter. [^30]

The Future Can Be Different

As I review the events in the history of the Church and particularly in the life of Joseph Smith, I find myself asking the question, "What if?" What if Oliver Cowdery had not apostatized? What if the people had not speculated wildly in Kirtland? What if Colonel Hinckle had not betrayed Joseph Smith at Far West? What if Joseph Smith could have had greater loyalty? What if. . .?

Sometimes as I reflect upon events in quiet moments, my mind goes beyond just asking "What if. . .?" Something within protests, and I cry out mentally: STOP! Let's rerun that scene again; let's try it a different way. Let's have the events just the same, but this time, let's have all give their loyalty to the Prophet Joseph Smith and then let's view the outcome. But there is no way to rerun a historical incident. The scene has been played out, and the Prophet is dead. No, the scene cannot be changed, but it is obvious that the lessons of history should not be overlooked nor disregarded. The price of disloyalty to all parties concerned is tragically high. We are still a people led by a prophet. We are still a people faced with perils. Will our faith be greater? Will we be more trustworthy? Will the prophet of today and tomorrow have our loyal support? Or will dissenting, hurtful voices be raised and harmful acts be repeated? The past cannot be altered, but the future can be different.

Chapter 6 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 110:1-4.
[^2] D&C 76:20-23.
[^3] JD 19:15.
[^4] HJS 100-101.
[^5] Ibid., p. 83.
[^6] Pearl of Great Price, p. 57, footnote.
[^7] JD 21:94.
[^8] Ibid., 17:374.
[^9] Ibid., 23:362.
[^10] Ibid., 20:174-75.
[^11] Millennial Star, 61:629.
[^12] JD 5: 83-84.
[^13] JD 26:106
[^14] Burton, Alma P., Discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.), p. 16.
[^15] JD 8:248-49.
[^16] Ibid., 21:317.
[^17] Ibid., 7:99.
[^18] Ibid., 19:303.
[^19] Ibid., 17:47.
[^20] Ibid., 1:81-82.
[^21] Ibid., 24:9.
[^22] D&C 135:1, 3.
[^23] D&C 121:36.
[^24] D&C 122:7.
[^25] JD, 1:38.
[^26] Ibid., 2:127.
[^27] Ibid., 23:361.
[^28] Ibid., 7:289.
[^29] Ibid., 4:136.
[^30] 2 Nephi 3:15.
