Leon R. Hartshorn, Joseph Smith: Prophet of the Restoration ( 1970)

7

The Prophet Joseph in Eternal Perspective

Joseph Smith—the Lord's Prophet

Some see Joseph as one thing and others see him as another. It would seem that what a person sees Joseph Smith as being may partly be determined by what the individual himself is. If men in varying degrees of imperfection have a difficult time knowing what Joseph Smith is really like, then it might be wise to consider the evaluation of one who has no imperfections and by his own admission has all knowledge. It is apparent by just a casual perusal of the scriptures that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ sees Joseph Smith as a worthy servant and a worthy prophet. He visited him more than once. He communicated with him, inspired him, and comforted him on almost innumerable occasions.

He restored the priesthood and the gospel through him. Heavenly messengers by the score visited him. He was worthy enough to have all this happen to him. What he was, was sufficient to perform the greatest mission for the Lord Jesus Christ ever performed by a man. Joseph Smith was permitted to see the Savior on more than one occasion. In addition to the glorious First Vision, when Jesus Christ with God the Father visited Joseph, He also appeared in the Kirtland Temple. The building had been built at great sacrifice. After the dedication, Joseph and Oliver prayed, and there appeared the Son of God. Joseph's beautiful description of the event follows:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his contenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. [^1]

Joseph, in company with Sidney Rigdon in 1832, beheld a most glorious vision. They saw the glory of God, His kingdom, the fate of the righteous and the wicked; and they saw the Lord Jesus Christ and bore this following testimony:

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshipping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father. . . . [^2]

Vision After Vision

In addition to personal visitations, our Lord sent numerous heavenly beings, holy angels, to instruct Joseph and to bestow keys of authority upon him. Foremost among these in terms of frequency of appearance was Moroni, who had a very special relationship with Joseph. He was the Prophet's tutor. By appointment, once each year, Joseph Smith met with Moroni to be instructed. Orson Pratt wrote:

. . . for the space of four years; during which, whenever Joseph needed chastisement he received it at the appointed time; his failings were corrected; he was shown whenever he erred; and he was taught what to do: he was instructed, little by little, until he learned, by practice to do the will of God. [^3]

The Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, also informs us about her son's intimate relationship with his heavenly teacher. She also indicates that there were occasions when the angel had cause to rebuke her young son.

Presently he [Joseph] smiled and said, 'I have taken the severest chastisement that I have ever had in my life.'

My husband, supposing that it was from some of the neighbors, was quite angry and observed, 'I would like to know what business anybody has to find fault with you!'

'Stop, father, stop,' said Joseph, 'it was the angel of the Lord. As I passed by the hill of Cumorah, where the plates are, the angel met me and said that I had not been engaged enough in the work of the Lord; that the time had come for the record to be brought forth; and that I must be up and doing and set myself about the things which God had commanded me to do. But, father, give yourself no uneasiness concerning the reprimand which I have received, for I now know the course that I am to pursue, so all will be well. [^4]

The Prophet's mother also gives some insight concerning the great amount of knowledge Joseph received during the four-year period of preparation:

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them. [^5]

In 1829 Joseph and Oliver knelt and asked God about baptism, and there appeared John the Baptist. He had died as a martyr while on the earth. He was beheaded, but he stood before them as a perfect, glorious, resurrected being and bestowed upon them the Aaronic Priesthood. Oliver says of this occasion:

. . . the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message. . . . His voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, 'I am thy fellow servant' dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel, from glory, 'twas a message from the Most High! And as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were wrapped in the vision of the Almighty. [^6]

A few weeks later, the three chief apostles of Jesus Christ—Peter, James, and John—came to the earth and gave Joseph and Oliver the higher priesthood—the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, or Melchezedik Priesthood. Moses, Elijah, and Elias also appeared and bestowed keys upon the young prophet. John Taylor, a close associate of Joseph's, said that there were additional heavenly messengers:

I know of what I speak, for I was very well acquainted with him and was with him a great deal during his life and was with him when he died.

The principles which he had placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another. Why? Because he had to introduce a dispensation which was called the dispensation of the fulness of times. . . . [^7] (Italics added.)

John Taylor on another occasion said:

And when Joseph Smith was raised up as a Prophet of God, Mormon, Moroni, Nephi, and others of the ancient prophets who formerly lived on this continent, and Peter and John and others who lived on the Asiatic Continent, came to him and communicated to him certain principles pertaining to the Gospel of the Son of God. [^8] (Italics added.)

George Q. Cannon adds:

He [Joseph Smith] was visited constantly by angels. . . . Moroni, in the beginning as you know, to prepare him for his mission came and ministered and talked to him from time to time. and he had vision after vision in order that his mind might be fully saturated with knowledge of the things of God, and that he might comprehend the great and holy calling that God has bestowed upon him. [^9] (Italics added.)

On another occasion, John Taylor told further of Joseph's greatness:

. . . the spirit of revelation rested down upon God's servant Joseph in these early days, who like Adam, Moses, Abraham, Jesus, Jared, Nephi, Moroni and others, had the heavens unfolded to his view, and although the Church was so few in number the principles and purposes of God were developed fully to the vision of his mind, and he gazed upon the things that are to transpire in the latter-days associated with the dispensation that he was called upon by the Almighty to introduce. He learned by communication from the heavens, from time to time, of the great events that should transpire in the latter days. He understood things that were past, and comprehended the various dispensations and designs of those dispensations. He not only had the principles developed, but he was conversant with the parties who officiated as the leading men of those dispensations, and from a number of them he received authority and keys and priesthood and power for the carrying out of the great purposes of the Lord in the last days, who were sent and commissioned specially by the Almighty to confer upon him those keys and this authority, and hence he introduced what was spoken of by all the prophets since the world was; the dispensation in which we live, which differs from all other dispensations in that it is the dispensation of the fulness of times, embracing all other dispensations, all other powers, all other keys and all other privileges and immunities that ever existed upon the face of the earth . . . which was altogether ahead of all the intelligence that existed in the world. [^10]

Let us just pause and think for a moment what it would mean to a mortal on this earth to see and hear, be instructed by, and receive authority from many of God's greatest prophets. Such knowledge and wisdom would be almost beyond comprehension—not just because they had lived on the earth at various times and were among the greatest men who ever lived, but also because they came immediately from the presence of God to Joseph Smith. What a way to be educated—personal visitations and visions of the eternal world! Little wonder that Joseph's followers said of him:

I have sometimes thought that the Prophet Joseph, with the knowledge he possessed and the progress he had made could not stay with the people, so slow were we to comprehend things and so enshrouded in our ignorant traditions. The Saints could not comprehend Joseph Smith; the Elders could not; the Apostles could not. They did so a little towards the close of his life, but his knowledge was so extensive and his comprehension so great that they could not rise to it. [^11] (George Q. Cannon)

Brother Joseph used a great many methods of testing the integrity of men; and he taught a great many things which, in consequence of tradition, required prayer, faith, and a testimony from the Lord, before they could be believed by many of the Saints. His mind was opened by the visions of the Almighty, and the Lord taught him many things by vision and revelation that were never taught publicly in his days; for the people could not bear the flood of intelligence which God poured into his mind. [^12] (Wilford Woodruff)

Joseph Smith Was Foreordained

The Lord saw Joseph Smith in eternal perspective. He saw him as one chosen to perform a great mission on the earth. Thousands of years prior to his actual birth on the earth, Joseph who was sold into Egypt knew this and prophesied of it. A prophet who lived on the earth during and after the life of Joseph Smith spoke of it. John Taylor spoke of the foreordination of the prophet of the last dispensation as follows:

We all look upon Joseph Smith as being a Prophet of God. God called him to occupy the position that he did. How long ago? Thousands of years ago before this world was formed. The prophets prophesied about his coming. . . . [^13]

President John Taylor further declared:

Joseph Smith in the first place was set apart by the Almighty according to the counsels of the Gods in the eternal worlds, to introduce the principles of life among the people of which the Gospel is the grand power and influence, and through which salvation can extend to all peoples, all nations, all kindreds, all tongues, and all worlds. It is the principle that brings life and immortality to light, and places us in communication with God. God selected him for that purpose, and he fulfilled his mission and lived honorably and died honorably. [^14]

When the foreordained Prophet Joseph Smith came to earth, the Lord had enough confidence in his integrity to bestow all of the keys of the priesthood upon him. What an awesome responsibility for a man! Few who have ever lived have been so honored. The Lord trusted him enough to put into his young and inexperienced hands a priceless book of scripture, the continued existance of which had great eternal importance. It had been prepared hundreds of years before by the most competent and inspired men on the earth and had been carefully safeguarded for centuries to come forth in the latter days to bring the peoples of the earth to the fulness of the gospel; and it was entrusted to the Lord's servant Joseph. He also called his servant Joseph to prepare a book of scripture, the Doctrine and Covenants—a book almost entirely written by Joseph's own hand, a book of revelations from his God. The book has come to occupy a distinctive place as a companion book of scripture to the Bible and the Book of Mormon. In addition, a fourth book of scripture, the Pearl of Great Price, a compilation of the works of Joseph Smith has been published since his death. As one reads the scriptures, one is left with the distinct impression that the Lord had complete confidence in Joseph Smith; and of all those on the earth, it was his servant Joseph, and only his servant Joseph, whom he so trusted. There have been but few in the past who have enjoyed as much of the confidence, and hence the power, of God.

Testimonies of Joseph's Associates

As a servant of the all-powerful Eternal God, Joseph Smith did not have to depend upon the witnesses nor the praise of men to establish himself as a prophet. His master was God, and God poured out his spirit on those who were faithful and obedient, and they bore testimony that Joseph truly was called of God and directed by him.

Heber C. Kimball bore his witness as follows:

. . . You will not doubt in relation to the truth of what the world calls "Mormonism," for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, established and organized through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, is the true Church of God. With it is the Priesthood and power of God; and you might as well try to doubt that the sun shines, for it is truth; and although all hell may deny it, and all the men upon the earth, that will make no difference, for it is from God. The Lord called that man, and sent his angels to ordain him and confer upon him that authority necessary for the building up of the Kingdom of God; and it was through him that we received all the authority we hold, and through us every soul of you who have received the truth received it—through that Priesthood which came from God through Joseph Smith. . . . [^15]

Wilford Woodruff said of Joseph Smith:

It has been my faith and belief from the time that I was made acquainted with the gospel that no greater prophet than Joseph Smith ever lived on the face of the earth save Jesus Christ. He was raised up to stand at the head of this great dispensation—the greatest of all dispensations God has ever given to man. [^16]

Wilford Woodruff bore the following testimony of Joseph Smith:

The mind of the Prophet was opened by the spirit of revelation, so that he could see and comprehend a great deal; but he required the Spirit of the living God—the inspiration of the Almighty to rest upon him continually, to qualify him for the great duties that were constantly increasing upon him. . . . [^17]

John Taylor said of the first prophet of this dispensation:

He was the representative of God, his credentials came from God, and his mission extended not to one nation only, but to all nations; and he was authorized to establish and organize what was termed the Church and Kingdom of God upon the earth. And every step that he took, every principle that he inculcated, and every doctrine that he taught, came from God by the revelations of God to him, and through him to the people. [^18]

President Taylor, speaking on another occasion, said:

. . . I believe that Joseph Smith revealed more in relation to the Kingdom of God, and was a greater Prophet than perhaps any other man who ever lived except Jesus Christ. [^19]

Brigham Young spoke as follows:

There are a goodly number in the congregation, who have been acquainted with this Church and Kingdom from its rise, and . . . they knew Joseph—they knew him week to week, and from year to year, they knew what he did, they knew how he spake, they knew the spirit he possessed, they were acquainted with it, it is the same spirit they possess to the present day—the spirit of "Mormonism," the spirit of the Gospel. I will ask those brethren, and those sisters, if they believe Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God? If they believe that he magnified his calling? I will ask them if Joseph lived and died a Prophet of God, and what would they answer? All men and women know by the power of the Holy Ghost, by the spirit they know it. . . . [^20]

Joseph F. Smith said tens of thousands knew Joseph Smith was a prophet of God:

Consequently, as I have said, Joseph Smith is held in reverence, his name is honored; tens of thousands of people thank God in their heart and from the depths of their souls for the knowledge the Lord has restored to the earth through him, and therefore they speak well of him and bear testimony of his worth. . . .

They speak to his praise, to his honor, and they hold his name in honorable remembrance. They revere him and they love him as they love no other man, because they know he was the chosen instrument in the hands of the Almighty of restoring the Gospel of life and salvation unto them. [^21]

Joseph Smith, an Extraordinary Servant

All men have free agency, and to communicate with or receive blessings from God, one has to fulfill the law upon which the blessings are predicated. To have had the experiences that he had, Joseph Smith had to be a remarkably righteous person, an unusually humble and devoted servant. To suggest that Joseph Smith was not a completely worthy individual would be to deny the very most basic truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

After the death of "His Servant Joseph," the Lord caused to have written and included as scripture the following, so that it becomes the Lord's statement:

To seal the testimony of this book and the Book of Mormon, we announce the martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet. . . . Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood. [^22] (Italics added.)

"Save Jesus only, Joseph the Prophet has done more for the salvation of man in the world than any other." As one reads this and other scriptures, one is left with no doubt of God's confidence in Joseph Smith. Joseph had a remarkably intimate relationship with God—a relationship which can only be established upon the basis of some well-defined eternal principles. To associate with God, one must have unwavering faith in him and must be willing to forsake his sins and subject his own will to the will of God. The acceptance of Joseph Smith by the Lord is an irrefutable witness of Joseph Smith's personal qualities. The Lord has said that "the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." [^23]

There are those who have said, and still say, that it is difficult to know what Joseph Smith was really like. It seems that God knew. From God's perfect point of view, Joseph Smith was an extraordinary servant and one whom He trusted implicitly. There are many ways of viewing Joseph Smith, but apparently from the Lord's vantage point, there were few who ever lived upon the earth who could compare with his servant Joseph. The Lord had unlimited confidence in Joseph Smith, and those who knew and served the same God that Joseph knew bore strong witness that he was God's servant and that God loved him and sustained him. This should be an indication to us that we may also safely put our confidence in Joseph Smith as a prophet of the living God, and we need not fear that we will be disappointed. He did not disappoint God, and he will not disappoint us. Man's vision and knowledge is limited, but God's is not.

Joseph Smith, Head of Our Dispensation

Joseph Smith was being prepared in this life by the Lord for a contribution in the next life. He was to occupy a very important role eternally, and to occupy that role well he had to have certain experiences here on earth. That does not mean that God brought the heartache, the suffering, the brutality into Joseph Smith's life. God is not the author of evil, but of good. He is not the author of unhappiness, but of happiness. It does mean, however, that men exercised their free agency and brought misery into the life of Joseph; and the Lord did not immediately change that condition but let Joseph Smith the prophet learn from it.

It appears as we read the account of Joseph's life, that an unusual amount of adversity was crowded into his thirty-eight years. His life was not long, but it was literally filled with situations that were hard to bear. The Lord told him during his painful confinement at Liberty, ". . . Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." [^24]

It has been the practice of our Father in heaven to call one person to stand at the head of a dispensation; and that one person, a prophet of the living God, was blessed and received from God an unusual outpouring of heavenly things. That prophet then became the chief witness to the people of that dispensation that God in reality lives and that his gospel is on the earth. The testimony of the prophet then became the way to God and to His blessings. Those who accept the prophet as a true prophet come to God, and those who reject him cannot come to God.

Joseph Smith holds this unique and responsible position in the last dispensation. He will always stand at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times. This is testified of by succeeding prophets. President Brigham Young said:

Permit me, my hearers, brethren and strangers, to say to you, there is not that man that hears the sound of my voice this day, that can say that Jesus lives, whether he professes to be his disciple or not; and can say at the same time, that Joseph Smith was not a Prophet of the Lord. . . . Jesus lives, and is the Savior of the world, Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, and lives in the bosom of his father Abraham. Though they have killed his body, yet he lives and beholds the face of his Father in Heaven; and his garments are pure as the angels that surround the throne of God; and no man on the earth can say that Jesus lives, and deny at the same time my assertion about the Prophet Joseph. This is my testimony, and it is strong. [^25]

Brigham Young further says:

He [Joseph Smith] is at home, and still holds the keys of the Kingdom, which were committed to him by heavenly messengers, and always will. Do you ask who brother Brigham is? He is a humble instrument in the hands of God, to keep His people in the path which He has marked out through the instrumentality of His servant Joseph; and to travel in which is all I ask of them. . . . Thus the Lord found him, and called him to be a Prophet, and made him a successful instrument in laying the foundation of His kingdom . . . and to whom the Lord gave the keys of this last dispensation, which were not to be taken from him in time, neither will they be in eternity.

I wish to see this people fulfill in every particular what Joseph told them to do, and build up the Kingdom of God, and this they are doing. [^26] (Italics added.)

This is verified by George Q. Cannon:

He [Joseph] stands at the head. He is a unique character, differing from every other man in this respect, and excelling every other man. Because he was the head, God chose him, and while he was faithful no man could take his place and position. He was faithful, and died faithful. He stands therefore at the head of this dispensation, and will throughout all eternity, and no man can take that power away from him. If any man holds these keys, he holds them subordinate to him. You never heard President Young teach any other doctrine; he always said that Joseph stood at the head of this dispensation; that Joseph holds the keys; that although Joseph had gone behind the veil he stood at the head of this dispensation, and that he himself held the keys subordinate to him. President Taylor teaches the same doctrine, and you will never hear any other doctrine from any of the faithful Apostles or servants of God, who understand the order of the Holy Priesthood. If we get our salvation we shall have to pass by him; if we enter into our glory it will be through the authority that he has received. We cannot get around him. . . . [^27]

Additional insight to Joseph Smith's eternal role is given by President Young:

Joseph Smith holds the keys of this last dispensation, and is now engaged behind the veil in the great work of the last days. . . . No man or woman in this dispensation will ever enter into the Celestial Kingdom of God without the consent of Joseph Smith. I cannot go there without his consent. He holds the keys of that kingdom for the last dispensation. Should not this comfort all people? They will, by and by, be a thousand times more thankful for such a man as Joseph Smith, Junior, than it is possible for them to be for any earthly good whatever. It is his mission to see that all the children of men in this last dispensation are saved, that can be, through the redemption. You will be thankful, every one of you, that Joseph Smith, Junior was ordained to this great calling before the worlds were. [^28]

The continuing active role of Joseph Smith in the eternal world is further attested to.

In 1856, President Jedediah M. Grant, a counselor to President Brigham Young, during a serious illness was permitted to visit the spirit world and reported what he had seen and heard to Heber C. Kimball, also a counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. Among other things, he reported a conversation with his deceased wife Caroline, who had died on the plains. President Kimball, referring to Jedediah M. Grant's experience, said:

He asked his wife Caroline where Joseph and Hyrum and Father Smith and others were; she replied, "They have gone away ahead, to perform and transact business for us. The same as when Brother Brigham and his brethren left Winter Quarters came here to search out a home; they came to find a location for their brethren." [^29]

Often we hear, "Why did he or why did she have to suffer so? Why did he or she have to die?" The answers are not readily available; but when this question is raised concerning the first prophet of the last dispensation, a partial answer at least can be given because of the information revealed concerning Joseph Smith in the perspective of eternity. It would seem that as great as Joseph's mission was on the earth, it was just a preview of, an introduction to, his mission in eternity. The Lord was concerned not just with the development of a prophet-leader for this life, but with the development of an eternal prophet-leader. Joseph had a vast responsibility on the earth, but that responsibility has expanded in the eternal world. The answers to all the "why" questions asked by Joseph and his followers were not available in earth life, but most assuredly those answers are known in the perspective of eternity. The Lord's way of developing an eternal servant and leader will always be hard to comprehend in this life. Joseph Smith had the faith in his Lord Jesus Christ to believe that this life and its experiences had purpose in the wisdom of God; and he was willing, even in death, to make God's will his will.

If one did not have the perspective of eternity, if one did not know that Joseph Smith is to be forever a great leader of those born in the last dispensation, one would tend to overemphasize the tragedy of a life of harassment and an untimely violent death.

Joseph's birth was known and recorded nearly four thousand years before he was born. It is remarkable that Joseph who was sold into Egypt was able to see ahead thousands of years to our day. He envisioned a latter-day prophet, a "choice seer" who would be raised up and would do a great work among the ancient Joseph's decendents. The Hebrew who had been sold into bondage and had distinguished the name Joseph through his circumspect behavior and his noble deeds prophesied that the latter-day prophet whom he envisioned would also be named Joseph. Further insight into the greatness of the latter-day prophet is also given because Joseph who was sold into Egypt recorded, "and he shall be like unto me." [^30] What a remarkable prophecy nearly four thousand years before the birth of Joseph Smith! His birth was known, as well as his greatness. What a compliment to Joseph Smith to be named after and compared to the noble Joseph who was sold into Egypt! Also, what a compliment for Joseph who was sold into Egypt to be compared to the Joseph of the last dispensation. Joseph Smith occupies a position unique among prophets.

He was the designated head of a dispensation of the gospel. This in itself puts him in a small and very select group of prophets. Further, Joseph Smith was chosen to head the last dispensation—the dispensation of the fulness of times—the dispensation of the gospel in which all things would be restored—the dispensation when all things would be gathered together into one—the dispensation which would prepare for the return of Jesus Christ to the earth and the ushering in of the millennial reign.

As the head of this dispensation, Joseph was the instrument in the Lord's hands through which authority and gospel principles were restored to the earth for the last time. He also stands at the head of this dispensation, and all who live during this dispensation of the gospel are subject to him.

Joseph Smith, a Continuing Example

Joseph Smith has continued in his eternal progression and is no longer with us on this earth. But his example lives on in the lives of countless Latter-day Saints, self-sacrificing, honest, dedicated Latter-day Saints who say with their actions as Joseph said with his, "Thy will be done."

Those who lived contemporary with Joseph Smith had the advantage of knowing him personally. But we who live well over a century since he was on the earth are not without advantages. We have an advantage of perspective that those who lived with him did not have. We have the privilege of viewing Joseph Smith by the perspective of time. We can, if we desire, focus very closely through the eyes of those who knew him, or we can move back to a vantage point of a great distance and view him on a stage of great width and depth.

Continually one's horizons are expanded with regard to the greatness of the contribution that Joseph Smith made and also the greatness of the man himself. Time has a way of supporting the truly great and exposing those who would feign greatness.

The Lord called Joseph not just to be an example and guide to those of his own day, those who had the opportunity of knowing him personally. His greatness, and the greatness of his teachings, were to benefit those who would come after. Joseph Smith can belong to us today just as he did to his associates in former days.

In days past, individuals had to extend themselves to hear Joseph, to know him, and to understand him. Today this is still the case. One must extend himself to know Joseph Smith. His writings and his many teachings are now readily available, but it requires effort to seek, to probe, to know. But after the effort is extended, one is never the same again. To know the Prophet is to know true greatness. To know Joseph is to feel an influence that has persisted with the passing years. The influence of Joseph Smith, sustained by God, has always persuaded men to be better, to reach higher, to overcome the world, and to live nearer to God.

As one travels through the Church today, one is impressed with an obvious dynamic witness that Joseph Smith was what he said he was, that he was acting for and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith established God's Church on the earth; and the Church as it expands, grows, and develops worthy people throughout the world, is a testimony and an irrefutable witness that Joseph Smith was a prophet. Joseph Smith does not belong to the past alone but to the present and to the future. Each new generation of Latter-day Saints, whether children of members or converts, will feel great joy as they become acquainted with Joseph Smith. They will gain courage through Joseph's example. They will gain insights into life and eternity.

Joseph Smith Is What He Said He Was

My quest began with the question "What manner of man was this Joseph Smith?" I have not yet gained the total answer, but I have gained some insight into the nature of the prophet of the restoration. I have learned enough at this point in my continuing quest to witness that he was in every deed what he said he was. Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I have become somewhat familiar with his life, and have sought to serve the same God that he served, and have sought to live the gospel he restored. If one did less than this, I do not see how he would come to know that God's prophet was in reality God's prophet. Because intellect—as vital, necessary and important as it is—is not enough. Application of true principles in one's own life and the reception of the Holy Spirit in one's own soul are necessary prerequisites to understanding and conviction. Such conviction comes gradually. It comes line upon line, precept upon precept, with learning and application, repentance and re-application. The whisperings of the Spirit become unmistakable. As one experience follows another, there is a consistant commonalty in spiritual experiences. Belief gives way to knowledge, and conviction becomes immovable as witness after witness follows experience after experience. And the mind is enlightened and the soul enlarged. And in the scheme of things, the life and mission of Joseph Smith looms larger and larger, and one is filled with gratitude for his life and for one's knowledge of him.

Truly he is what he claimed to be—a prophet of God. No prophet of God is ordinary, but among extraordinary prophets, Joseph is unique and distinctive. The latter-day scriptures bear witness that save Jesus Christ only Joseph Smith did more for the salvation of men in this world than any one else. That is scripture, and it is true. Why is it scripture? Why is it true? Because with the exception of Jesus Christ, Joseph Smith had the most important assignment upon this earth. Jesus Christ, of course, is incomparable. He was a member of the Godhead before he came to this earth, he was divine on this earth, and he was resurrected to take his place at the right hand of his Father.

Joseph Smith was a man—a distant second, but second, which places him in a remarkable position. In the pre-existent life he was chosen to be the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

As he came to earth he had a great opportunity, and he fulfilled his assignment in an excellent manner. With all of his greatness before, during, and after his earth life, how humble was his behavior—so humble that there were many who rejected him as a prophet and rejected his eternal, life-giving teachings.

It had happened before in the lives of Noah, Jeremiah, Peter, and even the Lord Jesus Christ; and it will happen again because in a world of pretense, one devoid of it is often counted as naught except by those who have "a broken heart and contrite spirit," those who discern not only by the "natural" but also by the "spiritual." Those who lived during the life of Joseph, who applied the words of the Savior as the Prophet espoused them, came to know him as a representative of the Lord and followed him as a true prophet. Those who have lived after and followed the same pattern have also come to know, and their combined testimonies bear witness of him. I suggest they are true and valid witnesses.

May I also invite you to continue your own quest and more fully learn the answer to the query, "What manner of man was this Joseph Smith?"

Chapter 7 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 110:1-4.
[^2] D&C 76:20-23.
[^3] JD 19:15.
[^4] HJS 100-101.
[^5] Ibid., p. 83.
[^6] Pearl of Great Price, p. 57, footnote.
[^7] JD 21:94.
[^8] Ibid., 17:374.
[^9] Ibid., 23:362.
[^10] Ibid., 20:174-75.
[^11] Millennial Star, 61:629.
[^12] JD 5: 83-84.
[^13] JD 26:106
[^14] Burton, Alma P., Discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.), p. 16.
[^15] JD 8:248-49.
[^16] Ibid., 21:317.
[^17] Ibid., 7:99.
[^18] Ibid., 19:303.
[^19] Ibid., 17:47.
[^20] Ibid., 1:81-82.
[^21] Ibid., 24:9.
[^22] D&C 135:1, 3.
[^23] D&C 121:36.
[^24] D&C 122:7.
[^25] JD, 1:38.
[^26] Ibid., 2:127.
[^27] Ibid., 23:361.
[^28] Ibid., 7:289.
[^29] Ibid., 4:136.
[^30] 2 Nephi 3:15.
