Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

Preface

In considering a theme for the study of the Melchizedek Priesthood Quorums for the year 1947, the General Church Authorities decided to present a course dealing with the history of the Church with special stress upon the revelations and commandments given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The brethren of the Committee realize that such a study cannot be completed in the course of one year, therefore this same theme will be presented in the following year, or until such time as the period of history covering the life and ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith is completed.

We feel that there is a crying need for the study of our own Church History, and for a better understanding of the revelations and commandments which have been given in this Dispensation for our temporal and eternal welfare. We are living in momentous times. The Gospel has been restored "for the last time." It will never again be taken from the earth, but shall be here when our Lord comes to reign as Lord of lords and King of kings. However, the Church today, like the Church in the first centuries of the Christian Era, is constantly in danger. As it was in the first century, so now, we must guard against the introduction of false doctrines, theories and practices into the Church, for in this day there are those who arise, as they arose in the days of the apostles of old, who would pervert the way of the Lord; those of an apostate spirit, who would lead away many after them. If we are informed as we should be, then these evil designing persons will have no influence upon the members of the Church. The Lord has said:

"And whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived, for the Son of Man shall come, and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." P. of G. P., p.45.

Therefore if we will treasure up the word of the Lord, in faith, humility and prayer, we will not be deceived, but will have the light of truth for our guidance.

The text-book which will be used in our study of this course will be the Documentary History of the Church. References to this history will be given in the lessons as D.H.C. with volume and page. We hope that for the study of this course, the brethren will have in their possession the volumes of this history, which cover the period of the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Very sincerely

THE COUNCIL OF APOSTLES

By George F. Richards, President
