Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON ONE

Ancestry of the Prophet Joseph Smith

References

D.H.C. Vol.1:2-3. "Life of Joseph F. Smith," Ch. 1:15-18. "Life of Joseph Smith," George Q. Cannon, Ch. 1:31-33. "Topsfield Hist. Collections," Vol. 8:86-98, Art, "Ashael Smith of Topsfield." "Essentials in Church History," pp. 22-31. "Joseph Smith the Prophet," by his mother. Chs. 1-9.

References Same as above.

References as above.

"Life of Joseph F. Smith," Ch. 2. D.H.C. Vol. 1:2, 15, 28, 80.

D.H.C. Vol. 1:2-3. "Joseph Smith the Prophet, by his mother, Chs. 1-8 "Essentials in Church History," pp. 30-31. "Comprehensive History," B. H. Roberts, Vol. 1.

Notes

Every Latter-day Saint believes that the early settlers of the United States were led to this country by the hand of the Lord. This is verily true of the ancestors of the Prophet Joseph Smith. From the Book of Mormon we learn that Joseph, son of Jacob, prophesied of the coming of Joseph Smith as the instrument in the hand of the Lord in ushering in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Joseph predicted that his name should be the same as his and also that of his father. Joseph Smith, therefore, did not come into the world by chance. In choosing a prophet for such a glorious, important and far-reaching mission, we well may be assured that the Lord prepared for his coming by making choice of his ancestors among those worthy and favored by him. By revelation we discover that they have descended through the tribe of Ephraim and that Joseph Smith Sen. was entitled to the birthright in Israel because of his lineage. More will be said of this later. Nothing is known of the Smith family beyond Robert Smith, born about 1623. The place of his birth is not known. All we know is that as a youth he left Boston, Lincolnshire, sailed to London and from there took ship for America. It is generally believed today that his ancestral home was in Lincolnshire, in or near the town of Willoughby, the home of Captain John Smith of early colonial fame. In fact it is understood that the family of the Prophet is the same family as Captain John Smith. This is based on a statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith as reported by President George A. Smith, cousin of the Prophet, that the Prophet once declared that "he was related to Captain John Smith, English soldier, explorer and colonizer of Virginia. This statement, it is said, was based on heavenly inspiration." (Life of Joseph F. Smith p. 15.)

Robert was about fifteen years of age, when, with a number of other boys, he was brought to the United States, apprenticed to Mr. John Whittingham. This was not an unusual procedure in those days. Youths of humble families, hoping to better their condition frequently left the old world for the new. The record shows that Robert sailed with Mr. Whittingham from Boston to London and then to Boston in the United States. It is known that Mr. Whittingham had an estate at Southernton, (now Sutterton) about 4 miles from Boston, Lincolnshire. Willoughby is about fifteen miles from Boston. Presumably the boys gathered by Mr. Whittingham came from the vicinity of his estate. It is not known whether Robert was an orphan at this time, or whether his parents permitted him to come to America feeling that he could better his condition. It is possible that they were poor and had other children to support. In a court record in Essex Co., Massachusetts, the following is found: "Robert Smith aged about thirty-three years, deposed that he lived with Simon Tuttle's mother, about eight or nine years before." Sworn in court at Ipswich, March 29, 1659. It appears that he served out his ten years with Mr. Whittingham and then, in 1648, when of age became a citizen of Ipswich, Massachusetts. For a time he worked for the Tuttle family. He was married some time before March 26, 1656, for on that date his wife Mary was a witness before the Ipswich court. She was Mary French, daughter of John French of Ipswich. Probably she was born in Boston, March 2, 1635. In 1661 Robert and his wife moved to Rowley Village, later known as Boxford, and here he purchased 208 acres of land. In this humble way he began his married life. He was known as a frugal man and through his labor and industry he gathered around him some of the comforts of life. From a sketch in the Topsfield Historical Collection (Vol. 8:87-88), this is said of him:

"Among the early settlers (of Topsfield) was a Robert Smith who immigrated in the year 1648. Beginning life in the new world in a humble way he gradually won the esteem of his neighbors, and through his industry and integrity was able to gather around him some of the comforts of life. He married a Mary French and moved to that part of Rowley, in Essex County, which afterwards became the township of Boxford where he purchased two hundred eight acres of land. Robert was known among his neighbors as a quiet unassuming man, devoted to the welfare of the settlement, and was very ready to lend a helping hand to the needy. He was the father of ten children, namely: Thomas, Mary, born October 28, 1658, married John Towne; Phebe, born August 26, 1661, married Jacob Towne; Ephraim, born October 29, 1663, married Mary Ramsdell; Samuel, born January 26, 1666, married Rebecca Curtis; Amy, born August 16, 1668, married Joseph Towne; Sarah, born June 25, 1670, died August 28, 1673; Nathaniel, born January 29, 1674, married Rebecca Symonds; Mariah, born December 18, 1677 married Peter Shumway. In his will dated August 7, 1693—twenty-three days before his death—Robert appointed his wife Mary and third son, Samuel, his executors. Later by request of the mother and the children, Samuel became the sole administrator of his father's estate. He received a letter of administration from Judge Jonathan Corwin, October 3, 1698."

With his family he worshipped at the Topsfield church, and hence became known as Robert Smith of Topsfield. He served at various times as a member of the trial jury also on the grand jury. He raised his family in the strict prevailing teachings of the Puritans faith of New England. He died in Boxford, August 30, 1693. In 1909, when a delegation visited Topsfield and Boxford, descendants of Robert Smith were still living at the old homestead and farming some of the original 208 acres of Robert's farm.

He died November 14, 1785, leaving an estate valued at 544 pounds, 12 shillings and 8 pence.

The Salem Gazette of November 22, 1785, in recording the fact of his death made mention of him in the following worthy terms:

"Died.—At Topsfield, on Monday, the 14th instant, Samuel Smith, Esq. So amiable and worthy a character as he evidently appeared, both in public and private, will render the memory of him ever precious. For a number of years he represented the town in the General Court where he was esteemed a man of integrity and uprightness. His usefulness among those with whom he was more intimately conversant was eminent. He was a sincere friend to the liberties of his country, and a strenuous advocate of the doctrine of Christianity.

"The memory of the just be blessed."

During the Revolution he followed the example of his father and served in the American forces during the war. After the death of his father, in 1785, Asael returned to Topsfield to again make his home. He lived in the old home about one mile north of the town, where a number of his children were born. President George Q. Cannon has written of him: "The paternal grandfather of the Prophet was Asael Smith, a man of the strongest religious convictions, and yet a man whose broad humanitarian views were repugnant to many of the sectarians of the day. Upon one occasion, before the Prophet's birth, Asael Smith had a premonition that one of his descendants should be a great teacher and leader of men. To quote his words, as they are remembered and recorded by one who knew him and heard him speak: "It has been borne in upon my soul that one of my descendants will promulgate a work to revolutionize the world of religious faith."

"It is not known if young Joseph ever heard of this prophetic declaration, until after his own career had been made manifest. But Asael lived to see the dawn of the fulfillment of his words. Just before his death, the Book of Mormon, then recently printed, was presented to him. He accepted it, and with the light of inspiration which sometimes illumines the mind of a man as the veil of eternity opens to the gaze, Asael solemnly warned his attendants to give heed to the Book, for it was true and its coming forth heralded a renewal of Gospel light."—"Life of Joseph Smith, the Prophet." pp. 32-33. See also D. H. C. Vol. 1:28.

Asael was gifted with the pen and did considerable writing in his day. He was affable in manner, possessing a quaint and genial humor and a fund of anecdote. After leaving Topsfield the place of his birth and where his youth was spent, it was only natural that he should hold tender memories of that place. It is true, that he left behind him many friends, among those who were more noble and tolerant in spirit and with these he corresponded from time to time. His address to his family, the original copy of which is in the possession of members of the family to this day, is a very remarkable document, full of valuable advice for the members of his family. For a full consideration of this, see "Life of Joseph F. Smith," pp. 24-28.

Asael was devotedly attached to his wife and children. The latter years of his life were spent at the home of his son Silas, in Stockholm, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y., where he died, October 31, 1830, over 86 years of age. In stature he was very tall, with a well proportioned body, and it is said that he in his youth could handle two ordinary men with ease. His wife, Mary Duty Smith, received the Gospel and moved to Kirtland. The Prophet wrote under the date of May 16, 1836, "My cousin, Elias Smith, arrived from St. Lawrence County, N. Y. with the information that his father and family, and Uncle Silas and family, were on their way to Kirtland, and that my grandmother was at Fairport. On the 18th my Uncle Silas Smith and family arrived from the east. My father, three of his brothers, and their mother, met the first time for many years. It was a happy day, for we had long prayed to see our grandmother and uncles in the Church. On May 27, 1836, after a few days visit with her children, which she enjoyed extremely well, my grandmother fell asleep without sickness, pain or regret."—D. H. C. Vol. 1:28-29. The children of Asael and Mary Duty Smith are:

Jesse, b. April 20, 1760, md. Hannah Peabody. All his life he opposed the mission of the Prophet and spoke and acted in bitterness towards the members of the family who embraced the Gospel.

Priscilla, b. Oct. 20, 1769, md. John C. Wailer.

Joseph, b. July 12, 1771, in Topsfield; md. Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon and Lydia Mack, Jan. 24, 1796.

Asael, b. May 12, 1773, in Windham, N. H.; md. Elizabeth Shellenger.

Mary, b. June 4, 1777, md. Francis Wilcox.

Silas, b. Oct. 1, 1779, md. (1) Ruth Stevens; (2) Mary Aikens.

John, b. July 16, 1781, in Derryfield, N. H.; md. Clarissa Lyman.

Sussanna, b. May 18, 1783.

Stephen, b. April 23, 1785; d. April 23, 1802.

Sarah, b. May 16, 1789; md. Joseph Sanford.

With the exception of Jesse, the members of Asael's family were all favorable to the Church. Joseph, father of the Prophet, Asael, Silas and John, all became active in the Church and prominent in its counsels. They are the heads of the four branches of the Smith family in the west. Asael and John were Patriarchs. Joseph became the Patriarch to the Church. Their descendants now numbering legions are now active in the Church. John served for many years as Patriarch to the Church. His son George A. was an apostle and counselor to President Brigham Young. His son John Henry, also an apostle, served as a counselor to President Joseph F. Smith. His son, George Albert Smith is now President of the Church.

Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon and Lydia Gates Mack, was born in the town of Gilsun, Cheshire County, New Hampshire, July 8, 1776. She was married to Joseph Smith, January 24, 1796. They were parents of the following children:

Alvin, b. Feb. 11, 1798; d. Nov. 19, 1823.

Hyrum, b. Feb. 9, 1800; md. (1) Jerusha Barden, Nov. 2, 1826; (2) Mary Fielding, December 24, 1837.

Sophronia, b. May 16, 1803; md. Calvin Stoddard, Dec. 2, 1827.

Joseph, b. Dec. 23, 1805, at Sharon, Vermont; md. Emma Hale.

Samuel Harrison, b. March 14, 1808; md. (1) Mary Bailey, Aug. 13, 1834; (2) Levira Clark. He died of a fever occasioned by exertion in escaping from a mob shortly after his brothers were killed.

Ephraim, b. March 13, 1810; d. March 24, 1810.

William, b. March 13, 1811.

Catherine, b. July 28, 1812; md. Wilkins J. Salisbury.

Don Carlos, b. March 25, 1816; md. Agnes Coolbrith.

Lucy, b. July 18, 1821; md. Arthur Milikin.

Lucy Mack was a woman of exceptional talent. She was descended from John Mack, a Scotch immigrant of 1669, who came to Connecticut from Scotland. It is thought that the Mack family dropped their original name, retaining the prefix only because of persecution on account of religious belief during the religious wars in the British Isles. It is thought that part of their coat of arms was a boar's head. The Scotch families of MacDougal and McTavish have as part of their coats-of-arms a boar's head erased. One branch of the Mack family believes that the original name was McDerman. About the year 1795, Lucy Mack went to Tunbridge, Vermont, to spend some time with her brother Stephen and while there she became acquainted with Joseph Smith, son of Asael, and they were married January 24, 1796. From that time forth they met with many reverses because of the treachery of trusted friends. These trials and the desire to better their condition impelled them to remove to Western New York. Without any doubt the hand of the Lord was in this, for he had a mission for Joseph, Jr. to perform, and to accomplish it successfully it was necessary that he be in the vicinity of the Hill Cumorah. Surely the Lord works in a marvelous way to bring to pass his purposes. Lucy, the mother of the Prophet and Patriarch shared with her husband all the hardships, drivings and persecution of those early days in New York, Ohio, Missouri and Illinois. She was loyally devoted to the mission of her son and had an abiding testimony in the work which he was called upon to usher into this unbelieving and wicked world with the hope that many might be saved.
