Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWO

The Vision of the Father and the Son

a. Condition of the religious world in 1820.

b. Joseph Smith's perplexity.

c. The promise of James tested.

a. Joseph Smith's prayer.

b. Satan's opposition.

c. The glorious vision of the Father and the Son.

d. Joseph's parents believe his story. Note 3.

e. The proclamation of the vision brought sectarian hatred.

f. That the message was rejected not strange. Note 4.

a. Father and Son revealed as separate Personages. Note 5.

b. Man created in the image of God. Note 6.

c. The canon of Scripture not full. Note 7.

d. The Church of Jesus Christ was not on the earth. Note 8.

e. Divine Authority cannot be assumed. Note 9.

f. Evidence of the truth of the Prophet's story. Note 10.

References

D. H. C. 1:1-8. "History of Joseph Smith"—by Lucy Smith. Ch. 18. "Pearl of Great Price." "Writings of Joseph Smith," pp. 46-50.

James 1:5-6.

"Restoration of All Things,"—Smith. Chs. 5-8. Introduction to Vol. 1, D. H. C., page LIV to XCVI. "Articles of Faith" (Talmage) chs. 2, 10, 11. "Outlines of Ecclesiastical History," (Roberts) Part II.

Notes

The reason for mentioning Presbyterianism was due to the fact that his mother and some other members of the family had joined that church. As stated in the previous lesson, his parents accepted this story and were loyal to him in all the vicissitudes of persecutions, drivings, joys and sorrows, which resulted in the hatred manifested against him because of his call from the Lord to be the instrument in the restoration of the Gospel.

Among the persecutors of the truth and among those who have been the most bitter in their opposition to the restored Gospel and most pronounced in their opposition and bearing of false witness against the Church and Joseph Smith, have been the ministers of the so-called Christian churches. Naturally Joseph Smith went to the minister with whom he had been most friendly, feeling that of course, he would accept his story in gladness. It was not so, but immediately this man became his bitter enemy. As soon as Joseph's story was circulated, abuse was heaped upon his head, and even his life was sought by enemies. Many examples in both profane as well as sacred history illustrating this truth can be cited.

So it proves to be the case with all the other doctrines—baptism, the laying on of hands, divine authority, that the Lord has other revelation to give if and when the people are willing to receive it, and the Bible does not contain all of the word of God. They discover that their churches are not in any sense "the Church of Jesus Christ" as he established it. They have assumed authority to act in his name, and have built up churches unto themselves, not by divine command.

The Catholic church of course, claims to be the church in descent from Peter in succession. This claim is refuted in the fact that they have changed all the ordinances and the order and government of the Church of Jesus Christ as it was established in the days of our Lord's ministry. The evidence, therefore of the divine call to Joseph Smith is overwhelming and irrefutable.
