Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THREE

Visitation of Moroni

a. Joseph forbidden to join any church.

b. He engages in the common vocations.

c. Persecuted for telling his story.

d. Common "foibles" of human nature.

a. First appearance Sept. 21, 1823.

b. Second appearance.

c. Third appearance.

d. The interview the following day.

a. The Plates revealed.

b. Moroni quotes ancient prophets.

c. Admonition of the angel.

d. Description of Cumorah. Note 4.

a. Annual instructions from Moroni.

b. His warnings to Joseph Smith.

c. Contents of the cement box.

d. The plates delivered.

e. The interval of four years.

References

D.C.H. 1:9-17.

Notes

After telling the young man these things the angel quoted to him many passages of scripture. For a full account attention is called to the Pearl of Great Price and the Documentary History of the Church as indicated in this lesson. Among these quotations were the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, which he was told was shortly to be fulfilled. The third and fourth chapters of Malachi with some changes. These also were shortly to be fulfilled. Many other passages were also quoted, after which the angel took his departure, and Joseph Smith was left to ponder over what he had seen and heard. While he was thus in reflection again the light embraced the room and the same messenger stood before him. Again the same admonition and instruction was given, and again he was warned that when he got the plates he was to show them to no one except as the Lord should command him; neither the breast plate, nor the Urim and Thummim. If he violated this commandment he would be destroyed. On the appearing of the angel the vision opened to the mind of Joseph and he saw the place where the plates were deposited and so clearly and distinctly that he knew the place when visiting it the following day. The angel also informed him of the judgments that were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword and pestilence; and the grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Again the angel departed as before. By this time so deep was the impressions made upon his mind that Joseph could not sleep. He was overwhelmed with astonishment. Again the messenger appeared; the same instruction was repeated for the third time, adding a caution that Satan would try to tempt him, in consequence of the indigent circumstances of his father's family, to get the' plates for the purpose of getting rich. This the angel forbade stating that these plates were to be used to glorify the Almighty and he must not be influenced by any other motive. After the third visit, morning soon appeared, so the interviews must have consumed most of the entire night.

When the morning came Joseph went forth to continue in the labors of the day. Attempting to work as on other days, he found his strength failed him and, exhausted, he could not continue. His father who was laboring along with him observing that the son was ill, instructed him to return to the house. While on his way he had to cross a fence and his strength entirely failed him and he fell helplessly to the ground. The first thing he recollected was that a voice spoke to him. He looked up and beheld the same messenger of the night before. Here again all that had occurred the previous night was repeated and the youth was commanded to return to his father and tell him of the visions and commandments thus received. Afterwards he left the field and went to the place where the messenger had told him the plates were deposited which he knew from the vision of the night before.

It is related by his mother that when he visited the hill he endeavored to take the records from their resting place but received a shock. Again he tried and failed. The third time he tried and exerting all his physical strength, thinking that was all that would be necessary for him to obtain the record. This time he received a shock of considerable violence which sapped his strength and made him powerless. In his excitement he exclaimed, "Why cannot I obtain the book?" "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord," answered the voice of the angel. Looking up to his astonishment he beheld the heavenly messenger.

In humble supplication he sought forgiveness and his vision was opened and the glory of the Lord shone around about him and he was made to feel the sweet influence of the power of righteousness. While beholding this vision the angel said, "Look!" He then beheld the prince of darkness surrounded by his innumerable train of associates in all their diabolical fury. The angel said to him that all of this was shown to him that he might know the good and the evil, the holy and the impure, the glory of the Father and his power and likewise the power of darkness, "It is he," said the angel, "who fills the hearts of men with evil, to walk in darkness and blaspheme God; and you may learn from henceforth, that his ways are to destruction; but the way of holiness is peace and rest." See Improvement Era, Vol. 2, p. 807, also "History of Joseph Smith," Ch. 19. "Essentials in Church History," p. 58.

"You are acquainted with the mail road from Palmyra, Wayne County, to Canandaigua, Ontario County, New York, and also, as you pass from the former to the latter place, before arriving at the little village of Manchester, say from three to four, or about four miles from Palmyra, you pass a large hill on the east side of the road. Why I say large, is because it is as large perhaps, as any in that country. To a person acquainted with this road a description would be unnecessary, as it is the largest and rises the highest of any on the route. The north end rises quite suddenly until it assumes a level with the more southern extremity, and I think I may say an elevation higher than at the south a short distance, say half or three-fourths of a mile. As you pass towards Canandaigua it lessens gradually until the surface assumes its common level, or is broken by other smaller hills or ridges, water courses and ravines. I think I am justified in saying that this is the highest hill for some distance round, and I am certain that its appearance, as it rises so suddenly from a plain on the north, must attract the notice of the traveler as he passes by." D.H.C. 1:15.

"Now you have got the record into your own hands, and you are but a man, therefore you will have to be watchful and faithful to your trust or you will be overpowered by wicked men; for they will lay every plan and scheme that is possible to get it away from you, and if you do not take heed continually, they will succeed. While it was in my hands, I could keep it, and no man had power to take it away, but now I give it up to you. Beware, and look well to your ways, and you shall have power to retain it." "History of the Prophet" (Lucy Smith) p. 106. D.H.C. 1:18.

The contents of the box are given in Section 17, of the Doctrine and Covenants. No sooner had the Prophet received the plates than he discovered that the words and caution of the angel were greatly needed. He writes: "No sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hands. When according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight." D.H.C. Ch, 3:18-19.

During these four years Joseph was employed in various capacities under the necessity of laboring to sustain himself and his wife, for in the meantime he had married. Mother Smith in her history gives accounts in numbers of the schemes by wicked plotters in the endeavor to get the plates, but, of course, the Lord protected them.
