Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FOUR

The Translation of the Record Begins

a. Reason for the delay.

a. He assists the Prophet with money. Note 2.

b. Takes portion of characters to learned professors.

c. He commences to write.

d. Reaction of Prof. Anthon to the record. Note 3.

a. Isaiah's prediction of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon.

b. "A Marvelous Work and a Wonder." Note 5.

c. The deaf to hear the words of the book. Note 6.

References

D.H.C. 1:18-21.

D.H.C. 1:19-21.

[^1]. "Orson Pratt's Works," pp. 23-29. "Was Joseph Smith Sent of God?" "The Restoration of All Things," Ch. 10.—Smith.

Notes

Seven and one quarter centuries before the birth of our Redeemer, the Lord revealed through Isaiah the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and some account of the Nephite race. In this Prophecy he said:

"For the Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered.

"And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith I cannot for it is sealed;

"And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned."

We have reason to believe that Martin Harris was unacquainted with this prophecy. Certainly when he went to Dr. Anthon, he had no thought in his mind in relation to this prediction. How could he know its meaning. Evidently when he returned he was still ignorant of the significance of the event in which he had played such a prominent part. By reading his story one can readily see that Professor Anthon had fulfilled the words of Isaiah literally in his interview with Martin Harris. He was the learned man spoken of by Isaiah. Joseph Smith the unlearned man unto whom the book was delivered. In the Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi, Chapter 27, we have Nephi's prediction concerning this same event. It likewise should be read in detail to the class. The story of Martin Harris, in connection with its significance in the fulfillment of the words of Isaiah, should impress every member of the Church deeply and reveal to him the marvelous way in which the Lord acts. This is not merely a coincidence, but the actual fulfillment of the predictions.

One of the clearest expositions of the significance of this prophecy and the fulfillment of it in the case of Martin Harris and Joseph Smith, is found as previously indicated, in "Orson Pratt's Works," a little work that can be purchased at the book stores. All should make themselves familiar with the clear way in which the true meaning of Isaiah's words have been fulfilled. A member of the class should be prepared with Orson Pratt's argument and present it to the class.

"Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men;

"Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder; for their wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid."

Surely this prophecy has been fulfilled, to the satisfaction of every Latter-day Saint. When we think of the manner of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, its influence upon thousands who have come into the Church; the miraculous, but logical, manner in which the Church was restored and its success in the midst of almost universal hatred or opposition, it is something to make us marvel and wonder. Then again when we think of the missionary work of the Church; how our young inexperienced men have gone forth to proclaim the Gospel to an unbelieving world and have come off victorious, we must acknowledge that only the guiding hand of the Lord could have accomplished this great work. We have seen the wisdom of the wise perish and the understanding of the prudent who trust in the world and the traditions of men, come to naught. And so it will and must be. Let us stop and reflect how Joseph Smith the man "unlearned" according to the Lord's prediction, has confounded the wise and the learned, the professors of science and of religion, and how their theories and doctrines have crumbled before the truth. False teachings have been exposed. The humble have had the Gospel taught to them, while the wise in their own conceit have stood astounded but unrepentant before the onslaughts of this youth against the citadel of their superstitions and false religious philosophy. We should humbly thank our Father in heaven, for the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy.

---
Notas:
[^1] Loss of the 116 Pages of Manuscript. Section three is a revelation given in consequence of the loss of the 116 pages of manuscript of the Book of Mormon which had been translated by Joseph Smith when Martin Harris was his scribe. In the History of the Church (1:20-23.) we have the account from which the following is taken:
