Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FIVE

The Lost Manuscript

a. Documentary History 1:20-23. Note 1.

a. "God does not walk in crooked paths. Vs. 1-3. D. and C. 35:1.

b. Dangers of boasting and carnal desires. v. 4. D. and C. 84:73. Note 3.

a. vs. 5-15. Note 4.

b. Transgression of the Lord's commandments. vs. 5-6.

c. The dangers of disobedience. vs. 9-11.

a. That which was sacred delivered to Martin Harris, v. 12.

b. Martin Harris called a wicked man, v. 12. Note 6.

c. Because he broke a most sacred promise before God. v. 13.

d. He boasted in his own wisdom. v. 13.

e. For that reason Joseph Smith lost his privilege to translate for a season. v. 14.

f. The counsel of the Lord was trampled upon. v. 15.

a. It shall go forth through the testimony of the fathers. vs. 17-18.

b. For this purpose were the plates preserved. v. 19.

c. Lamanites to come to a knowledge of their fathers. v. 20.

References

Psalms 36:1-7.

Additional references: D. & C. 19:17. 82:1-5. 104:8-9.

Notes

"Mr. Harris * * returned again to my house about the 12th of April, 1828, and commenced writing for me while I translated from the plates, which we continued until the 14th of June following, by which time he had written one hundred and sixteen pages of manuscript, on foolscap paper. Some time later Mr. Harris had begun to write for me, he began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so. I did inquire, and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer, and desired that I should inquire again. I did so, and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented, but insisted that I should inquire once more. After much solicitation, I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions; which were that he show them only to his brother Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him, that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in the most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered unto this day." This full account should be presented to the class. See D.H.C. as indicated and other references.

It was lack of experience and trustfulness in others which brought upon the Prophet this great trouble and punishment from the Lord, and while Martin Harris broke his solemn covenant, which was a grievous sin, he felt capable in his own strength to protect the manuscript after it was once in his hands, and in this he miserably failed, as he should have known would have been the case.

Naturally, both Martin Harris and Joseph Smith passed through very severe mental torture following the loss of the manuscript. This was especially true of the Prophet. The Lord knowing the end from the beginning had provided for just this emergency and in a revelation given to the Prophet before the Lord took from him his gift, he was informed that the work and designs of the Almighty cannot be frustrated by puny man or by the devil. The Prophet was taught that even though a man may receive many revelations if he sets himself up in his own strength or follows his carnal desires he will incur the displeasure, even the vengeance, of a just God. In his infinite wisdom our Father has provided for every problem or difficulty that may arise to stop or hinder the progress of his work. No power on earth or in hell can overthrow or defeat that which God has decreed. Every plan of the Adversary will fail, for the Lord knows the secret thoughts of men, and sees the future with a vision clear and perfect, even as though it were in the past. Jacob, son of Lehi, in his rejoicing declared: "O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." (2 Nephi 9:20.) He knew that Satan would try to frustrate the coming forth of the Book of Mormon by the stealing and changing of the manuscript, and provided for it hundreds of years before the birth of Jesus Christ. Martin Harris, without a doubt, fell a prey to the enticings of Satan, in his constant pleading for the manuscript. Satan played upon his pride and foolish thought that by the showing of the manuscript his kindred could be convinced.

"Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

"Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you.

"And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation."

This is a wonderful lesson which it would be well for all of us to learn.

Evidently it cut the Prophet deeply to be informed that he had often been in transgression of the word of the Lord because of the persuasion of men, and that he should not have feared man more than God. Because of this weakness this punishment came to him and thus he learned and realized the fearful nature of the punishment the Lord could inflict. To his credit be it said that notwithstanding this severe rebuke, he published the revelation in which it is contained, not hiding his own folly and the reprimand given him of the Lord. A man of small caliber would have endeavored to hide from the public the chastisement and the folly which caused it.

"And now, my beloved brethren, all those who are of the house of Israel, and all ye ends of the earth, I speak unto you as the voice of one crying from the dust: Farewell until that great day shall come.

"And you that will not partake of the goodness of God, and respect the words of the Jews, and also my words, and the words which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God, behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day.

"For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey. Amen." 2 Nephi 33:13-15.

All through these scriptures the prophets speak in terms similar to this, that their testimony will be the voice from the dust, to the wicked nations in the last days. For other references see the Title Page of the Book of Mormon; [^1]. [^2] and Moroni 10th Chapter.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Altered Manuscript. Topics In section ten, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the plan of his enemies into whose hands the manuscript had fallen. In their hate of the truth for "their hearts are corrupt, and full of wickedness and abominations," the Lord said, they felt that they were justified in destroying Joseph Smith and the work of the Lord even by resorting to wilful and malicious lying. "And thus he (Satan) flattereth them, and telleth them that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy him. And thus he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their souls down to hell; and thus he causeth them to catch themselves in their own snare."
[^2] The Prayers of the Nephite Prophets Answered. vs. 46-56. Note 3. The Prophet Nephi kept a record of the sacred history of his people on what he was pleased to call the small plates which he had made. The historians who followed him continued that history down to the reign of King Benjamin, when the plates of this record were full. When Mormon was making his abridgement the Lord inspired him to attach these "small plates" to his abridgement. He did not know why only that the Spirit whispered to him to do so. The Lord, who knows the end from the beginning, thus prepared for the loss of the abridged record which was given to Martin Harris. Mormon therefore had a double account of the early history of his people from the time of the call of Lehi from Jerusalem down to the end of the writings of Amaleki, the last to write on the small plates of Nephi. The Lord, thus knowing that the manuscript covering this period of history would be stolen in the manner described, provided the better record to take the place of the abridgement. He denied Joseph Smith the privilege of translating the abridgement the second time, and thus prevented him from falling into the trap set by his enemies, but commanded him to translate the small plates giving the full account as kept by the early prophets and scribes.
