Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON SIX

The Lost Manuscript—2

a. The gift to translate restored. vs. 1-9.

b. Satan's hold on the hearts of men. vs. 10.

c. The altered manuscript. vs. 11-123.

d. "Wo unto him who lieth to deceive." vs. 25-29.

e. The Small Plates of Nephi. vs. 30-45. Note 2.

a. Prayers that the Nephite records might be a blessing to the nations. vs. 49-58.

b. The Church to be established among nations if they do not harden their hearts. vs. 52-53.

a. Paragraphs regarding the mission of the Book of Mormon, written by Moroni.

b. Words of Nephi, 1 Nephi Chapter 13.

a. Word of the Lord to the Jews, John 10:16.

b. 3 Nephi 15:16-24.

References

D. H. C. 1:21-28.

D. H. C. 1:23-28. D. and C. 10.

2 Nephi 28:20-23. Note 1.

D. H. C. 1:23-29.

Notes

How often this is the case: Today Satan is raging in the hearts of the children of men, and he has stirred them up to anger against that which is good. (2 Nephi 28:20.) From the very beginning he tried to stop or destroy this work, and no effort is left undone to bring to pass the destruction of the Church of Jesus Christ from within as well as from attacks without. Therefore all members of the Church should be constantly on their guard and prayerfully obedient to all covenants and commandments given them in the word of the Lord. We are commanded to "beware concerning ourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life." "For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." D. and C. 84:43. Never before in the history of the world, has Satan raged more determinedly in the hearts of the people than he is doing today.

When Jesus appeared to the Nephites he told them that they were the other sheep of whom he had spoken to his disciples in Palestine, but because of their unbelief he was forbidden by his Father to tell them more. To the Nephites he made it very plain that not only were they of the "other sheep," but there were still others, including the ten lost tribes, who would also hear his voice, and eventually when the gathering of Israel is complete these other members of the house of Israel who were scattered would be gathered and bring their records with them. In that day the records of the Jews and of the Nephites and also the other tribes of the house of Israel, which he had led away should join their records, and these scattered and punished people would be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions and then he would remember his covenant with Abraham and once again they would be his people and forever. See 2 Nephi 29. 3 Nephi 15 and 16.

The Lord has always been willing to bless and extend his mercy to those who are willing to humble themselves and accept his commandments: "If this generation harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them." It is just as true today as it was two thousand years ago, that men love darkness rather than the light, because their deeds are evil. The very sound of the Gospel causes a spirit of resentment, often anger, in the hearts of the wicked. The principles of the Gospel, all of which are glorious and uplifting and which any person can readily discover to be worthy of all acceptance, seem to create a spirit of hate and antagonism in the bosoms of those who oppose the truth and whose deeds are evil. Although the Jews saw Jesus heal the sick, raise the dead, give sight to the blind and perform all kinds of merciful deeds, yet they hated him, and his good deeds caused them to hate him the more. The Lord knew very well that the people of this generation, with the exception of the few, would turn away from his truth so that he could not establish branches of his Church among them, in any great numbers.
