Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON SEVEN

A Call to the Ministry

Topics

a. "With all your heart, might, mind and strength." D. & C. 11:19; 31:11; 59:5-6; Deut. 6:4-13; Matt. 10:37-9; Mark 12:29-34.

b. "That may stand blameless before God."

c. None can assist in work, who is not humble.

a. The long night of darkness (Apostasy). And its problems.

b. Bringing salvation to his soul.

c. Essential qualifications of teachers of the Gospel. Sec. 4:5-6.

a. The greatest of all the gifts of God.

b. Deny not the spirit of revelation. Sec. 11:25.

c. The thing of most worth. Section 15:6.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:28.

Doc. and Cov., Section 4. (See also Secs. 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37).

D. & C., Sec. 12:8.

D. & C. 6:3; 11:3-5; 31:4-5.

D. & C. 42:13-14; 50:13-24; 121:45-46.

D. & C. 11:5-7; 14:7; Matt. 13:47-50.

D. & C. 16:6.

Notes

This revelation is very short, only seven verses, but it contains sufficient counsel and instruction for a life-time study. No one has yet mastered it. It was not intended as a personal revelation to Joseph Smith, but to be of benefit to all who desire to embark in the service of God. It is a revelation to each member of the Church, especially to all who hold the Priesthood. Perhaps there is no other revelation in all our scriptures that embodies greater instruction pertaining to the manner of qualification of members of the Church for the service of God, and in such condensed form than this revelation. It is as broad, as high and as deep as eternity. No elder of the Church is qualified to teach in the Church, or carry the message of Salvation to the world, until he has absorbed, in part at least, this heaven-sent instruction.

Before the organization of the Church several men, who had been convinced in their hearts of the truth of Joseph Smith's story, came making inquiry as to their duty in this restoration. The Lord informed each of them as he did Joseph Smith, Sen., that the time had come for him to fulfill the promise made through Isaiah and that "a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men." This marvelous work is the restoration of the Church and the Gospel with all the power and authority, keys and blessings which pertain to this great work for the salvation of the children of men. All who have given diligent attention to the Church and the great things it has accomplished and is accomplishing, must feel and know that the word of the Lord is fulfilled, even though many of the marvels are yet future.

"And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; this is the first commandment." And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. "There is none greater than these." (Mark 12:29-34.)

The Lord in opening this dispensation gave this commandment to us, one and all, that we might be impressed with its great importance. O, Elders of Israel, what a power for good we could be, if we would but follow it.

Without such service, we cannot stand blameless before God, but shall stand condemned at the last day (v. 2). He has a right to demand of us that we love him, in this manner and be willing to give all, if need be, for his cause. Moreover, humility is absolutely necessary on the part of all who assist in this work. If we are not humble but boast in our own strength we have no claim on the blessings or the guidance of the Spirit of God.

The essential qualifications of teachers of the Gospel are declared in verses five and six: "Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence," these qualify one for the work. Each member of the Church should carefully, studiously, analyze each of these virtues and endeavor to the best of his ability to qualify by trying the best he can to reach perfection in each.

Today as in the beginning of this dispensation the thing of greatest worth to us is to "declare repentance unto this people" and bring souls unto God. (See Sections 15:6 and 16:6.)
