Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON EIGHT

The Promise of Three Witnesses

Topics

a. Martin Harris desires to be a witness. vs. 1, 11, 23-29. Note 1.

b. The Prophet's gift limited at the time. vs. 4, 5.

c. Other gifts to follow.

a. The anger of the Lord is kindled.

b. Showing the plates would not convince the world. v. 7.

c. The world to have the word through Joseph Smith. v. 10.

a. They will know of a surety that these things are true. v. 12.

b. They shall have power to view the plates. v. 13.

c. No others to receive such a testimony. v. 14.

d. By their testimony will go forth the word of the Lord. v. 15.

e. Effect of the testimony on the world. v. 18. Note 4.

a. Earth to be made empty. Note 5.

b. Eternal life promised through faithfulness.

c. Martin Harris rebuked v. 23.

d. Martin Harris granted his wish. vs. 24.

e. He is restricted in what he shall say. vs. 25, 26.

f. He was to greatly humble himself. vs. 28-29.

a. Enemies lie in wait to destroy. v. 33.

b. This commandment given that his days may be prolonged. v. 34.

References

D. and C., Sec. 5. D.H.C. 1:28-29.

Luke 16:19-31.

Notes

When we consider this declaration from the Lord, we are reminded of the story of Lazarus and the rich man, as told in Luke (16:19-31). The story reads that the rich man lifting his eyes in torment pleaded with father Abraham to send Lazarus to dip his finger in water, and cool his tongue. When he was informed that this could not be done, then he requested that Lazarus be sent back to earth to warn his five brothers and his father's house, that they might repent and not come to the same kind of torment. "Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead."

The Lord has always sent his accredited witnesses to testify of his truth, and has declared that all who reject these witnesses shall be under condemnation. This revelation declared that this generation shall have the word of the Lord through Joseph Smith. There may be some who think that this is unreasonable, and the Lord should use some miraculous means to convert the world. Frequently when strangers visit the Bureau of Information and they hear the story of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, they ask if the plates are in some museum where they may be seen. Some of them with some scientific training, express themselves to the effect that if the scholars could see and examine the plates and learn to read them, they would then bear witness to the truth of the Book of Mormon and the veracity of Joseph Smith and the whole world would then be converted. When they are informed that the angel took the plates back again, they turn away in their skepticism shaking their heads, but the Lord has said: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways," saith the Lord. "For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9.) We have learned that people are not converted by miracles or by examining records. If the Lord had placed the plates where the scholars could examine them, they would have scoffed at them just as much as they do today. People are converted by their hearts being penetrated by the Spirit of the Lord when they humbly hearken to the testimonies of the Lord's servants. The Jews witnessed the miracles of our Lord, but this did not prevent them from crying out against him and having him crucified.

Those who reject the solemn testimony of these three witnesses, or the testimony of others of the servants of the Lord, are guilty before the Lord and according to his word shall suffer condemnation.
