Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON NINE

The Call of the Three Witnesses

Topics

a. Say nothing but repentance. Sec. 6:9. Note 2.

b. Sacredness of the Gifts of God. Sec. 6:10, 12. Note 3.

c. Mysteries of the kingdom. Sec. 6:11. Note 4.

a. The law pertaining to witnesses. Note 6.

a. This view obtained by faith, v. 2.

b. To testify by the power of God, v. 3.

c. That Joseph Smith might not be destroyed. vs. 4-8.

d. Statement of Oliver Cowdery. Note 8.

References

Sections 6 and [^1]. D. H. C. Vol. 1:32-35.

D. H. C. 1:32-35.

Matt. 3:1-8; Mark 1:3-5; D. & C. 11:9.

D. & C. 8:3-4.

D. & C. 76:5-9; Alma 12:9-11.

John 5:31-32; 8:13-18; II Cor. 13:1; II Nephi 11:3; 27:12-14; Ether 5:3-5.

Notes

"Wherefore at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify of the truth of the book and the things therein.

"And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

"Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God." (II Nephi 27:12-14.)

Joseph Smith in his youth when he was translating the Book of Mormon surely was not acquainted with the law of God in relation to witnesses. The law had been established in the beginning, and was reiterated by Moses to Israel, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses should all things be established. When the Jews accused Christ of standing alone with no one to testify with him, he, reading their thoughts, called attention to their law and said he did not stand alone but he and his Father fulfilled the law as witnesses of his mission. (John 8:14-18.) Here are his words.

"Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself yet my record is true; for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

"Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man;

"And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: For I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

"It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.

"I am one that beareth witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me."

In preparing witnesses for the Book of Mormon, and the restoration of the Church with its keys of power, the Lord provided for the necessary witnesses, according to his divine purposes to fulfill the law and to place that testimony before the people of the world with binding force. Therefore Nephi could well say: "Wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God."

The Urim and Thummim shown to the witnesses and which Joseph Smith received were prepared by the Lord for the purpose of translating these sacred records. They were given to the brother of Jared on the mount and he sealed them up with the writings which he made of the visions of the Lord, so that at a later day they were to be used to bring to light his record of the Jaredite people. These "stones" were in the possession of King Mosiah and by him were used in translating the Jaredite record. They were later hidden up by Moroni with the abridgment of Nephite history, with the other articles mentioned in section seventeen.

---
Notas:
[^1] "If I Will That He Tarry Till I Come, What Is That To Thee?" Note 1. "The Wandering Jew." The first mention of the legend of the Jew condemned to wander till the day of judgment for offering insult to Christ on the way to Calvary is ascribed to Matthew of Paris, who professes to have received the fable from an Armenian Bishop in 1228. The Jew, was, it is stated, a doorkeeper in the palace of Pontius Pilate. In 1547 he turned up at Hamburg, giving his name as Ahasuerus, and declaring that he had been a shoemaker in Jerusalem, and had refused to allow Jesus to rest at his door when he passed it bearing the cross. He struck Jesus who replied. 'I will stand here and rest, but thou shalt go on until the last day.' The 'Wandering Jew' subsequently visited Brussels as Isaac Lacquedom, and also Leipzig, Lubeck, Moscow, Madrid, and Hull." (Nelson's Encyclopedia) Based on this legend several novels have been written portraying the wanderings of this accursed man. George Croly's work, first published in 1827, and recently republished with the title, "Tarry Thou Till I Come," Lew Wallace's "Prince of India," and "The Wandering Jew," by the French author Eugene Sue, are outstanding novels dealing with this legend.
