Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TEN

The Record of John the Revelator

Topics

a. The tradition of the Wandering Jew.

b. "There be some standing here which shall not taste of death until they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom."

a. Inquiry by Urim and Thummim. Introduction.

b. The record of John revealed. Introduction.

c. John's request. vs. 1-2.

d. The mission given to John, and Peter's desire. vs. 3-6, 8.

e. The Three Nephites and John.

a. Given at the transfiguration.

b. Restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

References

D. & C., Section 7.

John 21:20-22.

Matt. 16:28.

D. & C. Sec. 7. Note 2.

[^1]; D. & C. 77:14; D.H.C., Vol. 1:176.

III Nephi 28:1-6.

III Nephi 28:7-40; D. H. C., Vol. 4:209-210, 425.

Matt. 17:1-9; D. H. C.. Vol. 3:387; D. & C. 81:1-2.

D. & C. 27:12-13; 128:20.

Notes

It is very likely that the legend had its beginning in some early period of our era, and was the outgrowth of the words of our Lord to Peter in relation to John. The story, of course, became perverted, and was made to apply to some one blessed that he might do good until the coming of Christ in glory. The Savior said in giving instruction to his disciples in relation to his coming in the clouds of glory; "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom." This saying has been quite generally a mystery to Christian people and it has been interpreted to mean that Christ has always come in glory in the hearts of those who are converted.

This desire made by John was a noble one, for he desired to live, not that he might lengthen out his life in mortality, for that of itself would not have been a blessing, but that he might bring souls unto Christ. Peter's desire was a very natural one—to come to the Lord as soon as his mission was finished on the earth. John desired, because of his love of mankind, that he might do a greater work by laboring in this mortal world until Christ should come the second time, in the clouds of glory.

When Jesus Christ visited the Nephites on this continent, he also chose twelve men and gave them authority similar to the authority of the Twelve at Jerusalem, that they might labor among their people in the Chuch and for the salvation of souls. Before he left them he granted their desires, as he had to Peter and John. Nine of the twelve chose the same blessing that Peter did, but three of them "sorrowed in their hearts, for they durst not speak unto him the thing which they desired." "And he said unto them: Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me." (See III Nephi 28:6)

"Therefore more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven." (III Nephi 28:5-7.)

A great mission was given unto John because of his desire, and he is even now laboring as "a flaming fire and a ministering angel, for those who are heirs of salvation." In the tenth chapter of Revelation we read that John was given a little book by the angel and commanded to eat it up, which he did and he said, "it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter." And the angel said by way of interpretation of this act: "Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings." When this mission was given, John was an old man far beyond the allotted years of three score and ten. In answer to a question as to the meaning of this vision of the book, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: it was a mission and an ordinance for John to gather the tribes of Israel. (D. & C. 77:14.) At a conference of the Church, held June, 1831, Joseph Smith said: "that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." (Doc. Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1:176. Essentials in Church History, p. 126.)

"Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." (Doc. Hist. of the Church, Vol. 4:425.)

Again he says:

"Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fulness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters he held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fulness as those who are resurrected from the dead.

"Now it was evident that there was a resurrection, or else God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein, then, can it be said a better resurrection? This distinction is made between the doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory." (D. H. C. Vol. 4:210.)

Mormon, in regarding the history of the labors of the Disciples of Christ, not only gives an excellent account of their ministry and powers, but also describes the fact that while the three who tarry will eventually have to be changed from mortality to immortality, they are not subject to pain, disease, and the ills of the flesh, and they have power over the elements. They also have the authority to minister to all the scattered tribes of Israel until Christ comes. (III Nephi 28:8-40.)

---
Notas:
[^1] How the Spirit of Revelation is Received. While the Prophet and Oliver were working on the translation during the month of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate and made that request of the Prophet. Inquiry was made by Urim and Thummim and the Lord gave consent in the revelation known as section eight. At this time the Lord seemed perfectly willing that Oliver Cowdery as well as Joseph Smith should engage in this labor of translating the plates, and he gave in some detail what qualifications are necessary for the reception of knowledge by revelation and also the procedure necessary in translating ancient records. Oliver was informed that this power could not be received except by the exercise of faith with an honest heart, and by this faith, knowledge of the ancient records and their engravings should be made known. The Lord said: "Behold I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart." This is the spirit of revelation. With a glad heart Oliver took over the work of translating, and the Prophet Joseph was ready to act as scribe. The attempt was a failure; it seems that Oliver Cowdery thought that it would be an easy matter with the aid of the Urim and Thummim to understand the engravings and give their equivalent meaning in the English language, without taking thought or studying it out in his mind. He therefore failed to comprehend the instructions the Lord had given him, notwithstanding the Lord told him he should have the gift of revelation.
