Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON ELEVEN

The Spirit of Revelation Defined

Topics

a. Knowledge received by faith. vs. 1-2, 10, 11.

b. A means of deliverance from enemies. vs. 4-5.

c. The gift of Aaron. vs. 6-8. Note 2.

a. The request granted. D. and C. Introduction, v. 1 (section 8).

b. Oliver instructed to continue as scribe. Sec. 9. verses 1, 3-6.

c. Other records to come forth. Section 9, verse 2. Note 3.

d. Key by which revelation may be known. Section 9, verses 8-14.

References

Sections 8 and [^1].

D. H. C., Sec. 8. Note 1; D. H. C., Vol 1:36-37.

D. H. C., Vol. 1:36-37.

II Nephi 27:7-11; III Nephi 26:6-10.

Notes

It seems probable that Oliver Cowdery desired to translate out of curiosity, and the Lord taught him his place by showing him that translating was not the easy thing he had thought it to be. In a subsequent revelation (Sec. 9), the explanation was made that Oliver's failure came because he did not continue as he commenced, and the task being a difficult one his faith deserted him. The lesson he learned was very necessary for he was shown that his place was to act as scribe for Joseph Smith and that it was the latter who was called and appointed by command of the Lord to do the translating. There must have been some desire on the part of Oliver Cowdery to be equal with the Prophet and some impatience in having to sit and act as scribe, but when he failed to master the gift of translating he was then willing to accept the will of the Lord who said to him: "Be patient, my son, for it is wisdom in me, and it is not expedient that you should translate at this present time. * * * Do not murmur my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you after this manner; Behold you have not understood, you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me." (D. & C. 9:3-9.)

A similar privilege is given to any member of the Church who seeks knowledge in the spirit of prayer and faith. The Lord will cause the feeling of security and truth to take hold of the individual and burn within the bosom and there will be an overwhelming feeling that the thing is right. Missionaries have felt the manifestation of this gift while laboring in the field; when searching the scriptures; when speaking before congregations on the streets and in public gatherings. When you have been listening to some inspired speaker who has presented a new thought to you, have you not felt that burning within and the satisfaction in your heart that this new thought is true? On the other hand, have you experienced the feeling of stupor, gloom, or uneasiness, when some thought has been presented which was in conflict with the revealed word of the Lord, and you have felt by this manifestation of the Spirit that what was said is not true? It is a great gift which all may receive, to have this spirit of discernment, or revelation, for it is the spirit of revelation. This is what Paul meant when he said to the Corinthian Saints: "Follow after charity and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy." (I Cor. 14:1.) He was not so anxious that the members of the Church in that day should seek for the power to reveal the future as he was to have this spirit by which they could discern truth and separate it from error. The better our understanding of the scriptures and the more diligent we are in the service of the Lord, the better will we comprehend this truth and have this gift bestowed upon us. The Lord has told us that we "are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally," and the Spirit will testify unto us if we live in holiness of heart, walking uprightly before him, "doing all things in the spirit of prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils." (D. and C. 46:7-8.) We have a sure word by which we may be guided in these matters, and that is faithful, prayerful obedience to the commandments of the Lord.

"Oh, remember these words, and keep my commandments. Remember this is your gift."

There was another gift bestowed upon Oliver Cowdery, and that was the gift of Aaron. Like Aaron with his rod in his hand going before Moses as a spokesman, so Oliver Cowdery was to go before Joseph Smith. Whatever he should ask the Lord by power of this gift should be granted if asked in faith and in wisdom. Oliver was blessed with the great honor of holding the keys of this dispensation with Joseph Smith, and like Aaron did become a spokesman on numerous occasions. It was Oliver who delivered the first public discourse in this dispensation.

The Lord told him that he was to continue as scribe until the translation of the Book of Mormon was completed, and that there were other ancient records to come forth, and that he might have the privilege of translating these at some future day if he would remain faithful. We learn from the Book of Mormon that there are many records and that at some time when the people are prepared by faith to receive them that they shall also be translated and published for the knowledge and salvation of the faithful. (II Nephi 27:7-8; III Nephi 26:6-11; Ether 3:22-28 and 4:5-7.)

Later there came into the hands of the Prophet other records which had to be translated, such as the book of Abraham, but these records of the ancient inhabitants on this American continent were not translated. It is possible that some of them might have been translated had the people received the Book of Mormon with full purpose of heart and had been faithful to its teachings. This was the promise the Lord made through Mormon. He said he would try the faith of the people and if they were willing to accept the lesser things (i.e. the Book of Mormon) then he would make known to them the greater things. That we have failed in this is very apparent, we have not accepted the revelations in the Book of Mormon neither in the Doctrine and Covenants with that faith and willingness to know the will of the Lord which would entitle us to receive this greater information. Oliver Cowdery was a party to this failure by turning away from the Church for a number of years when it needed his service. He therefore lost his privilege to translate through his own disobedience, and the people have lost the privilege of receiving the "greater things" spoken of by the Lord to Mormon (III Nephi 26:8-11) until the day shall come when they are willing to be obedient in all things and will exercise faith such as was had by the brother of Jared. It should be remembered that such faith has rarely been seen on the earth. It appears, therefore, that we must wait until the reign of unrighteousness is at an end before the Lord will give to the people these writings, containing "a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof." (II Nephi 27:7.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel Smith the Third Person Baptized. Shortly after the baptism of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Samuel Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet, went to visit him. No doubt he was anxious about his brother and had some misgivings in relation to his work. The Prophet writes: "We informed him of what the Lord was about to do for the children of men and began to reason with him out of the Bible. We also showed him a part of the work which we had translated, and labored to persuade him concerning the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which was now about to be revealed in its fulness. He was not however, very easily convinced of these things, but after much inquiry and explanation, he retired to the woods, in order that by secret and fervent prayer he might obtain of a merciful God wisdom to enable him to judge for himself. The result was that he obtained revelation for himself sufficient to convince him of the truth of our assertions to him, and on the twenty-fifth day of the same month in which we had been baptized and ordained, Oliver Cowdery baptized him; and he returned to his father's house, greatly glorifying and praising God, being filled with the Holy Spirit." Thus Samuel Harrison Smith became the third person baptized in this dispensation. Not only was he the first person baptized after the two witnesses unto whom the ordinance was revealed, but he was perhaps the first missionary of the Church. In the month of June, 1830, he was set apart by the Prophet to take a missionary journey to the east. Taking with him several copies of the Book of Mormon, he started on his way. The first day he traveled twenty-five miles, and on the way attempted to sell copies of the book, but without success. When night came on he went to an inn, faint and hungry; approaching the proprietor he asked him if he did not want to buy a book which contained the history of the Indians.
