Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWELVE

The Call to Hyrum Smith

Topics

a. The conversion of Samuel Smith. Note 1.

b. Obtains revelation for himself.

b. He seeks to know the will of the Lord. Note 2.

b. Receives knowledge through revelation.

a. A command to bring forth Zion.

b. "Seek not for riches." v. 7 and Note 3.

c. "Cry nothing but repentance." Note 4.

d. Hyrum Smith's gift. vs. 10-11. Note 5.

e. Put trust in Spirit. vs. 12-13.

f. Not called until the Lord speaks. Note 6.

a. Seek first the kingdom of God. v. 23.

b. Deny not the Spirit. v. 25.

c. Treasure up wisdom. vs. 26-29.

a. Kindness to the Prophet D.H.C., Vol. 1:47.

b. Called to assist in the work.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:44-46. Also pages 45, 80, 352.

D. and C., Sec. 11.

D. and C., Sec. 14. (also Sec. 4.)

D.H.C. 1:48. Jenson's "Bio-Ency." Vol. 2:772.

Notes

"I do not know," the man replied, "how did you get hold of it?"

"It was translated by my brother, from some plates of gold, that he found buried in the earth," was Samuel's reply.

"You liar!" said the landlord, "get out of my house, you shan't stay one minute with your books."

Samuel was discouraged but continued on his journey. That night he slept under an apple tree. In the morning he called at the home of Rev. John P. Greene, a Methodist minister. Mr. Greene was just leaving on a preaching tour and like the others who had been approached, he was not interested in the book. However, he manifested a friendly spirit, and at the earnest solicitation of Samuel, conceded to take a subscription paper and try to sell copies of the book. Thereupon Samuel left him a copy of the Book of Mormon with the understanding that he would call again in about two weeks. At the appointed time Samuel returned and was disappointed to learn that there had been no sale. On his way to the home of Mr. Greene, Samuel again passed the tavern. On the door was a smallpox sign. Making inquiry he learned that the tavern keeper had died from the effects of the disease. He returned home after his labors were finished feeling that his work had proved to be fruitless. With more curiosity than desire, both Mr. Greene and his wife read the book and were deeply impressed. The copy Samuel left with John P. Greene was placed by the latter in the hands of members of the Young family, which was the first direct information to Brigham Young, and his brothers and some friends, including Heber C. Kimball, of the restoration of the Gospel." (See "Hist. of Joseph Smith," by Lucy Smith, pp. 152-153. "Essentials in Church History." pp. 104:105.)

"For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart."

The truth of this may seem difficult to realize, but when the "still small voice" of the Lord speaks to men it is overwhelming. We have the story of Elijah who withstood the great wind when the Lord passed by; that rent the mountains, likewise the earthquake which shook the earth, and then fire, but the Lord was not in the fire, and then the Lord spoke by the "still small voice." Then Elijah wrapped his face in his mantle, for the fear of the Lord came upon him. When the Lord comes he will speak, and the rocks will be rent, the mountains will be laid low and the valleys exalted and men will try to hide themselves from his presence. They will not be able to stand the piercing of the "still small voice", unless the Spirit of the Lord is upon them.

"As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good." (Teachings, p. 217.)

Where Joseph Knight was born is not known. From the journal of his son Newel, we learn that he married Polly Peck. At the time of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon he was living in New York not far from the Susquehanna river, in Chenango County and later in Colesville, Broom County, New York. There he remained nineteen years. His son Newel says of him: "My father owned a farm, a grist mill and carding machine. He was not rich, yet he possessed enough of this world's goods to secure to himself and family, not only the necessaries, but also the comfort of life. His family, consisting of my mother, three sons and four daughters, he reared in a genteel and respectable manner, and gave his children a good common school education. My father was a sober, honest man, generally respected and beloved by his neighbors and acquaintances. He did not belong to any religious sect, but was a believer in the Universalist doctrine." It was some time about May, 1829, that Joseph Knight came to visit the Prophet, he having heard of the manner in which the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery were occupying their time, and he kindly brought them some provisions. The Prophet says: "I would just mention here, as in duty bound, that he several times brought us supplies, a distance of thirty miles, which enabled us to continue the work when otherwise we must have relinquished it for a season." (D.H.C. Vol. 1:47.) It was when on one of these visits that he requested of the Prophet that he seek the Lord to know his duty in this work, and this revelation was given in answer to his petition. From that time forth he became very active in the Church. He was prominent in the Colesville branch and moved with that branch to Ohio by command of the Lord. When that branch was given the command to live unitedly Joseph Knight was one of their leaders, and after the covenant made with the Lord was broken by the acts of some of the members of the branch, and the branch was ordered to move to Jackson County, Missouri Joseph Knight was given the direction of the company. While the Prophet was translating the plates Joseph Knight gave him employment from time to time which greatly endeared the Prophet to him and also because of his integrity. He was always loyal and after the Saints were driven from Nauvoo he started on the westward journey but died while wintering among the Ponca Indians on the Running Water in what is now northern Nebraska. Because of his loyalty the Prophet wrote of him:

"I am now recording in the Book of the Law of the Lord, of such as have stood by me every hour of peril, for these fifteen long years past—say, for instance, my a good and beloved brother, Joseph Knight, Sen., who was among the number of the first to administer to my necessities, while I was laboring in the commencement of the bringing forth of the work of the Lord and of laying the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. For fifteen years he has been faithful and true and even-handed, and exemplary, and virtuous, and kind, never deviating to the right hand or to the left. Behold he is a righteous man; may God Almighty lengthen out the old man's days; and may his trembling, tortured and broken body be renewed and the vigor of health turn upon him, if it can be Thy will, consistently, O God; and it shall be said of him by the sons of Zion, while there is one of them remaining, that this man was a faithful man in Israel, therefore his name shall never be forgotten. There are his sons, Newel Knight, and Joseph Knight, Jun., whose names I will record in the Book of the Law of the Lord with unspeakable delight, for they are my friends." ("Mill. Star." Vol. 19:756.) For further information see D. H. C. Vol. 1:49.

b. In this revelation (Sec. 12.) Joseph Knight was called to engage in the work. The instruction given to him was similar to that given to others who inquired seeking the same blessing. The first requirement was in each case that the inquirer should keep the commandments of the Lord and then great blessings were to be their reward, and eventually eternal life. The Lord declared that no one could assist in the work unless he be humble and full of love, having faith, hope and charity, being temperate in all things.
