Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTEEN

The Restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood

Topics

a. Origin of the Priesthood of Aaron. Note 2.

b. "I confer the Priesthood of Aaron." v. 1.

a. John held the keys of Aaronic Priesthood.

b. John a literal descendant of Aaron.

c. John came under the direction of Peter, James and John.

a. The Gospel of faith, repentance and baptism.

b. The administering of angels.

a. Included in the Aaronic Priesthood.

b. Duties of the Levites.

c. To offer an offering in righteousness. Note 4.

a. It was the Melchizedek Priesthood.

b. The Patriarchal order.

References

D. H. C. Vol. 1:39-45. D. and C. Sec. 13.

Exodus 28, [^1], Leviticus 8. D. H. C. Vol. 1:39-40.

D. H. C. Vol. 1:40.

D. and C. 107:13-14; 84:26-28.

D. and C. 107:1-6; Numbers chs. 3, 4, 8, 18; Malachi 3:3; D. and C. 128:24.

Alma 13:1-3, 5-11.

Notes

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. ( [^2].)

He said that the Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that he should baptize me. Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me, after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion, and conferred the Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood he said would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the 15th day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized." D. H. C. Vol. 1:39-41.

In his account the Prophet declared that the angel ordained him and Oliver Cowdery. The proper word would have been conferred the Priesthood. In the early days of the Church the term "ordain" was used in the sense of conferring or setting apart. The distinction which we make today between conferring, setting apart and ordaining, had not been clearly drawn. The Angel John, however, used the proper expression. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, as the record shows, were not ordained to any office, but the Priesthood was conferred upon them. All of the offices of the Priesthood come out of, and are appendages to, the Priesthood. (See D. and C. 107:5.) Priesthood has existed independently of the Church at times, but the offices pertain to the Church organization and are conferred by the sanction of the Church. This is also true of the bestowal of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Under the hands of Peter, James and John, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood and all of the offices come out of this Priesthood after the organization of the Church. The first office held in this dispensation was that of Elder. Joseph Smith was ordained by Oliver Cowdery to be the first Elder of the Church, and Oliver Cowdery was ordained to be the second Elder of the Church, on the 6th day of April, 1830. Following this ordination, as the Church increased in membership deacons, teachers, and priests were ordained, also other elders. On the third day of June, 1832, the first high priests were ordained. Among this number was Joseph Smith the Prophet. He was ordained at his request to the office of high priest, under the hands of Lyman Wight who had been previously ordained to that office by Joseph Smith the Prophet. Oliver Cowdery who was absent at the time of this conference was ordained a high priest, August 28, 1831, "by the voice of the Church and the command of God." (See "Essentials in Church History," pp. 126-127.)

John the Baptist informed Joseph and Oliver that the Aaronic Priesthood, "had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter." (D. H. C. Vol. 1:39.) In the conferring of this Priesthood the messenger also said: "* * * and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." This saying has led to some speculation and needless discussion. We may be sure that the Aaronic Priesthood will never be taken from the earth while mortality endures, for there will always be need for temporal direction and the performance of ordinances pertaining to "the preparatory Gospel." Oliver Cowdery writing in the early day of the Church of the glorious vision has given us a little different version of this restoration, as follows:

"On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake to us while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked-for message, and the Keys of the Gospel of repentance! What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld, our ears heard. As in the blaze of day; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then the voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory. 'Twas a message from the Most High! and as we heard we rejoiced while his love enkindled our souls, and we were wrapt in the vision of the Almighty. Where was room for doubt? Nowhere, uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever!

"But dear brother, think, further think for a moment, what joy filled our hearts, and with surprise we must have bowed (for who should not have bowed the knee for such a blessing!) when we received under his hands the Holy Priesthood as he said, 'Upon you my fellow-servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer this Priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (Messenger and Advocate, p.16.)

There can be little question about the meaning of the words of the angel. The Priesthood was to remain that the sons of Levi may offer an offering in righteousness.

"And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, instead of the first born. * * * Therefore the Levites shall be mine; because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast; mine shall they be: I am the Lord. * * *

"Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am the Lord. And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and three score and thirteen of the first born of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites; thou shalt even take five sheckels apiece by the poll after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them: and thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons. (Numb. 3:6; 12; 13; 45; 48)

The Lord had promised to make Israel a nation of priests, but because of their rebellion and failure to hearken to his word, in his anger, he took the Melchizedek Priesthood away with Moses, and left the people subject to the ministrations of the tribe of Levi. The prophets in Israel, however, received special ordination and were from the several tribes.

The Levitical Priesthood conferred on the men of the tribe of Levi, was subject to the authority of Aaron and was a part of the Aaronic Priesthood. It was the duty of the Levites to assist the priests of Aaron. Their duties are stated in the book of Numbers. Some of their principal duties were as follows:

"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest that they may minister unto him. And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation to do the service of the tabernacle. And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and his sons: They are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel. ( [^3].)

The Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the preparatory Gospel. In other words it holds the keys of the preaching of faith in God, repentance from sin and baptism by immersion for the remission of sin, with power to officiate in the ordinance of baptism. These keys were conferred upon Aaron and have descended through his posterity from generation to generation until John the Baptist who held the keys by divine right and through blessing as well as lineage. Had the Church of Jesus Christ been fully organized and properly organized with the Jews in John's day, that is to say when he was preaching in the wilderness, instead of the Jews being in a dreadful state of apostasy, John the Baptist would have taken his place by right as the presiding priest of the Aaronic order. But the Jews recognized him not, and failed to understand the nature of his authority, even as they failed to comprehend the authority of our Lord. By right of his authority John laid the foundation for the overthrow of their power and kingdom, which was based on a false foundation. (D. and C. 84:28.) Had they accepted John then also would they have accepted the Savior. There is perfect order in the Kingdom of God, and he recognizes the authority of his servants. It was for this reason John, who acted under the direction of Peter, James and John came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored the Aaronic Priesthood, which John held in the dispensation of the Meridian of Time. (D. H. C. Vol. 1:40.)

"John was a priest after the order of Aaron, and had the keys of that priesthood and came forth preaching repentance and baptism for remission of sins, but at the same time cries out, 'There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose, and Christ came according to the word of John, and he was greater than John, because he held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and kingdom of God, and had before revealed the priesthood of Moses, yet Christ was baptized by John to fulfil all righteousness; and Jesus in his teachings says: 'Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. "What Rock? Revelation." (Joseph Smith—D.H.C. Vol. 5:258.)

"It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in the future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges, and authority of the Priesthood, or with the prophets. * * *

"These sacrifices as well as every ordinance, belonging to the priesthood, will when the Temple of the Lord is built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings." D. H. C. "Teachings of the Prophet," p. 172.

In the restoration of all things, these ancient practices which were given in the beginning—not the carnal law—and which had a bearing on the coming of Jesus Christ, will be restored. That sacrifice by blood should continue to be necessary forever, we need not suppose to be the case. (3 Nephi 9:18-20.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The Call to David Whitmer. In the midst of the persecution which followed the Prophet while translating the Book of Mormon, it became necessary for him to move from his home. He first went to the home of his wife's parents but it became expedient before very long for him to seek shelter elsewhere. The Lord continued to raise friends to assist him. Among these friends was Peter Whitmer and his family. This family learning through Oliver Cowdery of the latter day work in June 1829, David Whitmer came to the place where the Prophet was residing and brought with him a two-horse wagon, for the purpose of having the Prophet and Oliver accompany him to David's father's house in Fayette, Seneca County, NY. It was arranged that Joseph and Oliver should have their board free of charge and that the Whitmer brothers would assist them in their work as they might be required. This arrangement was to continue until the translation was completed. When they arrived they found the Whitmer family very anxious to assist in the work and they were extremely friendly to the Prophet. They continued to provide board and lodgings according to agreement, and John Whitmer assisted the Prophet in his writing during the remainder of the work. David, John and Peter Whitmer Jr., sought to know their respective duties, and having desired with much earnestness, the Prophet inquired of the Lord for them and each received a revelation for his comfort. These revelations are under consideration in this lesson.
[^2] The Call to John Whitmer. In the revelation given to David Whitmer (Sec. 14.) the Lord made him the promise that if he would keep the commandments and endure to the end, he should have eternal life, moreover he was commanded to assist in bringing forth the Lord's work and that the time would come when he would be a witness "of the things of which you shall both hear and see, and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation." This promise was based upon his faithfulness, and David was faithful and sincerely in earnest in his devotion to the Church and Joseph Smith when that witness came and for several years afterwards. There was one incident of significance that occured when the Angel Moroni presented the plates before the three witnesses. The record states: "In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, 'David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keepeth his commandments;' when immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God." D. H. C. Vol. 1:54.
[^3] The Call to Peter Whitmer, Jr. Next to David Whitmer, John, his brother was the most prominent of the Whitmer family in the early history of the Church. While Oliver Cowdery was called upon to keep the first records in the Church and did much of the recording in the early months, both before and after the organization of the Church, yet John Whitmer became the first regularly appointed historian or recorder for the Church. In those early months he was very much devoted to the Prophet and to his appointed work. He was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake, in June, 1829, soon after the arrival of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery at the Whitmer home. His brothers David and Peter, Jr., were baptized at the same time. John displayed his eagerness to be of assistance and did some writing for the Prophet at that time. With his brothers he desired earnestly to know what message the Lord had for him and due to his solicitation the Lord gave him a revelation (Sec. 15.) through the Urim and Thummim. He was closely associated with the Prophet and accompanied him on his first missionary journey to Colesville, N. Y. and at other places. He was present at his earnest request when the Prophet showed the plates to the eight witnesses, and was one of them. In September 1830, he was called by revelation to preach the Gospel and labor in the interest of Zion. In March of that year he was chosen to keep the record of the Church. (D. and C. 47.) When the first high priests were ordained he was one of them. In November of that year he was called by revelation to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Jackson County, Mo., with the revelations of the "Book of Commandments," as the Lord desired that Oliver Cowdery should have a companion for protection on that journey. He was called with other High Priests to build up Zion in Missouri. In July, 1833, he was set apart as one of the assistant presidents of the Church in Missouri, comparable to a counselor in the stake presidency. He was present at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple and received blessings in that holy house. At a meeting of High Priests held at Far West, Missouri, April 7, 1837, he was appointed to act as a member of a committee for the sale of town lots in Far West. At a conference held at that place, Nov. 7, 1837, objections were made to John Whitmer as one of the assistant presidents in Missouri, but after he had made confession he was temporarily sustained. It became necessary however, finally to reject him along with his brother David and others in Missouri. He was excommunicated by the high council at Far West, March 10, 1838, for persisting in unchristian-like conduct. After his excommuniction he refused to deliver to the Church the records which he had kept which called forth a severe letter from the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, but he still held to the record which has never been obtained by the Church. Elder Andrew Jenson, however, made a copy of this record which is on file in the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City. He died at his residence at Far West, Mo., July 11, 1878. While he never returned to the Church he, like his brother David, remained true to his testimony in relation to the plates to the day of his death.
