Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FOURTEEN

Revelations to David, John and Peter Whitmer

Topics

a. Birth and ancestry. Note 1.

b. Takes the Prophet and Oliver to his father's home.

c. David called to assist in bringing forth the work. Note 2.

d. Promised to become a witness if faithful.

e. Apostasy.

f. Loyalty to his testimony.

a. Sketch of John Whitmer. Note 3.

b. Called to declare repentance.

c. Witness of the Book of Mormon.

d. Church recorder.

e. Accompanied Oliver Cowdery to Missouri.

f. Apostasy of.

a. The Lord speaks with sharpness. v. 2.

b. Called to cry repentance.

c. Sketch of Peter Jr. Note 4.

d. Witness of the Book of Mormon.

References

D. H. C. Vol. 1:48-51.

D. and C. 14.

D. and C. 15.

D. H. C. Vol. 1:66.

D. H. C. Vol. 1:234-235.

D. and C. 15.

Notes

David Whitmer became the most prominent of all the members of the Whitmer family in the bringing forth of the work. He was born January 7, 1805 near Harrisburg, Penn. While a small child his father moved to Western New York and settled on a farm in Ontario County, between Cayuga and Seneca lakes and twenty-five miles from Palmyra. In the year 1828 he heard of the Prophet Joseph Smith from Oliver Cowdery, his brother-in-law. Becoming convinced of the truth of the story, he left for the Prophet, as previously stated and took him and Oliver Cowdery to his father's home. David had written as follows: "The translation at my father's occupied about one month, that is from June 1, to July 1, 1829." (See "Mill. Star," Vol. 43:421.) In June 1829, David Whitmer was baptized by Joseph Smith, in Seneca Lake, and was soon afterwards privileged to be one of the special witnesses of the Book of Mormon according to the promise in that sacred book. After the organization of the Church with six members, of which David was one, he commenced to preach and bear witness as he was appointed to do, and baptized many into the Church. When the Church removed to Ohio by command of the Lord, the Whitmer family made their residence in that state. October 25, 1831, David Whitmer was ordained a High Priest by Oliver Cowdery and soon after moved to Jackson County, Missouri and located on the Big Blue River. In the fall of 1833 he was driven from the county along with the other members of the Church and with other members of the Church he settled in Clay County, where in July 1834, he was appointed president of the High Council, which corresponded to what we designate as president of a stake. For nearly four years after this he acted as one of the leading Elders of the Church in Missouri, and after the location of the Saints at Far West, in Caldwell County, Mo. he was sustained as president of the Saints in that place. During these trying times he fell into transgression and was rejected as the presiding officer at a general conference held in Far West, Feb. 5, 1838. Refusing to mend his ways it became necessary to take action against him and he was excommunicated by the high council at Far West, April 13, 1838. After his excommunication he left Far West and took up his residence in Richmond, Ray County Mo., where he resided until his death January 23, 1888. After he left the Church he was accepted by the citizens of Richmond and of Missouri, and the persecution against him ceased. However, he lived in Richmond the remaining years and was considered to be one of the most respected and worthy citizens of that place. Although he became estranged from Joseph Smith and the Church, he was always true to his testimony and bore it on hundreds of occasions during those years when he was out of the Church. His claim was that he had not turned away, but that Joseph Smith and the Church had departed from the true teachings of the Church. He organized a church of his own and zealously preached the Book of Mormon, but rejected all revelations through the Prophet coming after the early days of the Church. The story of David Whitmer is a very interesting one and the evidence of his testimony is strengthened in the fact that under all circumstances and until the day he died, he maintained emphatically his story. When a certain man, John Murphy, of Polo, Caldwell County Mo., circulated a report that David Whitmer had told him that his testimony was not true, with scathing indignation David Whitmer published in the local paper in Richmond (The Conservator of March 25, 1881) that this man was bearing false witness, and on this occasion he prepared a written statement declaring that his testimony is true and that he had never deviated from it as first told and given to the world. Twenty-one of the leading citizens of Richmond signed this statement in which they bore record to the integrity and sincerity of David Whitmer. This has been published many times. For a full account of the life and testimony of David Whitmer attention is called to the following references among many others: "Jenson's Biographical Encyclopedia," Vol. 1:263-271. "Life of Joseph F. Smith," Ch. 21. "Restoration of All Things," Chs. 11-12.
