Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FIFTEEN

The Witnesses View the Plates

Topics

a. Each pray in turn.

b. The prayers go unheeded.

c. Martin Harris withdraws.

d. The answer given the two.

f. David Whitmer cautioned.

a. Martin commanded to humble himself.

b. The Prophet joins him in prayer.

c. The witness is received.

a. The testimony binding on the world.

b. Consequences of rejection. of that testimony. Note 4.

a. All witnesses remain true to their testimony.

b. The weight of testimony lifted from the shoulders of Joseph Smith. Note 5.

References

D. H. C. Vol. 1:54-59. "History of Joseph Smith," by Lucy Smith. Ch. 31.

2 Nephi 27. John 5:30-32 and Ch. 10:12-18.

Notes

When the second series of prayers failed, Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw from the others, believing that he was the cause of the failure. He accordingly withdrew from them, and they knelt down again, and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently they beheld a light above them in the air, of exceeding brightness and the angel stood before them. The Prophet writes: "In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed David Whitmer, and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps his commandments." Since David Whitmer is the only one of the three who turned away from the Church and did not return, this remark seems significant. Immediately following their examination of the plates and evidently the other contents of the box in which they were deposited, they heard the voice of the Lord speaking to them from the heavens and saying: "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

Before the witnesses left the home to go to the woods to pray family devotion was held, with scripture reading, singing and prayer. Besides the Whitmer family, the Prophet and his wife and Oliver Cowdery, there were present the Prophet's father and mother and Martin Harris. Mother Smith records that after the prayer "Joseph arose from his knees, and approaching Martin Harris with a solemnity that thrills through my veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection, and said, 'Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer.'" (History of Joseph Smith, Ch. 31.)

Elder B. H. Roberts in a note in the Documentary History (p 55) says: "When the former transgression of Martin Harris in the matter of betraying the trust of the Prophet, by which part of the translation of the Book of Mormon had been lost—when this and the pride and self-will of the man's character are taken into account, there was certainly a necessity for the admonition which the Prophet gave Martin Harris that morning. The circumstance also affords an explanation of Martin's difficulty in obtaining the testimony which, after his withdrawal from them, appears to have been given so readily to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer.

The class should carefully study the solemn testimony of the Three Witnesses and also the Eight in the light of the weight of evidence which each contains. If it is convenient have one member present the testimonies of these three men, as that testimony was given in the closing years of their lives, weighing carefully this evidence. This may be found in various sources already listed in these lessons. It should be pointed out that not one of these eleven witnesses ever denied the testimony he had received.

"When they returned to the house it was between three and four o'clock, p.m. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith (the Prophet's father) and myself, were sitting in a bedroom at the time. On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed: 'Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am: the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world." Upon this, Martin Harris came in: he seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard." "History of Joseph Smith."
