Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON SIXTEEN

Preparation and Publication of the Book of Mormon

Topics

a. Oliver Cowdery as Scribe.

b. Time consumed in the translation.

a. Plots to steal the manuscript. Note 2.

b. Attempts to print garbled excerpts.

a. A second copy made.

b. Care in giving copy to the printer.

c. Difficulty in obtaining a printer. Note 4.

a. Copyright obtained in State of New York.

b. Meaning of "Author and Proprietor."

c. Final disposal of the manuscript. Note 6.

c. The printer's copy.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:60,61. "Joseph Smith the Prophet," Lucy Smith, chs. 32-33. Comprehensive History," B. H. Roberts, Vol. 1: "Essentials in Church History," pp. 81-83.

Notes

Northern District of New York, to wit:

Be It Remembered, That on the eleventh day of June, in the fifty third year of the independence of the United States of America, A.D. 1820, JOSEPH SMITH, JUN., of the said district, hath deposited in this office the title of a Book, the right whereof he claims as author, in the words following to wit: (Then follows the title page, with the words: "By Joseph Smith, Junior, Author and Proprietor, Palmyra: Printed by E. P. Grandin for the Author, 1830.

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled, "An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the time therein mentioned; and also the act, entitled, An act supplementary to an act, entitled 'An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts, and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the time therein mentioned, and extending the benefits thereof to the arts of designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints.

R. R. Lansing

Clerk of the Northern District of New York

The forepart of the copyright includes the two paragraphs on the title page written by Moroni and explaining what the contents of the book really are and the purpose for which it is published. Following the copyright there is found in the first edition the following Preface:

To the reader—As many false reports have been circulated respecting the following work, and also many unlawful measures taken by evil designing persons to destroy me, and also the work, I would inform you that I translated, by the gift and power of God, and caused to be written, one hundred sixteen pages, the which I took from the Book of Lehi, which was an account abridged from the plates of Lehi, by the hand of Mormon; which said account, some person or persons have stolen and kept from me, notwithstanding my utmost exertions to recover it again—and being commanded of the Lord that I should not translate the same over again, for Satan had put it into their hearts to tempt the Lord their God, by altering the words, that they did read contrary from that which I translated and caused to be written; and if I should bring forth the same words again, or in other words, if I should translate the same over again, they would publish that which they had stolen, and Satan would stir up the hearts of this generation, that they might not receive this work: but behold, the Lord said unto me, I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his evil design in this thing: therefore thou shalt translate from the plates of Nephi, until ye come to that which ye have translated, which ye have retained; and behold, ye shall publish it as the record of Nephi; and thus I will confound those who have altered my words, I will not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will shew unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the Devil. Wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, I have, through his grace and mercy, accomplished that which he hath commanded me respecting this thing. I would also inform you that the plates of which hath been spoken, were found in the township of Manchester, Ontario county, New York.

The Author

The fact that Joseph Smith is spoken of as "Author and Proprietor" in the copyright, and that he signed the Preface in this manner, leaves no point or issue which merits attention, as the enemies of the work would have people believe. As explained in the copyright act, he had to so designate himself, and in the Preface, he declares that he translated the record from plates, and this by "the gift and power of God." How apparent it is that the enemies of this work are put to the most contemptible and silly arguments which only, in the end, defeat their real purpose and help to exalt the work. (For full discussion of these matters, see D.H.C. Vol. 1:56-59.)
