Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON EIGHTEEN

Meaning of Eternal Punishment

Topics

a. The Savior's proclamation the Beginning and the End.

b. The Redeemer's labors accomplished.

c. Every man must repent.

a. Not written that there shall be no end to torment.

b. "To work upon the hearts of men."

c. Eternal punishment is God's punishment. vs. 9-12.

a. The explanation of punishment for Martin's comfort.

b. The unrepentant sorely punished. vs. 15-19.

c. "I, God, have suffered for all."

d. Jesus came to do will of the Father.

e. Martin Harris commanded to pray.

f. The last commandment to be given to Martin Harris. v. 32.

g. He is warned. vs. 33-36.

h. A promise and a blessing. v. 37-41.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:72-75. D. and C. Sec. 19.

Moses 1:33. D and C. 38:1-3. Matt. 28:18. John 3:35. Moses 1:38-39.

Matt. 12:31-32.

2 Nephi 9:22-43; Mark 16:16; Romans 6:23. John 12:47-48. 3 Nephi 27:14-19. 2 Nephi 9:20-22.

John 5:19-20; 8:28-29.

Notes

No words of the Prophet introduce this revelation in his History. Nothing is known of the circumstances which called it forth. And yet there are few revelations that have been given in the present dispensation of the Gospel more important than this one. The doctrine of the atonement of the Lord Jesus as directly applying to the individual, and God's exposition of "Eternal Punishment," as here set forth, give it a place of first importance in the doctrinal development of the Church. (Doc. Hist. of the Church, footnote, Vol. 1, page 72.)

It was in the summer of 1828 that the manuscript of the Book of Mormon was lost through the insistence of Martin Harris to show it to relatives and friends. We have seen that for this he was sorely punished. From that time until the time the witnesses were called to testify of the Book of Mormon, he was on probation before the Lord, and while he continued to seek the fellowship of the Prophet and to manifest repentance, the Lord continued to impress upon him the need of humility and obedience. Martin was possessed of a somewhat arrogant and egotistical spirit, and without doubt it took this long period of probation and mental suffering to give him the experience which such a nature as his needed. Even after his sincere and earnest pleading to be one of the Three Witnesses, and the request had been granted, the Prophet said to him before they started for the woods: "Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer." Before this purpose was accomplished the angel appeared to the two other witnesses after Martin Harris had withdrawn from them, as he seemed to be a hindrance to the presence of the holy messenger. Later he also beheld the messenger and exclaimed: "'Tis enough; Tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld.'" (Doc. Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1:55.)

In this revelation (Sec. 19) Martin is again admonished and called on to repent, and the dire consequences of his failure to repent are pointed out to him. It is evident that Martin Harris came to the Prophet seeking the favor of the Lord and in response to his pleading this revelation was given. The Lord also warns him that he need not ask for favor again, for this is to be the last, and a great commandment unto him. (v. 32.)

The Savior, although speaking to Martin in power and plainness, nevertheless imparts to him wonderful information in relation to salvation. He speaks of his power as the Son of God and declares that he, through his obedience to his Father, came into the world and accomplished the work the Father gave him to do, thus subduing all things unto himself, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world. He is the Alpha and Omega, or in other words, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world. The works of Satan cannot be destroyed until the end of the world, and the last day of judgment (v. 3) when every man shall be judged "according to his works and the deeds which he hath done." Paul told the Corinthian Saints that the last enemy to be destroyed is death. This of necessity must be so, for when death is destroyed mortality comes to an end. At that time all the children of God, except sons of perdition, will be redeemed from hell and the second death. The earth itself will be redeemed from its mortal or temporal existence. (D. and C. 29:22-25; 77:6), and will become the celestial body it is destined to be (D. and C. 88:18-20) or the sea of glass, to endure forever as a great Urim and Thummim as well as the dwelling place for those who partake of the celestial order. (D. and C. 130:8-9.) When all the dead come forth, and the labors of Christ are fully accomplished as they are related to this world—

"Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.

"For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.

"The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

"For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him.

"And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all." (I Cor. 15:24-28).

The same punishment follows the same offense or transgression of the law. The prison remains, it has been explained, even when the prisoner goes free; also the same punishment awaits each transgressor of each particular offense, but when the law is satisfied the prisoner goes free. The general teaching of eternal damnation at the time of the restoration of the Gospel was that there was a deciding line separating heaven and hell. A man was either in heaven or in hell. If in the latter place he was subject to the torments thereof forever without any relief. Later when discussing Section 76, we will go into the matter more fully in relation to salvation and condemnation.
