Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWENTY-TWO

The Importance of Record Keeping

Topics

a. This commandment given the day the Church was organized.

b. Reason for this commandment. Note 1.

c. Importance of keeping records in all dispensations. Note 2.

d. Oliver Cowdery the first recorder.

e. John Whitmer made historian. Note 3.

a. Contrary to the will of heaven.

b. Genealogies not to be kept.

c. Those of High Priesthood who apostatize to have no inheritance, and to be dealt with as in days of Ezra.

a. Names on records vital to blessings and ordinances of the Church.

b. Those who neglect to have recommendations presented to wards or branches, when moving from one place to another, weak in the faith.

c. Such neglect may result in loss of standing.

d. Those who lose standing are overcome by the world. Importance of individual records. Note 5.

a. The Lord's approval on teachings of Joseph Smith.

b. To the Church they are scripture.

c. All who labor in Church to be blessed.

d. Oliver Cowdery called to be first preacher. vs. 11-12.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:78-79. P. of G. P. Moses 6:4-7. Abraham 1:31.

D. and C. Sec. 21.

Ezra 2:61-62.

D. and C. 50:8. 85:7-8, 11-12.

D. and C. 68:4.

Notes

"It is a fact, if I now had in my possession, every decision which had been had upon important items of doctrine and duties since the commencement of this work, I would not part with them for any sum of money; we have neglected to take minutes of such things, thinking, perhaps, that they would never benefit us afterwards; which, if we had them now, would decide almost every point of doctrine which might be agitated. But this has been neglected, and now we cannot bear record to the Church and to the world, of the great and glorious manifestations which have been made to us with that degree of power and authority we otherwise could, if we now had these things published abroad.

"Since the Twelve are now chosen, I wish to tell them a course which they may pursue and be benefited thereafter, in a point of light of which they are not now aware. If they will, every time they assemble, appoint a person to preside over them during the meeting, and one or more to keep a record of their proceedings, and on the decision of every question or item, be it what it may, let such decision be written, and such decision will forever remain upon record, and appear an item of covenant or doctrine. An item thus decided may appear at the time, of little or no worth, but should it be published, and one of you lay hands on it after, you will find it of infinite worth, not only to your brethren, but it will be a feast to your souls.

"Here is another important item. If you assemble from time to time and proceed to discuss important questions, and pass decisions upon the same, and fail to note them down, by and by you will be driven to straits from which you will not be able to extricate yourselves, because you may be in a situation not to bring your faith to bear with sufficient perfection or power to obtain the desired information, or, perhaps, for neglecting to write these things when God has revealed them, not esteeming them of sufficient worth, the Spirit may withdraw, and God may be angry; and there is, or was a vast knowledge, of infinite importance, which is not lost."

"And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled. (Moses 6:5-6.)

"And Enoch continued his speech: * * *

"And death hath came upon our fathers; nevertheless we know them, and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam.

"For a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given us by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language." (Moses 6:43-46.)

"Abraham also bears record that the writings of the Father, even from Adam, had been handed down and he had them in his hands, in which the Lord has made known his purposes even from the creation, and these things Abraham preserved and copied for his children after him. What a dire calamity it would have been if the Lord had not called upon men in the beginning and taught them to read and write and to preserve their history containing the principles of prophecy and of salvation. Without their writings how helpless we would be today! Even as it is the world rejects this truth, but the Lord has revealed it to us for our profit and learning. If no records were kept of the word of the Lord, containing his doctrines and commandments, then we would be in the bondage of unbelief and like unto the Mulekites when they were discovered by the Nephites, as recorded in the Book of Mormon.

President Anthon H. Lund has said: "From the days of Moses until the days of the apostles, he (God) gave revelations, and inspired his servants to write them. How thankful we are that these records have been kept! Moses had been called God's first pen. The earliest authentic writings we have (except the Book of Abraham) come from him, and studying them, we see how consistent is the word of God from the beginning to end. Moses gave the same writing unto men as John did, and yet after him were many writers of scripture. We have many books written since then, which we know were written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Many books have been lost, and many books will be brought to light yet, by the power of God." (Conf. Reports, Oct. 5, 1901.)

We learn from the Book of Mormon how particular the Lord was to have records preserved. He sent the sons of Lehi back to Jerusalem to get the Brass Plates that they might have his word given to the earlier prophets and that they might be kept in touch with a written language as well as with his divine word. How jealously he has guarded the history of that people. How carefully and with what wonderful attention he brought forth their history in this dispensation, that we might be edified thereby.

"My standing in the Church is worth to me more than this life—ten thousand times. For in this I have life everlasting. In this I have the glorious promise of the association of my loved ones throughout all eternity. In obedience to this work, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I shall gather around me my family, my children, my children's children, until they become as the seed of Abraham or as countless as the sands upon the sea shore. For this is my right and privilege, and the right and privilege of every member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who holds the Priesthood and will magnify it in the sight of God. Without it there is death and desolation—disintegration and disinheritance; without it there may be a chance to become a ministering spirit, a servant unto servants throughout the endless ages; but in this Gospel there is a chance to become a son of God, in the image and likeness of the Father and of his Only Begotten son in the flesh. I would rather take my boys and my girls to the grave while they are innocent, than to see them entrapped in the wickedness, the unbelief, and the spirit of apostasy so prevalent in the world, and be led away from the Gospel of Salvation.—President Joseph F. Smith, "Gospel Doctrine," pp. 133-134.)

"Some people may not care very much whether their names are recorded or not, but this comes from ignorance of the consequences. If their names are not recorded they will not only be cut off from the assistance which they would be entitled to from the Church, if they need it, but they will be cut off from the ordinances of the house of God; but they will be cut asunder from their dead and from their fathers who have been faithful, or from those who shall come after them who shall be faithful, and they will be appointed their portion with the unbelievers, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. It means that you will be cut off from your fathers and mothers, from your husbands, your wives, your children, and that you shall have no portion or lot or inheritance in the kingdom of God, both in time and in eternity. It has a very serious and far-reaching effect."—President Joseph F. Smith, Conference, Oct, 1899.)
