Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWENTY-THREE

Old Covenants Done Away

Topics

a. Baptism a new covenant. Note 2.

b. Yet is it from the beginning.

c. A divine law and unchangeable.

d. Dead works cannot save. Note 3.

a. Only one way to receive salvation.

b. Baptism the door into the kingdom. Note 5.

c. Baptism of the Holy Ghost essential. Note 6.

a. By innovations innocently adopted.

b. Branches of the Church infrequently visited.

c. Decline of faith and transgression. Note 8.

d. Which brought apostasy and change of ordinances.

a. Sprinkling and pouring.

b. Infant "baptism."

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:79. D. & C. Sec. 22.

Notes

"Revelation given to the Church of Christ which was established in these last days, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Given at Manchester, New York, April, 1830, in consequence of some desiring to unite with the Church without re-baptism, who had previously been baptized."

As we have stated, the baptism they had received had not been made in the true spirit because it was unauthorized and performed by those not having authority, although it was done in sincerity, but in ignorance. "Wherefore," the Lord said "although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God. Amen."

"The sum of the whole matter is this: Reason is the last arbiter; our own reason, our individual reason, my reason, nobody's else. There are various sources of authority, Bible, or Church, or God, but each one must be tested by our personal reason before it is believed. We are all of us at bottom rationalists, cannot help being. What God is, whether there be a God, we must decide by the best reason we have. If we are made in the image of God, that image is in reason, not in body; and our little reason can and must get some true view of God, just as our little blinking myopic eyes can truly, if imperfectly, decry the infinite spangled universe. Reason may see faintly, even erringly, but it is all we have to guide us."—William Hays Ward, in "The Independent," March 15, 1915.

Certainly if what Mr. Ward has said be true, then there is little hope for the human family. But we know that it is not true. The Lord has not left us to grope with only the unlighted lantern of our individual reason. If we will do his will, so we have received the promise, we shall "know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." ( [^1].) One of the ways confusion has come to the world is that every man has endeavored to follow his own reason or that of someone else who is without divine inspiration.

"The baptism of water, without the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost attending it, is of no use; they are necessary and inseparably connected. ("Discourses," page 360.) "You might as well baptize a bag of sand as a man, if not done in view of the remission of sins and getting of the Holy Ghost. Baptism in water is but half a baptism, and is good for nothing without the other half—that is, the baptism of the Holy Ghost." ("Teachings" page 314.)

Then in those early centuries the means of travel were very limited. Visits to the various churches could not be made but at rare intervals. It was natural therefore that these isolated branches of the Church left to themselves for long periods of time would introduce customs and alter methods of procedure and even introduce changed doctrines. We have reason to believe that these same conditions would prevail in the Church today if we were placed in similar conditions. As it is the stakes are visited by some member of the General Authorities each three months, and our privilege of reaching officers by telephone and regular mail all help to keep the church in unity of purpose and practice.

"Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

"For I know this, that after my departing shall grevious wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

"Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them.

"Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears." Acts. 20:28-31.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Conference of June Ninth. After the Prophet's visit to Colesville and the remarkable experience of Newel Knight, the Prophet returned to Fayette. He writes that the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, which his enemies predicted should not be published, created considerable excitement and was "accounted as a strange thing," as the ancient prophets had predicted. "Great opposition was aroused, and Satan was determined to destroy the work, if possible, while its roots were tender. However, writes the Prophet, "But it had now come to pass that truth had sprung out of the earth, and righteousness had looked down from heaven, so we feared not our opponents, knowing that we had both truth and righteousness on our side, that we had both the Father and the Son, because we had the doctrines of Christ, and abided in them; and therefore we continued to preach and to give information to all who were willing to hear."
