Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWENTY-FIVE

Be Patient in Affliction

Topics

a. Word of the Lord to Oliver Cowdery. Note 1.

b. Word of the Lord to Hyrum Smith.

c. Word of the Lord to Samuel H. Smith.

d. Word of the Lord to Joseph Smith, Sen.

e. Word of the Lord to Joseph Knight.

a. Joseph delivered from his enemies. v. 1.

b. Not excusable in transgressions. v. 2.

c. Called to magnify his office. v. 3.

d. And to move to Colesville, v. 3., and Manchester.

e. Branches commanded to support him.

f. A cursing to come on them if they fail.

g. The Prophet to continue to call upon the Lord. vs. 5-6.

a. The Prophet to have many afflictions. v. 8. Note 3.

b. Not to have strength in temporal things. v. 9. Note 4.

c. But to have strength in spiritual things.

a. To do so would bring him glory. vs. 10-12.

b. Miracles not to be required. vs. 13-14.

c. To leave a cursing where testimony is rejected. v. 15.

d. Washing of feet as a witness. vs. 15-16.

e. The Lord to punish those who go to law. v. 17.

f. To take no purse or script. v. 18.

g. Vineyard to be pruned for last time. v. 19.

Notes

The Lord also told Hyrum Smith that he was free from condemnation and that his heart was opened, his tongue loosed, and his calling was to exhortation, and to strengthen the Church continually. In a later revelation the Lord said of Hyrum Smith that he loved him "because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loved that which is right before me, saith the Lord." Because of his integrity and because his heart was right, he had conferred upon his head all that once was given to Oliver Cowdery. (D. and C. 124:15, 94-96.) There is another thing of great significance in this brief blessing to Hyrum Smith (Sec. 23:3.) which is: "Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Amen." It is doubtful if the Prophet Joseph fully understood the meaning of this expression when this revelation was given. In later years it was made clear. Evidently it has reference to the office of Patriarch and in this office, it was his duty and that of his family forever.

To Samuel Smith the Lord said it was his duty also to strengthen the Church, although he was not yet called to preach before the world. It will be recalled that Samuel was the third person baptized in this dispensation. He was one of the first to be ordained to the office of elder, and it was not long after this revelation when he was sent forth to teach which he did with marked success, far beyond his own realization.

To Joseph Smith, Sen., who was so faithful and devoted to his son in the commencement of this marvelous work, the Lord said: He was not under any condemnation, and he also was called to exhort, and to strengthen the Church, and this was his duty from hence forth and forever.

To Joseph Knight, the faithful servant who came to the aid of the Prophet many times in the hour of his need, the Lord said: "Behold, I manifest unto you Joseph Knight, by these words, that you must take up your cross in the which you must pray vocally before the Lord as well as in secret, and in your family, and among your friends and in all places." It is quite possible that Joseph Knight before he joined the Church was not given to prayer to any great extent. He was a Universalist with very liberal views. This revelation was given before he had united himself with the Church. He was baptized at the time the enemies destroyed the dam in Colesville following the first conference of the Church.

Oliver was instructed that as he went forth with the voice of the trump, that where he was received he should leave a blessing; where he was rejected he was to leave a cursing "by casting off the dust of your feet by the wayside. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall lay their hands upon you by violence, ye shall command to be smitten in my name; and, behold, I will smite them according to your words, in mine own due time." He was told that if anyone took him to law, they would be cursed. He was to travel "without purse or scrip, neither staves, neither two coats, for the Church shall give unto thee in the very hour what thou needest for food and for raiment, and for shoes and for money, and for scrip."

This was a wonderful commission given to Oliver Cowdery as a witness for the truth, and the promises of the Lord to him were very great. Had he gone forth in this spirit all the time, as he did in the first half-dozen years of the history of the Church he surely would have accomplished a wonderful work. "He was sent to "prune the vineyard for the last time." This is also true of all others who have been ordained. The Lord has declared that the Gospel is here, in this dispensation to stay. The vineyard (world) is to be pruned. To do this pruning laborers are needed, for the time is short.

While the Lord has instructed the elders who go forth, just as he instructed Oliver Cowdery, to cleanse their feet, or wash them, as a witness against those who persecute them or in bitterness reject their message, yet the performance of such a responsibility should not be done unless the Spirit of the Lord indicates that it should be done.
