Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWENTY-SIX

Office and Calling of Emma Smith

Topics

a. Through faithfulness, to receive inheritance in Zion.

b. Admonished not to murmur. Note 3.

c. "An elect lady." Note 4.

d. To comfort her husband.

e. To be "ordained" to expound scripture. Note 5.

f. Called to make selection of hymns. Note 6.

g. Admonished to beware of pride.

h. "Except thou do this, where I am you cannot come. And this is my voice to all." Note 7.

a. Music one of the most ancient of the arts.

b. Music is an expression of feeling and emotion.

c. What Latter-day Saints should sing.

d. False doctrine in hymns and anthems.

e. Selection of hymns and anthems for sacred services.

References

Romans 8:11-18; 1 John 3:1-3; D. and C. 11:30; 34:2-3; 35:1-2.

Gen. 4:31; I Cor. 14:26; Eph. 5:19; Col. 3:16; Matt. 26:30; James 5:13; D. and C. 128:22; 136:28.

Notes

Music is an expression of the feelings and emotions of man. Our singing in our sacred places should be done unto edifying. Paul said, implying criticism and condemnation of the Corinthian Saints, "How is it then, brethren? When ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying." (1 Cor. 14:26). Speaking to the Ephesians he said: "And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord." (Eph. 5:18-19.) Matthew tells us that after the feast of the Passover, when Christ introduced the Sacrament before they went forth in the spirit of sadness from that supper table from whence Christ knew he was going to his betrayal and death, they had "sung an hymn," a sad hymn depicting their feelings, without doubt.

Since singing is pleasing to the Lord and a prayer unto him when it is "sacred" and a song of the heart, Latter-day Saints should endeavor always to sing in harmony with the Spirit and with understanding. Frequently the spirit of a meeting is hampered by improper music and singing. Jazz, under no condition can be called sacred. Light frivolous songs are always out of place in the sacred services of the Church. Recently in a Sabbath meeting a quartet sang: "Some Folks Say That a Nigger Won't Steal," a pleasing melody, but entirely out of place in a meeting of worship. Our songs should be always in keeping with the Gospel truth. False doctrine is discovered frequently in sectarian hymns. Beautiful melody cannot compensate for false sentiment, yet we have this to contend with constantly in the services of the Church. For instance, The Rosary, is NOT in harmony with gospel truth. "Just As I Am, Without One Plea," is false in sentiment, and "Beautiful Isle of Somewhere," is a contradiction of the revealed word of God. Choir leaders should endeavor to be prepared with songs which will harmonize perfectly with the theme of the meeting. Musical numbers should be made to harmonize with the spirit of such meetings.
