Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON TWENTY-SEVEN

The Sacrament

Topics

a. Death of the first-born in Egypt.

b. The paschal lamb.

c. The departure from Egypt.

d. The annual feast and ordinance.

a. The Twelve with Jesus eat the Passover in an upper room.

b. The giving of the broken bread and the wine.

c. In remembrance of the body and the blood of Jesus Christ.

d. The Sacrament substituted for the Passover feast.

e. The Sacrament to be partaken of worthily.

a. The emblems sanctified in the name of Jesus Christ.

b. That they may eat in remembrance of the "body and the blood of the Son."

c. Witness that they are willing to take upon them the name of the Son.

d. "And always remember him."

e. "And keep his commandments which he has given them."

f. A promise: If they partake of these emblems in righteousness, they will "always have his Spirit to be with them."

a. The angel instructs Joseph Smith.

b. Wine not essential—water introduced.

c. Wine not to be purchased from enemies and not to be used unless new.

d. The Savior will partake, after his coming, with prophets and saints.

e. Saints commanded to be diligent that they may withstand the evil day (verses 15-18).

References

Exodus, Ch. 12-13; Lev. 23:4-8; Deut. 16:1-8; Ezra 6:18-22. Matt. 26:26-30; Mark 14:14- 6; Luke 22:14-20.

D. and C. 20:34; Moroni 4 and [^1]; I Cor. 10:16-21; 11-34.

Doc. Hist. of Church, Vol. 1:106.

Matt. 26:29; Luke 22:18; and D. and C. 27:5-14.

Notes

The ceremonies connected with this annual feast were to continue for seven days beginning on the fourteenth and concluding on the twenty-first day of the month. During that time only unleavened bread should be eaten. (Read Ex. 12; Deut. 16:1-8; and Ezra 6:18-22.)

"The time having come when the great atonement should be made by the offering up of Himself, Christ told Peter and John to go and prepare a place where He might, according to His custom, eat the Passover with His disciples. The Passover. Was it the Passover, or the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper? The Lord, in Egypt passed by, or passed over the houses of the Israelites whose door posts had been sprinkled with the blood of the lamb sacrificed for that purpose; and the Israelites were commanded to observe the Passover in all their generations. Jesus, in compliance with this command, directed that a place be made ready where He might eat the Passover with His Apostles; for He, the great prototype, was going to offer up Himself as a lamb without spot or blemish; not only for the Israelites, but for all nations, for every people, and kindred, and tongue under the face of the whole heavens: * * *

"But previous to the offering of Himself, as the great expiatory sacrifice, having fulfilled the law and made it more honorable, and having introduced the Gospel, He met with His disciples as already noted, to eat the Passover. He then told them, 'With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.' To eat what with you? The Passover. To eat what with you? The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Thus He ate both, for the two ceremonies centered in Him, He was the embodiment of both, He was the Being provided before the foundation of the earth, and prophesied of by men of God throughout all the preceding ages; and also on account of whom the sacrifices were offered up by all the servants of the Lord, from the fall of Adam to that time; and all the various atonements heretofore pointed to Him, for whom they were all made and in whom they all centered. On the other hand, He it was who introduced the more perfect law, and offering Himself once for all, an infinite atonement, He through this sacrifice, accomplished that which was designed by the Almighty before the world was, and of which the blood of bullocks, of goats and of lambs was merely the shadow." (pp.124-125.)

First, that through the sanctified bread and water, we too, sanctify ourselves in partaking of it before our Heavenly Father, and in the name of Jesus Christ.

Second, that we eat in remembrance of his broken body and of his blood which was shed for us.

Third, that we are willing to take upon us the name of the Son, and not be ashamed of him. We belong to the Church of Jesus Christ, and if faithful have taken upon us his name.

Fourth, we covenant that we will always remember him. This embodies the willingness to love and honor him.

Fifth, that we will keep his commandments which he has given us.

These things we covenant to do when we partake of these emblems; moreover, we renew the covenant each week, if we perform our duty. The promise made to us, if we will do these things, is that we shall always have his Spirit to be with us.

No member of the Church can fail to make this covenant and renew it week by week, and retain the Spirit of the Lord. The Sacrament meeting of the Church is the most important meeting which we have, and is sadly neglected by many members. We go to this service, if we understand the purpose of it, not primarily to hear someone speak, important though that may be, but first, and most important, to renew this covenant with our Father in heaven in the name of Jesus Christ. Those who persist in their absence from this service will eventually lose the Spirit and if they do not repent will eventually find themselves denying the faith.

The Savior informed his Apostles on the night he ate the Passover that he would not drink the "fruit of the vine" with them again, until he should "drink it new with them in the kingdom of God." This was reiterated in the revelation to Joseph Smith, wherein the Lord promised to drink and eat with his prophets and saints, in his Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hiram Page's False Revelations. (Section 28) Note 1. Hiram Page was born in Vermont in 1800. He joined the Church five days after its organization and was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake. Previously he had become one of the Eight Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. Soon after his baptism he obtained a stone by means of which he received certain spurious revelations, at variance with the principles of the Gospel and the revelations received by Joseph Smith. Among other things he claimed to have received a revelation making known the place where the City of Zion would be built. In reading the Book of Mormon (Ether 13) it was discovered that Zion, or the New Jerusalem, was to be built upon this continent. This prediction caused some speculation at that early day and Hiram Page endeavored to settle the question by means of revelation received through his stone. As it was but a few months after the organization of the Church the members had not learned that there was but one appointed of the Lord to receive revelations for the Church, and several others thought that Hiram Page or Oliver Cowdery could receive revelation, just as well as Joseph Smith. Oliver Cowdery and the members of the Whitmer family were deceived by these false declarations of Hiram Page. This caused serious trouble and Oliver Cowdery took the Prophet to task for not accepting what Hiram Page had given. Finally the Prophet persuaded Oliver Cowdery that these things were wrong, and later the whole membership renounced the revelation given through this stone, but this did not come until the Lord had given to the Church the revelation known as section twenty-eight.
