Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY

Mission to the Lamanites

Topics

a. Hiram Page renounces his peepstone. Note 1.

b. A conference of rejoicing.

a. David Whitmer reprimanded.

b. Peter Whitmer to accompany Oliver Cowdery. Note 3.

c. John Whitmer to proclaim the Gospel. Note 4.

a. Blessed because of faith.

b. A physician to the Church.

c. To pray and be faithful.

a. Called to go with Oliver Cowdery.

a. Reason for the mission.

b. The departure of the missionaries.

c. Work in Kirtland.

d. Sidney Rigdon and others join the Church.

a. A journey of hardship.

c. Branches organized.

d. Preaching to the Indians.

e. Bitterness of Indian Agents.

f. The Missionaries denied the right to preach on Indian lands.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:1-115-126, 146, 182-84.

D. and C., Sec. 30.

D. and C., Sec. 31.

D. and C., Sec. 32.

Notes

l. A conference of the elders of the Church was called for the 26th of September at Fayette, N. Y. There were present eight elders, four priests and two teachers when the conference convened. Thirty-five persons had joined the Church, making a total of sixty-two in all. Joseph Smith opened the conference with prayer and then read the fifth chapter of Isaiah, which speaks of the gathering, and made comment thereon. One matter of business was the investigation of the Hiram Page peepstone incident. After considerable investigation, Hiram Page and all present who had been influenced by him renounced the use of this stone, and there was a mutual satisfaction and happiness again. At this conference which continued for three days, the Spirit of the Lord was manifest. Some who were previously baptized were confirmed and some others were also baptized and confirmed during the conference.

Peter was informed that he was to heed the words of his brother, Oliver Cowdery, and he was to share with him in all his afflictions, lifting his heart to the Lord in prayer and faith, for their deliverance. "I have given unto him power to build up my church among the Lamanites." Moreover, Peter was informed that there was none appointed to be Oliver's counselor, except Joseph Smith. Thus Peter understood that it was his duty to take, not to give, counsel while on this journey. The fact that Oliver Cowdery had shared with Joseph Smith in the conferring of Priesthood and authority on all occasions naturally gave to him the authority to stand second in the Church to Joseph Smith in the government of the Church.

"We deliver Brother Ziba Peterson over to the buffetings of Satan, in the name of the Lord, that he may learn not to transgress the commandments of God." (D.H.C. Vol. 1:367.) We have no further history of him as to his conduct or when he died.

"Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto me, but my Father, which is in heaven." He and his wife were then baptized and also many others joined the Church. Among them were Frederick G. Williams, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, Lyman Wight, and Edward Partridge. All of these afterwards became prominent in the councils of the Church.

Here in the borders of the Lamanites, the elders began their ministry among the remnants upon the land. They commenced to preach to the Delawares, and presented them with the Book of Mormon. Oliver Cowdery explained to them in detail the coming forth of the book. A Mr. Pool, who believed the testimony of these elders, became their interpreter. Several of the Indians could read and they received copies of the Book of Mormon. The Indians answered the brethren by saying: "We feel thankful to our white friends who have come so far, and been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this news concerning the book of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here," and the speaker of the tribe placed his hand on his heart. This good labor, however, was not to last, for the excitement reached the settlements in Missouri, and due to the efforts of sectarian priests the Indian agents ordered, the missionaries out of the Indian country as disturbers of the peace, threatening to use military force in case of non-compliance. With this disappointing turn of affairs the brethren were forced to withdraw and devote their labors among the whites. However they had declared the message of salvation to three great tribes, the Chatteraugus, in New York; the Wyandots in Ohio; the Delawares, west of Missouri. It was decided that Parley P. Pratt should return to Kirtland and perhaps to New York, and report their labors, and visit the branches that had been organized. In February he started back, and met the Prophet in Kirtland when he arrived there.
