Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-ONE

Individual Revelations

Topics

a. Called to lift up their voices. v. 1.

b. A crooked and perverse generation. Note 2.

c. The eleventh hour, and last time laborers to be called. v. 3. Note 3.

d. Vineyard corrupted every whit. v. 4.

e. Church called out of wilderness. v. 5. Note 5.

f. Elect to be gathered from four quarters of earth. Note 6.

g. Without faith there is no salvation. v. 12. Note 7.

h. Holy Ghost to be given to all who have faith. Note 8.

a. Reason for the revelation.

b. Jesus Christ the Light of the world. Note 10.

c. Sons of God. Note 11.

d. "A crooked and perverse generation. Note 12.

e. All nations shall tremble. Note 13.

f. Sun shall be darkened.

g. Destruction awaits the wicked. Note 14.

h. "I come quickly." Note 15.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:126-131; Life of The Prophet Joseph Smith (Cannon) ch. 15. D. & C. Secs. 33, 34.

Notes

Orson Pratt, one of the most capable among the many capable men who came into the Church in the early days, was born September 19, 1811, in Hartford, New York. He was the younger brother of Parley P. Pratt, and when his brother Parley returned to his home with the message of the Gospel, Orson believed him and was baptized, September 19, 1830, on his birthday. In the following months he traveled two hundred miles to see Joseph Smith in Fayette, and on the 4th of November received this revelation. He was ordained an elder December 1, 1830, by the Prophet and went on his first mission to Colesville. In the early part of 1831, he went on foot to Kirtland a distance of about three hundred miles. He filled several short missions to various parts of the Eastern States. He was a member of Zion's Camp and was chosen and ordained an Apostle in 1835. He was one of the greatest mathematicians of modern times and one of the clearest and most logical defenders of the Church and the mission of Joseph Smith that the Church has produced. His mathematical ability was a great asset to the Pioneers when they were crossing the plains and mountains from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley, and with Erastus Snow he blazed the way into the Salt Lake Valley arriving on the 21st day of July, three days before the arrival of the main body of pioneers. (For a full biographical sketch, see Jenson's "Biographical Encyclopedia," Vol. 1:87-91.)

.) again the lord has said that the elders should go forth in power, ">13. The Lord has promised that all nations, after they have rejected his message of salvation and had filled the cup of their iniquity, shall fear and tremble when his judgments shall be poured out upon them without measure. Before the end shall come, however, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned to blood, and the stars shall refuse their shining, and some shall fall, and great destruction awaits the wicked." There are some, even in the Church, unfortunately, who think that such expressions are cruel, and they are not willing to accept them as coming from a "merciful God." However, man brings the punishment upon himself and the judgments of the Almighty are bound to follow. "Yea, wo unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off the horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots. And I will cut off the cities of the land, and throw down all thy strongholds * * For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O House of Israel; and I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard." (3 Nephi 21:14-21. Compare Micah. 5:9-15

We are promised that one of the great signs preceding the coming of the Lord will be that the sun shall be darkened and the moon turned to blood. Of course the turning of the moon to blood is a figure and it will appear as a body of blood. The earth, likewise will reel two and fro as a drunken man and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens. ( [^1].) It will then be the time of the gathering of the righteous "from one end of heaven to the other." It will be at this time, most likely, when the great city of Enoch will return. In regard to these signs the Prophet Joseph Smith has given us the following: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." (D.H.C. April 6, 1843. "Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 286-7.)

14.The prophets all through the ages, when predicting the time of the second coming of our Lord, have spoken of the destruction of the wicked. Isaiah in his twenty-fourth chapter said: "Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left." Malachi speaks of the day coming that shall burn as an oven; "and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch."

---
Notas:
[^1] Revelation to Sidney Rigdon. Note 1. The conversion of Sidney Rigdon by Elder Parley P. Pratt has previously been noted. Here we give a brief sketch of his birth and ministry. He was born February 19, 1793 in St. Clair township, Alleghany County, Pennsylvania. He was the youngest son of William and Nancy Rigdon. His father died when he was seventeen years of age, and his mother passed away about nine years later. In his twenty-fifth year he became a member of the "Regular Baptists," and shortly after left the farm for the ministry. In May, 1919, he went to Trumbull County, Ohio, where he married Phebe Brook and later moved to Pittsburg becoming a very popular preacher. He became greatly disturbed, because he could not harmonize the current teachings of the clergy with the doctrine in the Bible. He became acquainted with Alexander Campbell, a native of Ireland, and Walter Scott, a native of Scotland. After leaving the Baptist church, these three men met together and discussed religious problems which resulted in the organization of a society which they called "Disciples," known today quite generally as "Campbellites." Sidney in the course of a year or two moved to Bainbridge, Ohio, where he engaged in the work of the ministry, and built up a church of considerable numbers. It was while engaged in the ministry in Ohio, that he met Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson on their way to the Lamanites, beyond the borders of Missouri. He read the Book of Mormon and was converted. In December, 1830, with Edward Partridge he visited Joseph Smith where each of them received a revelation for their guidance. The life of Sidney Rigdon from this time forth, until the Nauvoo period, was closely knit with that of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was called to be a scribe for the Prophet in his translation of the Scriptures. On March 18, 1833, he, and Frederick G. Williams, were called and set apart as counselors to the Prophet Joseph Smith, forming the First Presidency of the Church. In January 1838, when the trouble and apostasy broke in that place, he and the Prophet were forced to flee for their lives to Missouri. He was one of the brethren who were betrayed by Col. George M. Hinkle, Oct. 31, 1838, into the hands of the mob-militia and suffered imprisonment with the Prophet and others for many months in Liberty, Missouri. In Ohio, while laboring with the Prophet, he and the Prophet were wickedly abused by a mob, which greatly impaired his health. While imprisoned in Missouri his health failed, and he was released on bail, after having been held from November 1838 until February 1839. He took an active part in the founding of Nauvoo, but during the Nauvoo period, he became somewhat lukewarm and did not support the Prophet as a counselor should. At the general conference held in October, 1842, the Prophet desired to reject him as a counselor, but due to the pleadings of his brother Hyrum and some others, this was not done. In 1844 he left Nauvoo, contrary to the will of the Lord, and returned to Pittsburgh, forsaking his ministry. After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith he hurried back to Nauvoo and claimed the right to preside over the Church by virtue of his office as first counselor in the presidency of the Church. He said he would be a "guardian" as no successor could be raised up to Joseph Smith. He presented his claim before the people August 8, 1844, and was rejected. Later he was tried for his fellowship. He returned to Pennsylvania where he endeavored to establish himself with a following. He maintained that he had not turned from the Church, but that Brigham Young and the Twelve had led it astray. He died July 14, 1876. It has been the opinion of some of the early brethren that Sidney Rigdon's mind was impaired by the suffering and persecution that he passed through, which accounted in large part for his indifference and opposition in his declining years.
