Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-TWO

The Call to Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge

Topics

a. Birth and ancestry.

b. Joins with Alexander Campbell.

c. Meets Parley P. Pratt.

d. His prayers heard. Note 2.

e. Sent to prepare the way. v. 4.

f. He baptized without authority.

g. None do good except those who receive the Gospel. Note 3.

h. Weak things to thrash the Nations. Note 4.

i. Joseph Smith gives keys of the kingdom. vs. 17-18. To write for Joseph Smith. vs. 19-20. Note 5.

k. To preach.

a. Sketch of Edward Partridge. Note 6.

b. To be blessed by Sidney Rigdon.

c. To proclaim the Everlasting Gospel.

d. The Lord's promise to come to his temple. Note 7.

a. Translating to cease for a season. Note 8.

b. The call to the Ohio. Note 9.

c. Reason for the call.

d. The Church to assemble in Ohio.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:128-132. D. and C. Sec. 35.

D. and C. Sec. 36.

D. and C. Sec. 36.

D. and C. Sec. 37.

D. and C. Sec. 37.

Notes

How wonderfully this promise has been fulfilled. There have not been many of the great and mighty, according to the notions of the world, who have come into the Church. Most of those who have risen to prominence have been humble and from the ranks of the poor. Educated men today, as in the days of Paul, seem to think that the "marvelous work and wonder" which the Lord has revealed, is beneath their notice. They cannot be bothered with "purported" revelations from the Lord, or with foolish ordinances such as the Lord requires.

"For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, nor many noble, are called:

"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty.

"And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are;

"That no flesh should glory in his presence." (I Cor. 1:26-29.)

Never in the history of the world has this truth been so greatly manifest as in the preaching of the Gospel by the weak and humble elders of the Church. They have gone forth into strength which the Lord promised them and they have confounded the wisdom of the wise and the understanding of their prudent men has been hid. (Isa. 29:14.) Think of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was without training or education, only in the simple grades, so far as the learning of the world is concerned. Yet the Lord called him and educated him and he has confounded the entire religious world and brought to naught their false doctrines.

He was to be blessed by Sidney Rigdon according to the word of the Lord. He was baptized by the Prophet in December 1830, while on the visit to Fayette, and was commanded to proclaim the Gospel with a loud voice along with others who were ordained, to cry repentance saying: "Save yourselves from this untoward generation, and come forth out of the fire, hating even the garments spotted with the flesh." This expression is found in Jude, (3) and the Lord said to John (Rev. 3:) "Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy." This is symbolic language, yet is plain to understand. This is an untoward generation walking in spiritual darkness and the punishment for sin is spoken of as punishment in fire. Garments spotted with flesh are garments defiled by the practices of carnal desires and disobedience to the commandments of the Lord. We are commanded to keep our garments unspotted from all sin, from every practice that defiles. We are therefore commanded to come out of the world of wickedness and forsake the things of this world. Every man who will embrace the truth and receive it in humility of heart was entitled to be ordained and set forth, to teach the truth.
