Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-THREE

Alpha and Omega the Beginning and the End—Except Ye Are One Ye Are Not Mine

Topics

a. Jesus Christ the beginning and the end.

b. Jesus Christ is Jehovah. Note 2.

c. The same which looked upon the wide expanse before the world was made. Note 3.

d. The same which knoweth all things. Note 4.

a. The Wicked to be kept in darkness until judgment. (verses 5-6.)

b. The righteous soon to see Christ. (verses 7-8.)

c. Powers of darkness prevail, which cause eternity to be pained. (verses 11-12.)

a. All flesh is God's and he is no respecter. (See Lesson 2) (verse 16.)

b. Christ to stand upon the earth. (verse 17.)

c. Riches to be given to the Saints. (verses 18-39.)

d. This land the inheritance of the Saints. (verses 18-20.)

e. In time there will be no king or ruler except Christ. (verses 21-22.)

a. The parable of the twelve sons.

b. "I say unto you, be one."

c. Wars are to come.

d. Warning given for protection against wickedness. (verses 30-31.)

a. The Lord's law to be given in Ohio. (verse 32.)

b. Endowment to be given. (verses 32-38.)

c. The calling of Bishops foreshadowed. (verses 34-38.)

d. Let every man * * * go to with his might. (verses 40-42.)

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:140-143.

D. and C. Sec. 38.

Ex. 3:2-15; John 1:1-5; 8:55-59; Heb. 13:8; Moses 1:1-3, 31-33; Alma 13:7; Heb. 7:1-3; Rev. 1:5-8.

Ex. 6:3-7; I Cor. 10:1-4; D. and C. 110:1-4; Abraham 1:16; 2:6-8.

Psalms 139:1-18; John 1:1-5; II Nephi 9:20; Alma 7:13; 18:32; 26:35; Mormon 8:17; Moroni 7:22; D. and C. 76:24; 88:41-42; 93:23-28; II Peter 2:4; Jude 6.

D. and C. 50:45; 88:68; 83:1-3.

D. and C. 59:15-22; Psalms 24:1-2; I Cor. 6:19-20; 1 Peter 1:18-19.

Matt. 24; Jude 14; Mal. 3:1.

D. and C. 58:22; 76:63; 88:29; Rev. 11:15.

John 17:21-23.

D. and C. 105.

D. and C. 41:9.

Notes

"For I am the Lord thy God; I dwell in heaven; the earth is my footstool; I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be my chariot: I say to the mountains—depart hence—and behold, they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly.

"My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee." (Abraham 2:7-8.)

According to the record in [^1]) as we have it in the Bible, the Lord said to Moses: "* * * I am the Lord;

"And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the name of God Almighty but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them."

This is a contradiction of what is written by Abraham, but the statement in Exodus is a mistranslation. It is given by Joseph Smith in the inspired scriptures as follows:

"And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?"

This rendering makes the scriptures consistent, for it was Jehovah who spoke to Moses and by that name to the prophets before him. President Charles W. Penrose at the General Conference in April, 1920, said:

"He says: 'Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins.' (See Sections 29, 38, 49.) He is the Great I AM spoken of in the Hebrew Scriptures.

"He is the Jehovah spoken of in the Old Testament. Jesus Christ of the New Testament, is Jehovah of the Old Testament, and he so proclaimed it when he came to the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery in the temple of the Lord, the account of which we read in the 110th section of the Doctrine and Covenants. They speak of his appearance, the glorious appearance and power, and his voice was like the rush of many waters. It was the voice of Jehovah. I say this for the benefit of some few of my friends who do not believe in the doctrine that Jesus of the New Testament was Jehovah of the Old Testament. Jesus the Christ represents the Father fully. In him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead bodily, as we read in the scriptures: 'It pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell." And so he could tell Philip, when he asked, 'Lord, show us the Father: 'Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.' God was manifest in the flesh, in the personality of Jesus of Nazareth, and he was verily the Son of God, begotten of the Father, and his mother was the virgin Mary." (pp. 29-30.)

Paul also informs the members of the Church at Corinth (I Cor. 10:1-4) that it was Christ who led Israel out of Egypt.

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

In modern revelation, and in the revelation given to the ancients which has been revealed to us in this dispensation, we have received the definite information that Jesus Christ was the Creator of this earth. Not only of this earth, but of many other earths. The Book of Moses (see [^2]) is very explicit on this matter and we are taught this doctrine in the Book of Mormon as well. Nephi declares that "the God of our fathers who were led out of Egypt * * * yea, the God of Abraham and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the word of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up "as a sacrifice for the sins of the world. (I Nephi 19:7-10.) Lehi instructing his son Jacob says, "* * * for there is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." Abinadi declares that Jesus Christ, the very Eternal Father should come into the world to bring to pass the resurrection and redemption of man (Mosiah 16:15), and Amulek speaks of him as "the very Eternal Father of Heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are; he is the beginning and the end, the first and the last." (Alma 11:39.) This same testimony is given by the Apostles in Palestine, and Christ declared to John in the Apocalypse: "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord:" likewise he proclaimed himself to Isaiah:

"Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I, the Lord, the first and with the last; I am he" (Chapter 41:4). Isaiah also speaks of Christ as "Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." ( [^3].)

These titles, and the sayings that Jesus was the Creator and all things were made by him, have proved to be a stumbling block to some who are not well informed. The question arises, "How could he, if he had not body and flesh and bones, before he was born of Mary accomplish these things as a spirit?" Jesus had no body of flesh and bones until he was born at Bethlehem. This he fully explained to the brother of Jared. The answer to this question is simply that he did these wonderful works because of the glory his Father had given him before he was born (John 17:5-24) and because at that time he was God. In an epistle issued by the First Presidency and Council of Twelve Apostles in 1916, these matters are clearly explained. (See Era, Vol. 19:934.) From this epistle the following is taken: "* * * scriptures that refer to God in any way as the Father of the heavens and in the earth are to be understood as signifying that God is the Maker, the Organizer, the Creator of the heavens and the earth.

"With this meaning, as the context shows in every case, Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ the Son of Elohim, is called 'the Father,' and even 'the very eternal Father of heaven and of earth.' (see Mosiah 16:15.) With analogous meaning Jesus Christ is called 'The Everlasting Father,' (Isaiah 9:6; compare II Nephi 19:6.) The descriptive titles, 'Everything' and 'eternal' in the foregoing texts are synonymous.

"That Jesus Christ, who we also know as Jehovah, was the executive of the Father, Elohim, in the work of creation is set forth in the book, 'Jesus the Christ,' Chapter 4. Jesus Christ, being the Creator, is constantly called the Father of heaven and earth in the sense explained above; and since his creations are of eternal quality, he is very properly called the Eternal Father of heaven and earth."

"We have observed that God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle of faith dwells independently, and he is the object in whom the faith of all other rational and accountable beings center for life and salvation."

The Lord has stated that his progression is in building worlds and bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, and this goes on for ever thus increasing his power, dominion and glory, but not his intelligence or knowledge, or virtue, or wisdom, or love, for these things are, as the scriptures teach, in a state of perfection.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Lost Books of Scripture. The close of the year 1830, found the small band of Latter-day Saints, composing the Church of Jesus Christ, greatly encouraged and strengthened. The total membership at that time was about seventy members, but they were happy in the new light that had been revealed, although they were confronted with great opposition and bitterness, particularly on the part of sectarian priests. The Lord was pouring out upon them knowledge by revelation line upon line, precept upon precept, just as rapidly as they were prepared to receive it, By commandment of the Lord, Joseph Smith had been given the responsibility of a revision of the Scriptures. Sidney Rigdon was called to assist him in this work and in December they were busily engaged in this duty. Oliver Cowdery who had stood by the Prophet in such work previously, was in Missouri on his mission. The Lord gave to Joseph Smith at this time some of the most remarkable revelations that have ever been delivered to the children of man. These were the writings of Moses which are found in the Pearl of Great Price, and will not be considered in any detail in these lessons, but will be studied at some later time and in another class.
[^2] Conference of January 1831. The writings given to Moses are, however, among the most important of all the revelations given to the Church. They form the beginning of the revision of the Hebrew Scriptures. which were entrusted into the keeping of Joseph Smith to revise. To any reasonable mind, it will appear impossible for mortal man, no matter how well educated, or how well trained in history and science, or in Bible lore, to have produced such a remarkable work of scripture, as the revelations restored through Joseph Smith from the writings of Moses, unless the Almighty had revealed it to him. Nephi, when speaking of the value the Book of Mormon would be to both Jew and Gentile in the last days when it should come forth, declared that the record of the Jews (The Bible) would be brought to this western hemisphere by the Gentiles and would be had among them and they would give it to the remnant upon the land. However, when it should come, he said that "many plain and precious things" would be taken from it. These "plain and precious things" the Book of Mormon would help to restore and it would be a witness for Jesus Christ and for the record of the Jews. We have seen the fulfilment of this great prophecy. This is something that Joseph Smith could not have predicted without the aid of the Spirit of the Lord. Even if he had, how could he cause it to come true? These other books spoken of by Nephi which were to help in this great cause without any question are the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price.
[^3] The Prophet Moves to Kirtland. "Before organizing his company for the migration from Seneca County, New York, into Ohio, the Prophet called a conference of the Church to be held in Fayette on the 2nd day of January, 1831. With the opening of the year, the Prophet saw a glorious prospect for the welfare of the kingdom. And at this conference all present seemed to partake of his faith and of the power of the Holy Spirit. In a revelation given for the comfort and sustenance of the Saints on this occasion, the Lord made known that in secret chambers was much plotting for the destruction of the Saints of God. The command was renewed that they should go into Ohio, and some of the reasons for this movement made known. Encouragement was also given to the people that the Lord intended to give unto them a land of promise—a land upon which there should be no curse when the Lord should come. If they would seek it with all their hearts the Lord made a covenant with them that it would be the land of inheritance for themselves and their children, not only while the earth shall stand, but in eternity no more to pass away. It is upon this and kindred promises that is founded the hope, so tenaciously clung to by the Latter-day Saints amid all the vicissitudes of their checkered career, that they will yet inherit that land where* * Zion is to be built." ("Life of Joseph Smith, the Prophet," George Q. Cannon, p. 105.)
