Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-FOUR

Restoration of Lost Scripture—The Church Moves to Ohio

Topics

a. Close of the year 1830. Note 1.

b. The writings of Moses. Note 2.

c. Fulfilment of prophecy.

a. Business transacted. Note 3.

b. Important instructions (D. and C. 38).

c. James Coville (D. and C. 39). Note 4.

a. Meeting with Newel K. Whitney. Note 5.

b. The branch of the Church in Kirtland. Note 6.

c. The Law of the Lord to the Church. Note 7.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:131, 132, 133, 140, 143, 146. I Nephi 13:20-42. Moses 1:40-42. "Life of Joseph Smith," (Cannon) ch. 16.

Notes

He was promised that the day of his deliverance had come, if he would hearken unto the voice of the Lord. It seems from this commandment and promise that there had been times when Mr. Coville had received a desire to join the Church, but had weakened because of his pride and the love of the world. Now, however, he had come seeking the truth and the Lord informs him that is to him the day of deliverance from these worldly cares if he will now abide in the truth. The voice of the Spirit of the Lord had said to him on other occasions that he should rise and be baptized, and wash away his sins. This commandment was now renewed with the promise if he did so he would receive the Spirit as he had never had it before. "If thou do this, I have prepared thee for a greater work," the Lord said to him. He was to proclaim the Gospel in its fulness, and the covenant which had been sent forth to recover the house of Israel. The power of the Lord would rest upon him and he would be given great faith, for the Lord would be with him and go before him. He was called not to go to the "eastern countries," but to the Ohio, where the Lord had commanded his people to assemble, and where blessings had been kept in store such as had not been known among the children of men. And from thence the blessings and the Gospel should go forth to all nations.

"Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that the people in Ohio call upon me in much faith, thinking I will stay my hand in judgment upon the nations, but I cannot deny my word. James Coville was to join the forces and labor with his might and help in the pruning of the vineyard for the last time.

It seems that the people in Ohio, like many other people of today, thought the Lord could stay his hand, and revoke the judgments upon mankind even if they would not repent. The Lord declared to the contrary, that his hand could not be stayed, except in the case that the people would repent; otherwise the judgments were bound to follow. They would bring them upon themselves because of their wickedness, and it was a matter of their agency.

This man James Coville received a most wonderful revelation and blessing, provided he would turn to the Lord and in humility and faith seek to bring forth and establish Zion. "And again," the Lord said to him in conclusion, "it shall come to pass, that on as many as ye shall baptize with water, ye shall lay your hands, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and shall be looking forth for the signs of my coming and shall know me. Behold, I come quickly. Even so. Amen."

We are led to believe that in this promised blessing, this foolish man was convinced of the truth, for it is clear that the Lord revealed to him things which he and the Lord alone knew to be the truth. However, when he withdrew from the influence of the Spirit of the Lord and had time to consider the fact that he would lose the fellowship of the world, and his place and position among his associates, he failed and rejected the promises and blessings which the Lord offered him. In a revelation explaining why he failed the Lord said:

"Behold, verily I say unto you, that the heart of my servant James Coville was right before me, for he covenanted with me that he would obey my word. And he received the word with gladness, but straightway Satan tempted him; and the fear of persecution, and the cares of the world, caused him to reject my word; Wherefore he broke my covenant, and it remaineth with me to do with him as seemeth me good. Amen."

How many others there have been, and now are, who have rejected the word of the Lord, because of the love of the world and the fear of men, to mortals may never be made known. Evidently they are legions, some have frankly admitted it, others have turned away and have developed a spirit of extreme bitterness towards the Church.

"About the first of February, 1831, a sleigh containing four persons drove through the streets of Kirtland and drew up in front of the store of Gilbert and Whitney. One of the men, a young and stalwart personage, alighted, and springing up the steps walked into the store and to where the junior partner was standing. 'Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!' he exclaimed, extending his hand cordially, as if to an old and familiar acquaintance. 'You have the advantage of me,' replied the merchant, as he mechanically took the proffered hand, 'I could not call you by name as you have me.' 'I am Joseph the Prophet,' said the stranger smiling, 'You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?' The Prophet, it is said, while in the East, had seen the Whitneys, in a vision, praying for his coming to Kirtland. 'Mother Whitney' also tells how on a certain night, prior to the advent of Elder Cowdery and his companions, while she and her husband were praying to the Lord to know how they might obtain the gift of the Holy Ghost, which of all things they desired, they saw a vision as of a cloud of glory resting upon their house, and heard a voice from heaven saying: 'Prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming.' Shortly afterwards Oliver Cowdery and his associates came with the Book of Mormon, and with the message of the restored Gospel. Moreover, in further fulfillment of the vision, under the roof-tree of the Whitneys the Prophet received a number of revelations," contained in the Documentary History of the Church, and the Doctrine and Covenants.

Newel Kimball Whitney was born in Marlborough, Windham County, Vermont, February 5, 1795. About the year 1817 he located in Plaineville, Ohio, where he fell in with a merchant named Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who, recognizing his business qualifications, and feeling a friendly interest in him, took him into his store as a clerk and gave him some knowledge of bookkeeping. Several years later the firm of Gilbert and Whitney was organized in Kirtland and in this business these two men were prospering when the Lamanite Missionaries arrived and taught them the Gospel, and both members of this firm became very active members of the Church. They joined the "Disciples" and were ready for the Gospel when it arrived. It was not long after the Church made its headquarters in Kirtland that Newel K. Whitney was ordained to the office of bishop in the Church. He accompanied the Prophet on his second visit to Missouri. On the way Newel K. Whitney's leg was broken in an accident, and while waiting for it to mend, he and the Prophet were given poison, but the word of the Lord was fulfilled and they recovered, knowing that an attempt to take their lives had been planned. Bishop Whitney was very active in the Church all of his life. He was sustained as Presiding Bishop of the Church, April 7, 1851 and was set apart April 11, 1852, at the age of 58 years. He died October 16, 1883, in Salt Lake City. (For a full sketch, see Jenson's "Biographical Encyclopedia," Vol. 1:222.)

"The branch of the Church at Kirtland had become numerically strong, for it numbered nearly one hundred members. But they had been led into strange errors and darkness. False spirits had crept in and had manifested themselves in the subjugation of the physical and mental powers of their victims—as Newel Knight had formerly been controlled and possessed by the evil powers at Colesville. * * * When the Prophet came and by his presence and the prayers and faith of those elders who accompanied him, banished all these dark influences from the congregation of the Saints." (Life of Joseph Smith, pp. 105-6.)
