Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-FIVE

A Blessing or a Cursing—The First Bishop Chosen

Topics

a. Condition in the Kirtland Branch. Note 1.

b. "The Family."

c. A curse or a blessing? Note 2.

d. Blessing Brings Cursing, when

a. The Law how to govern. Note 3.

b. "I will be your ruler." v. 4. Note 4.

c. The disciple receives the law.

d. Things of the kingdom not for the unworthy. v. 6. Note 5.

e. Joseph Smith to have house built. Note 6.

a. Called by revelation.

b. Appointed by voice of the Church.

c. His heart pure.

d. The duties of the bishop.

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:145-148. D. and C. Sec. 41.

Notes

However, there are other passages of like import in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants, given to teach us that trifling with the commandments of the Lord, and violating his covenants, will merit the greatest of all punishments. "Hearken and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all cursings." Again, the Lord has said: "I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessings." This course can bring upon the covenant breaker nothing but punishment of the most severe nature.

Is this not a just course? Why should any person expect to receive a blessing which is based on faithfulness and obedience to certain laws and principles, when those laws and principles are deliberately violated? How frequently throughout all the scriptures do we find the expression "He that endureth to the end shall be saved." Notwithstanding this proclamation so often repeated by the Lord how many there are among us, who seemingly think that the Lord does not mean what he says. Are we not guilty of thinking that we can violate covenants and that the Lord, because he is a merciful Father, will forgive us? If so, let us take warning and remember that there is a principle of Justice as well as a principle of mercy.

"For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved.

"What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God.

"And thus God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world. And thus cometh about the salvation and the redemption of men, and also their destruction and misery." (Alma 42:24-26.)

Is it not the most logical thing in all the world that when the Lord offers to a man "the greatest of all blessings," and he covenants to receive them, but does not keep them, that his punishment should be as great on the other hand as the blessing would be if he remained faithful and true?

"And now behold, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a second death, which is a spiritual death; then is a time that whosoever dieth in his sins, as to a temporal death, shall also die a spiritual death; yea, he shall die as to things pertaining unto righteousness." (Alma 12:17.)
