Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-SEVEN

A Warning to the World

Topics

a. The President of the Church the only one appointed to receive revelation for the Church. Vs. 1-7.

b. Individuals entitled to receive revelation for personal guidance.

c. Who is ordained must come in at the gate. Note 2.

d. This commandment given as a protection to the Church.

a. Counselors in Presidency cease to be counselors when President dies.

h. President of Council of Apostles succeeds in Presidency.

a. Unity and holiness will bring glory to the Church. vs. 9-10.

b. Iniquity to be purged out. v. 11.

c. Joseph Smith to be cared for by the Church. v. 13. Note 5.

a. They are to be taught from on high. vs. 15; 16.

a. Lest they be found among the wicked.

b. The Lord to utter his voice out of heaven.

c. The Lord to cry repentance through the elements. vs. 21-23.

d. Many calls given to the nations. vs. 23-25.

e. Cup of iniquity full. vs. 26-28.

f. The Lord to come and Millennium begin. vs. 29-30.

g. Satan to be bound. vs. 31. Note 8.

h. The righteous to be quickened.

i. Earth to pass away. Note 9.

j. "Unquenchable fire."

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:154-157.

D. and C. Sec. 43.

Notes

This law is given for our government for all time. It is the one who holds the keys and who stands as the Presiding High Priest and President of the Church who is the spokesman of the Lord for the members of the Church. Individual members may receive the inspiration and revelation for their own guidance, but not for the Church. Moreover, no member of the Church will profess to receive a revelation for his own guidance that is contradictory of any revelation coming from the President of the Church.

"For verily I say unto you, that he that is ordained of me shall come in at the gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed." This commandment is the key by which the members of the Church are to be governed and protected from all those who profess to be appointed and empowered to guide the Church. If we are living in full accord with all the commandments which the Lord has given us, then we are entitled to the guidance of the Holy Ghost and under such conditions we cannot be deceived. Knowledge of the truth is an essential requirement on the part of the members of the Church to keep them from being deceived, by false, cunning, and designing persons. "And whoso treasureth up my word," the Lord has said, "shall not be deceived." (P. of G. P. p. 45:37.) Again, we are granted the privilege by the will of the Lord, to vote to sustain, or reject the officers in the Church. When we have sustained them we are duty bound to support them. Any person who raises his hand to sustain the President of the Church, or any other officer, and then goes straightway and criticizes or condemns, that man is a covenant breaker, for it is a covenant we take when we raise our hand and pledge our support. President Joseph F. Smith has said:

"I testify in the name of God that he will not suffer the head of the Church, whom he has chosen to stand at the head, to transgress his laws and apostatize; the moment he should take a course that would in time lead to it, God would take him away. Why? Because to suffer a wicked man to occupy that position would be to allow, as it were, the fountain to become corrupted, which is something he will never permit.

"The moment a man says he will not submit to the legally continued authority of the Church, whether it be the teachers, the bishopric, the high council, his quorum or the First Presidency, and in his heart confirms it and carries it out, that moment he cuts himself off from the privileges and blessings of the Priesthood of the Church, and severs himself from the people of God, for he ignores the authority that the Lord has instituted in his Church. These are the men that generally get crochets in their heads, that get inspiration (from beneath), and that are often so desirous to guide the Church, and to sit in judgment upon the Priesthood. The only safe way for us to do, as individuals, is to live so humbly, so righteously and so faithfully before God that we may possess his Spirit to that extent that we shall be able to judge righteously, and discern between truth and error, between right and wrong; and then we shall know when a decision is rendered against us that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, we are in error and that decision is right." ("Gospel Doctrine," pp. 55-56.)

By following this course we are in perfect safety.

By study of the principles of the Gospel, and by teaching each other, we learn how to act and how the Church should be governed. Every member of the Church should so live that by study, reflection, faith and prayer, and association with his fellow members in study, he may understand the order of the Church and how it is governed. Then if we will be faithful to the principles of truth that have been given us for our guidance we will be sanctified and will act in all holiness before the Lord. When there is contention and differences of opinions among the members, and when conflicting views enter into the discussions in our meetings and classes the net result is confusion, and may lead to bitterness, and the loss of the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. It is our duty, one and all, to add glory to the kingdom. We are informed if we follow an unrighteous course, the knowledge which we have shall be taken away. The Church was commanded to purge out the iniquity which was manifest among its members that they might be sanctified. A large part of this iniquity was due to the fact that members permitted false teachers to influence them.

Then the Lord calls attention to the fact that he has called to the nations from the beginning by the mouths of his servants, by the ministering of angels and by his own voice," pleading with the people to repent and accept his truth. Like the hen gathering her chickens he would have gathered them, but they would not! He has offered to the nations the greatest of all gifts, eternal life, and would have saved them, but they turned a deaf ear to all these pleadings.

"Behold the day has come when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full. Behold these are the words of the Lord your God!"

Isaiah has pictured this great day when the Lord shall come with his garments, or apparel, red and glorious to take vengeance on the ungodly. (Isa. 64:1-6.) This will be a day of mourning to the wicked, but a day of gladness to all who have kept his commandments. Do not let any one think that this is merely figurative language, it is literal, and as surely as we live that day of wrath will come when the cup of iniquity is full. We have received a great many warnings. The great day of the millennium will come in; the wicked will be consumed and peace and righteousness will dwell upon all the face of the earth, for one thousand years.

There are many among us who teach that the binding of Satan will be merely the binding which those dwelling on the earth will place upon him by their refusal to hear his enticings. This is not so. He will not have the privilege during that period of time to tempt any man. (D. and C. 102:28.)

"Be sober. Keep all my commandments. Even so. Amen."
