Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON THIRTY-NINE

Gifts of the Spirit

Topics

a. The Holy Ghost the guide in all meetings of the Church in all ages. (Sec. 46:2.)

b. No one to be cast out of public meetings of the Church. (Sec. 46:3.)

c. Investigators welcome at sacrament meetings. Saints who trespass not to partake until reconciliation is made. (Sec. 46:4-6.) Note 2.

a. Saints should seek the Lord in prayer and faith that they be not deceived. (Sec. 46:7-8; Sec. 50:1.)

b. Many spirits abroad in earth some of men and some of devils. (Sec. 46:7; Sec. 50:2-3.)

c. Satan seeks to deceive. (Sec. 50:3.)

d. Deceivers and hypocrites in the Church to be brought to judgment. (Sec. 50:4-9.)

e. The Father to be asked regarding spirits which are not understood. (Sec. 50:31-36.)

f. Danger of railing accusations. (Sec. 50:33.)

a. Why gifts are granted and to whom. (Sec. 46:9.)

b. Saints commanded to remember always why the gifts are given. (Sec. 46:10.)

c. Diversity of gifts and why this is so. (Sec. 46:11-26.)

d. To some are given many or all the gifts that they may guide the Church and detect deceivers. (Sec. 46:27-29.)

e. All things to be done in name of Christ in virtue and holiness. (Sec. 46:30-33.)

a. The Lord reasons by the Spirit. (Sec. 50:10-21.)

b. A question: "Unto what were ye ordained?" (Sec. 50:13-15.)

c. The answer to the question. (Sec. 50:14-22.)

d. "That which doth not edify is not of God." (Sec. 50:23.)

e. That which is of God is light, and he who continueth in God receiveth more light, until the perfect day. (Sec. 50:24.)

f. All should know the truth that there be no darkness among us. (Sec. 50:25.)

g. He who holds the keys (the President of the Church) entitled to all gifts. (Sec. 50:27-28.)

h. The members of the Church to grow in grace and in knowledge and truth. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall. (Sec. 50:40-46.)

References

Sections 46 and [^1].

D. and C. 20:45; 42:14; Moroni 6:9.

III Nephi 18:22-23.

III Nephi 18:28-34.

II Nephi 28:19-24.

I Cor. 12.

Notes

"For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul; therefore if ye know that a man is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye shall forbid him.

"Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out from among you but ye shall minister unto him and shall pray for him unto the Father, in my name; and if it so be that he repenteth and is baptized in my name, then shall ye receive him and shall minister unto him of my flesh and blood.

"But if he repent not he shall not be numbered among my people that he may not destroy my people, for behold I know my sheep and they are numbered.

"Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister, for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them."

Speaking of these manifestations as they crept into the Church, Parley P, Pratt has written:

"As I went forth among the different branches, some very strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were disgusting, rather than edifying. Some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstasies and be drawn into contortions, cramps, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the gospel. In short, a false and lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

"All these things were new and strange to me, and had originated in the Church during the absence, and previous to the arrival of President Joseph Smith from New York.

"Feeling our weakness and inexperience, and lest we should err in judgment concerning the spiritual phenomena, myself, John Murdock, and several other Elders, went to Joseph Smith, and asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning these spirits or manifestations.

"After we had joined in prayer in his translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation: each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded by an ordinary writer in long hand." (Autobiography of P. P. Pratt, p. 65.)

In this way and under these circumstances Section Fifty was received for the Church.

If the members of the Church will carefully consider the word of the Lord and follow the precepts here given they will not be deceived by the evil spirits of man or devils. The promise is made in a positive manner that all "who buildeth upon this rock shall never fall." Yet, sad to say, there are members of the Church who are ready to follow any theory, philosophy, or strange doctrine especially if with it there is something mysterious.

Even in that day there were hypocrites and deceivers drawn into the Church and with them they brought their abominations which had to be speedily eliminated by the Lord making known their evil practices.

"And again, I say unto you, all things must be done in the name of Christ, whatsoever you do in the spirit; and ye must give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing ye are blessed with. And ye must practice virtue and holiness before me continually. Even so, Amen."

---
Notas:
[^1] The Thompson Branch. (Sections 48, 51.) Note 1. In December, 1830, the Lord commanded that the headquarters of the Church be removed from New York to Ohio (Sec. 37), where more fertile soil for the spread of the work was to be found. As early as September 1830, the Lord had spoken of the gathering of his elect that they might be prepared "against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked." (Sec. 29.) At the second conference of the Church, Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., were appointed by revelation to go to the Lamanites and shortly afterwards Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were also called to accompany them. (Sec. 32.) Early in January the Saints residing in New York were called upon to journey to Ohio "against the time" that Oliver Cowdery should return. (Sec. 37.) In the meantime the Saints residing in Ohio were instructed to impart of their lands as they were able for the benefit of the Saints coming from the east. These homes were not to be permanent, however, the people were to build as if they were to remain for years. (Sec. 51:17), and at the same time endeavor to save money that they might purchase an inheritance in "the city," when the time should come for them to continue their journey farther to the west. In this manner they would "make a commencement to lay the foundation of the city; and then," said the Lord, "shall ye begin to be gathered with your families, every man according to his family * * * according to the commandments which ye have received and which ye shall hereafter receive." (Sec. 48:6.) In May, 1831, the Saints from New York began to arrive in Ohio and the Lord appointed Bishop Edward Partridge to assign to them their lands. They were to be made equal according to their families and their needs. The head of each family was to receive a certificate insuring for him his portion and inheritance. Should a man transgress after receiving his portion, he was not to have power to claim that portion which had been consecrated to the Bishop for the use of the poor and needy, but could retain the portion which had been deeded unto him. A storehouse was provided where the substance needful for the people in want could be kept by the Bishop. In this manner the Lord endeavored to teach these members in part, at least, and train them in the great principle of consecration as a preparatory step before they should be permitted to journey to Zion, for it was in keeping with this law upon which the City of Zion was to be built. Thus these saints from the East were to be organized according to the law of God. (Sec. 51:4-6.) This land in Ohio was in this manner to be consecrated unto them "for a little season," until the Lord should provide for them otherwise, and command them to go hence. (Sec. 51:15-16.)
