Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FORTY

The Land of Zion

Topics

a. The Eastern brethren called to gather to Ohio. (Sec. 48.)

b. Lands to be obtained for temporary homes. (Sec. 48:2-3.)

c. Money to be saved to buy inheritances in Zion. (Sec. 48:5-6.)

d. Eastern Saints to be organized according to the laws of God, and the Bishop to approve their portion. (Sec. 51:1-4, 7-15.)

e. Transgressors in the branch to have no claim to consecrated portion. (Sec. 51:5.)

f. The land consecrated for a little season. (Sec. 51:16-20.)

a. Conference of the Church to be held in Missouri. (Sec. 52:2.)

b. Elders sent to Missouri two by two. (Sec. 52:3-10, 22-42.)

c. The broken covenant. (Sec. 54:4.)

d. The Thompson Branch commanded to go to Missouri. (Sec. 54.)

e. "To seek a living like unto men." (Sec. 54:9.)

f. The Lord "commands and revokes as seemeth good." (Sec. 56.)

g. The rebuke to Ezra Thayer.

h. Wo unto you rich men that will not give. (Sec. 56:16.)

i. Wo unto you poor men whose hearts are not broken. (Sec. 56:17-18.)

a. Missouri the land appointed and consecrated for the gathering. (Sec. 57:1.)

b. The place for the City of Zion revealed. (Sec. 57:2-4.)

c. The land to be purchased "unto line directly between Jew and Gentile." (Sec. 57:4-5.)

d. Calling of Edward Partridge and Algernon Sidney Gilbert in Zion. (Sec. 57:6-10, 15-16.)

e. William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as printers for the Church. (Sec. 57:11-12.)

References

Sections 48, 51, 54, 56 and 57.

Notes

It became necessary for the Lord to administer a rebuke to some members of the Church who had means (Sec. 56:16), but who let their selfishness canker their souls, and at the same time he also rebuked the poor who were greedy and whose hearts were not contrite but who felt that those who had means should impart to them without any equivalent in labor or otherwise in return. (Sec. 56:17-18.) The United Order, or law of consecration, does not contemplate that the idler shall eat the bread of the laborer. While all shall share in common and none shall possess above another, yet all must give, service and labor for the benefit of all. It was because of this greed, selfishness and desire on the part of some to "lay hold upon other men's goods" that trouble was brought upon this little colony in Ohio.

"Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion.

"And thus saith the Lord your God; if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom. Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place; and a spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far from the courthouse.

"Wherefore, it is wisdom that the land should be purchased by the Saints, and also every tract lying westward, even unto the line running directly between Jew and Gentile."

This expression—"lying westward, even unto the line running between Jew and Gentile," has reference to the line separating the Lamanites from the settlers in Jackson County. At this time the United States Government had given to the Indians the lands west of the Missouri, only later to take them away again. The Lamanites, who are Israelites, were referred to as Jews, and the Gentiles were the people many of whom were of the lawless element, living east of the river.

Here the Saints were commanded to purchase land for their inheritance. Edward Partridge, assisted by Algernon Sidney Gilbert, as his agent, was to stand in his office to divide to the Saints their inheritance. Sidney Gilbert was also to open a store and sell goods "without fraud," for the good of Zion. These men were to make preparation as soon as possible for the Saints who had been commanded to come to the land. On this land the Saints were informed by the Lord that they would have to keep the law of the Lord—consecration.

Among those who were appointed to locate in the land of Missouri was William W. Phelps, who was chosen to establish a printing plant where he could be a printer to the Church. In this he was to be assisted by Oliver Cowdery. William W. Phelps had been a printer and it was because of his experience that he was chosen for this important office. These two men were also appointed to select books and to write books for schools in the Church, that the members might receive instruction. This appointment was given to Brother Phelps before he left Kirtland (Sec. 55) and therefore he took his family with him to Missouri. (See Doc. Hist. of Church, Vol. 1:173, 189.)
