Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FORTY-ONE

A Mission to the Shakers—Zion to Flourish

Topics

a. Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Leman Copley sent to the Shakers. (verses 1-4, 11-14, 26-28.)

b. The Shakers desire part of the truth, but not all.

c. The mission of Jesus Christ in the world. (verses 5-6.)

d. The time of the advent of our Lord not known. (verse 7.)

e. All men need repentance save a few who are holy men reserved that we know not of. (verse 8) Note 2.

a. The everlasting covenant that which was from the beginning. (verse 9.) Note 3.

b. All the Lord's promises to be fulfilled. (verse 10.)

c. Marriage not forbidden of God. (verses 15-16.) Note 4.

d. The earth prepared to be filled with the measure of man according to his creation. (verse 17.) Note 5.

e. Eating of meat not forbidden. (verses 18-19.)

f. One man should not possess above another.

g. Needless shedding of blood of animals forbidden. (verse 21.) Note 6.

a. Authority of Priesthood with power to officiate in ordinances of the Gospel not given to women.

b. There are no female members in the Godhead.

c. Women share in all the blessings of exaltation with their husbands, but do not exercise authority of Priesthood.

a. The mountains to be made low and the valleys to be exalted, when the angel sounds his trumpet. (verses 24-25.)

b. Jacob to flourish and the Lamanites to blossom. (verse 24.)

c. The Promises of the Lord to Jacob and the Lamanites.

References

Section 49.

Doc. Hist. Vol. 1:167-169.

Mark 13:32; Luke 21:34-37.

D. and C. 66:2.

Matt. 5:18.

Gen 9:1-3.

Gen. 9:1-6.

Isaiah 35; Ezek 20:33-44.

III Nephi 21.

Notes

The Shakers, or "The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing," had their origin in England in a Quaker revival in 1747, of which Jane and James Wardley were the leaders, but it is due to the activity of Ann Lee that the society has been perpetuated. This organization is a celibate and comunistic sect, which did not prohibit marriage but refused to accept it as a Christian principle. The Shakers believed in "a life of innocence and purity, according to the example of Jesus Christ and his first true followers, implying entire abstinence from all sensual and carnal gratifications." "The leading authority of the society is (or was in 1831) vested in a ministry, generally consisting of four persons, including both sexes. These, together with the elders and trustees, constitute the general government of the society in all its branches." The society is divided into several branches commonly called families, so divided for convenience. There were in the days when this revelation was given, fifteen societies of Shakers in the United States located in the following places: Alfred, New Gloucester, and Poland, Me.; Canterbury and Enfield, N. H.; Shirley, Harvard, Tyringham, and Hancock, Mass.; Enfield, Conn.; Watervliet and New Lebanan, N.Y.; Union Village and Watervliet, Ohio; Pleasant Hill and South Unions, Ky.

They claimed a membership in 1842 of six thousand.

Under the leadership of "Mother" Ann Lee a band of six men and two women came to America August 6, 1774. "A group of Shakers came out of the Kentucky revival in 1800-02, and from this the branches in Kentucky and Ohio were formed. "The Shakers held that God was both male and female, that Adam, having been created in the image of God, had in him the nature of both sexes, that even angels and spirits are both male and female. Christ, they believe, was one of the superior spirits and appeared in Jesus, the son of a Jewish carpenter, representing the male principle. In Mother Ann, daughter of an English blacksmith, the female principle in Christ was manifested, and in her the promise of the second coming was fulfilled. Christ's kingdom on earth began with the establishment of the Shaker communities." (Ency. Brit., Art. Shakers.) In 1874, there were 58 Shaker communities with 2,415 souls. In 1905 they were reduced to about one thousand members. Their "families" were composed of from 30 to 90 individuals. Each "family" has its own house, the stories being divided between the men and the women. The Shakers "derive their name from the manner of worship, which is performed by singing, dancing, and clapping their hands in regular time, to a novel, but rather pleasant kind of music." (Hayward's Book of Religion.)

The mention of the second coming of Christ and that no man knows the day nor the hour, and that he "cometh not in the form of a woman," also the reference to eating of meat and to marriage, etc., in this revelation, are given for the benefit of the missionaries about to go forth to the Shakers, and to correct the false doctrines held by their religious sect. The Shakers denied the doctrine of the Trinity and the vicarious atonement and the resurrection of the mortal body.

"And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth. And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; unto your hand are they delivered.

"Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

"But the blood of all flesh which I have given you for meat, shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof, and the blood ye shall not eat.

"And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands."

It is a grievous sin in the sight of God to kill merely for sport. Such a thing shows a weakness in the spiritual character of the individual. We cannot restore life when it is taken, and all creatures have the right to enjoy life and happiness on the earth where the Lord has placed them. Only for food and then sparingly, should flesh be eaten, for all life is from God and is eternal.
