Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FORTY-TWO

"After Much Tribulations Cometh the Blessings"

Topics

a. All who keep the commandments shall receive great reward. (verse 2.)

b. The designs of the Lord not revealed. (verse 3.)

c. The blessings of Zion withheld until after much tribulation. (verses 3-4.)

d. Elders commanded to be obedient and bear testimony of things to come. (verses 6-7.)

e. "A feast of fat things" to be prepared for the faithful. (verses 8-12.)

f. First the rich and learned invited, then the poor in the day of power. (verses 9-12.)

a. Edward Partridge to stand in his calling. (verses 13-16, 24-25.)

b. "Whoso standeth in this mission is appointed a judge in Israel, to divide inheritances." (verses 17-18.)

c. God, not man, to be the ruler. (verses 19-20.)

d. Saints to be subject to worldly powers until Christ comes to reign. (verses 21-23.)

e. Men have power to do many things through their agency without being commanded. (verses 26-29.)

f. "He that doeth not anything until he is commanded * * * is damned." (verses 29-33.)

a. Martin Harris to set example in the law to the members of the Church in the giving of money. (verses 25-26, 38-39.)

b. Lands to be purchased, without shedding of blood. (verses 37, 52-54.)

c. Key by which repentant persons may be known. (verses 39-43.) Note 4.

d. The time not to come for many years for Elders to receive inheritance except those called to remain in Zion. (verses 44-49.)

e. Sidney Rigdon appointed to write description of Zion and to dedicate the land. (verses 50-57.)

g. A conference to be held and those not appointed to stay to journey eastward preaching on the way. (verses 58-65.)

References

Section 58.

D. and C. 63:25-31.

Notes

The Lord also promised to prepare a feast of fat things, even a supper of the house of the Lord, unto which all nations shall be invited. This invitation is to be given first to the rich and learned, the wise and noble—classes who do not readily embrace the Gospel and then in the day of his power, the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, should come in unto the marriage of the lamb. In this manner the parable of the great supper (Luke 14) will be fulfilled.

Very strict was the command to the Saints that the law of God should be kept on the land of Zion. "Let no man think he is ruler; but let God rule him that judgeth, according to the counsel of his own will, or, in other words, him that counseleth or sitteth upon the judgment seat." We, today, do not realize the rigidity of this command. The Saints were to assemble in the land which had been appointed from the beginning as the site of the holy city, New Jerusalem. This land and this site were dedicated. Those who assembled there were placed under covenant that they would keep the law of God, which commandment had been repeated to them many times. Sidney Rigdon, according to appointment, stood up and asked the assembly:

"Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance, with thankful hearts, from the Lord?"

"Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God on this land, which you never have kept in your own lands?"

"Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither to keep the laws of God?"

To these questions, they each answered, "We Do," and then the land was dedicated for their gathering and inheritance. The Lord was very jealous of these commandments. This was not to be an empty pledge. Failure to observe the covenant was to bring tribulation. The covenants given then were pertaining to the fulness of the Gospel upon which the city of Zion was to be built. Into this city none were to come except the pure in heart, who were willing to pledge themselves to keep the "law of God." At the same time they were to be subject to "the powers that be," and not break the law of the land, for they were to consider themselves as a part of the United States, and to this power—the Saints were to be obedient until the time should come when Christ shall take control and assert his right as the Divine ruler of the earth.

Many of the members of the Church forgot the covenant they had made to "keep the law of God" upon the land, which was mandatory, and this brought them into trouble. Persecutions came and eventually they were driven from their inheritances. The tribulation in part, but not all, which the Lord had promised they should suffer, came upon them because of their disobedience. We must not think, however, that their disobedience at this time was greater than our disobedience today. We have not been placed under so strict a law. They failed to keep the law of consecration and it was taken from them and the lesser law of tithing substituted as the law of revenue for the Church. The Lord has been more lenient with us than he was with them, but he has promised that if we, in this day, cannot abide in the law which we have received, we shall not obtain inheritances in Zion when the time comes to grant inheritances to the faithful. Our sins and disobedience, eventually, will find us out, and for them we will suffer if we do not repent and keep the law of God upon this land. So have the prophets predicted.

Today, as in the day when this revelation was given for the government of Zion, men are expected to bring to pass much righteousness without being commanded in all things. The Lord has given us the great gift of agency, but he expects us to use this gift in his service. If we do good we shall receive the reward; if we obey the covenants we make, the promised blessings are assured. If, however, we break these covenants and do not abide in the law of God, then we have no promise and the blessings shall be withdrawn. The fact that covenants are sealed upon our heads does not entitle us to the blessings except we abide by the law upon which these blessings are based. (D. and C. 130:20-21.) There may be many disappointments to those who have not, in faithfulness, kept the law.

Martin Harris was called upon to repent, so also was William W. Phelps, both of whom had failings which had a tendency to lead them and the rest of the members of the Church into difficulty with the class of people which were at that time found in western Missouri—the sin of pride, the praise of the world, and seeking to excel; sins which are extremely prevalent and common at this present day. The Lord gave a key by which the repentant sinner may be known and forgiven, it is, that he will repent and confess his sin. This does not mean that the person who has sinned is under obligation to make public his transgression, and proclaim it from the house tops, but that he will make confession in the proper place and way before those who are appointed to hear the case, according to the law given to the Church. (Sec. 42.)

The Saints were instructed to be patient and not overzealous in their desires to gather to Zion, but to prepare their way and not come in haste. The Elders of the Church were to give counsel in these matters and none were to go up to Zion until they had received the approval of those who presided. In the course of the next few months many members of the Church located in Jackson County, but they were not permitted to enjoy their inheritances. The work of the Lord was interfered with by enemies of the Saints, and the building of Zion was postponed until some future day when the Lord shall take matters into his own hands and then all opposition shall vanish away. When that day comes all who are deemed worthy of inheritances, shall have earned the right through faithful obedience to the laws of God.
