Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FORTY-THREE

The Earth and Its Fulness Given to Man for His Enjoyment

Topics

a. A blessing for all who come to Zion with an "eye single to glory of God."

b. If they live they shall inherit the earth; if they die they shall receive a crown in the mansions prepared. (verse 2.)

c. They shall be blessed with "commandments not a few and revelation in their time." (verses 3-4.) Note 2.

d. The First and Second commandments to be strictly observed. (verses 5-6.) Note 3.

e. Obedience to other commandments also required. (verses 6-7.)

f. Thanks to God (in prayer) sacrifice of broken heart and contrite spirit (humility) required. (verse 8.) Note 4.

a. On the Lord's day the Saints are to go to the house of prayer. (verse 9.)

b. This is a day appointed for Saints to rest from all labor and pay devotions to the Most High. (verses 10-12.)

c. "None other thing" to be performed save to prepare meals in singleness of heart. (verses 13-14.)

d. Inasmuch as this is done, the Saints to be blessed. (verses 15-16.)

a. All things subject to man and to be used by him in wisdom. (verses 16-19.)

b. It has pleased God to give all these things to man if man will keep his commandments. (verses 15-16.)

c. In nothing does man offend God, except wherein he does not acknowledge his hand in all things, and keep his commandments. (verses 21-24.)

References

Section 59.

D. and C. 76:111.

Ether 12:32.

Alma 1:26-28.

Exodus 9:5-6; Psalms 24:1; 50:7-17.

Notes

"Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." And the prophet-king, Benjamin, by commandment of the Lord informed the Nephites of their dependence upon the Lord in the following words:

"I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants.

"And behold, all that he requires of you is to keep his commandments; and he has promised you that if ye would keep his commandments ye should prosper in the land; and he never doth vary from that which he hath said; therefore, if ye do keep his commandments he doth bless you and prosper you.

"And now, in the first place, he hath created you, and granted unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto him.

"And secondly, he doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you; and therefore he hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, for ever and ever; therefore, of what have ye to boast?" (Mosiah 2:21-24.)

"And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (IV Nephi 16.)

This world, even in its fallen state, is beautiful with its many gifts and beneficient blessings all arranged for the use of man. Our misery, poverty and jealousy come because of selfishness and greed and in the failure to heed the word of the Lord. There is no peace, no happiness, no real prosperity, except through obedience to the will of our Heavenly Father. He has reason to expect us to acknowledge his hand in all things and to keep his commandments.
