Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 1 ( 1946)

LESSON FORTY-FOUR

Instruction to the Elders—The Power of the Destroyer

Topics

a. The Lord pleased with journey of elders to Missouri. v. 1. Note 1.

b. Some were rebuked, however, for their fear of man. v. 2.

c. Authority to be taken from them unless they improve. vs. 3-4. Note 2.

d. Manner in which elders were to travel. vs. 5-9. Note 3.

e. Edward Partridge to impart money for the journey. v. 10.

f. "Thou shalt not idle away thy time, neither hide thy talent." v. 13. Note 4.

g. To proclaim Gospel among wicked. v. 14.

h. Elders to shake off dust from feet. vs. 15-17. Note 5.

a. The Lord is merciful to those who confess their sins. vs. 1-2. Note 6.

b. Not necessary for whole company to go by water. v. 3.

c. Many dangers on the waters. vs. 4-13.

d. In the beginning the Lord blessed the waters, but now cursed them. vs. 14-16.

e. In the beginning the Lord cursed the land but now has blessed it. v. 17. Note 7.

f. The destroyer rides upon the waters. vs. 19-22.

g. Directions as to travels. vs. 23-29. Note 8.

h. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon not to preach until they reach Cincinnati. Note 9.

i. In that city they are to warn the wicked.

j. Elders to journey two by two. vs. 33-38. Note 10.

References

D. and C. 60.

D. and C. 61.

Notes

Edward Partridge, the bishop, was to impart money as it might be needed for the journey. This money was to be returned by such brethren as were able to reimburse the bishop after they arrived at their destination. Those who were not able to pay the money back were not to be required to do so. It is a marvel how these brethren could spend their time in the ministry without some manner of income to support them. Nevertheless the Lord came to their aid. It should be noted that in speaking of the funds in the hands of the bishop which were to be used for this purpose, the Lord said that he was to impart "of the money which I have given him." The law of revenue for the Church at this early period had not been definitely defined. In making these journeys back and forth from Ohio to Missouri the brethren had to depend for support very largely on the help they received from the people in a land where the majority were hostile to their cause.

"And now I speak of the residue who are to come unto this land. Behold, they have been sent to preach my Gospel among the congregations of the wicked; wherefore, I give unto them a commandment, thus: Thou shalt not idle away thy time, neither shalt thou bury thy talent that it may not be known." We are all familiar with the parable of the talents, and know the fate of the man who hid his talent away and then when his Lord returned said unto him: "I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed: And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, there thou hast that is thine." The Lord therefore said: " * * Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Matt. 25:14-30.)

This command applies to all those who have talents and Priesthood which they are expected to magnify. If we hide our talents and refuse to exercise the divine authority which is given us, then we may find a similar fate awaiting us, for this story of the talents applies to us all.

"And inasmuch as they do this they shall rid their garments, and they shall be spotless before me." As we have stated before, the only way that we can stand spotless, and not be held accountable for the blood of this generation is to magnify our callings in giving the warning to the world. The Lord called upon these brethren to travel two by two. This is how he sent his disciples out in the days of his ministry. When they traveled two by two they had protection. They were not as likely to fall into sin and they were not as likely to be attacked. We ask our missionaries today to travel two by two among the "congregations of the wicked," as a matter of protection. Many would have been saved from temptation and sin had they adhered to this regulation who suffered temptation and were overcome because they fell into traps set for them which never could have been sprung had they not been alone. Although they were to travel in pairs, yet the Lord cautioned them against temptation while on the way. Satan is always alert and it requires extreme diligence, humility and prayer to keep the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord and be able to overcome.
