For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the growth and status of the Church as of 31 December 1982. (Membership figures include estimates based on 1982 reports available prior to conference.)

Number of branches in stakes

Number of branches in missions

(These statistics reflect an increase of 71 stakes and 523 wards and branches during 1982.)

Number of sovereign countries with organized wards or branches

Number of territories, colonies, and possessions with organized wards or branches

Total membership at the close of 1982

Increase in children of record

Children of record baptized

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

Full-time missionaries

Names cleared in 1982 for temple endowments

Number of endowments performed during 1982:

Temples in operation

Temples planned or under construction

Temples closed during the year

Total enrollment during 1981–82 school year:

Seminaries and Institutes

Church schools, colleges, universities

Persons assisted by LDS Social Services

Persons placed in gainful employment

Man-days of labor donated to welfare services

Commodities distributed from storehouses in pounds

President N. Eldon Tanner, First Counselor in the First Presidency; Elder LeGrand Richards, Member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles; John G. Lahaderne, president of the Italy Catania Mission; Charles R. Hansen, president of the California Oakland Mission; Terry Lavelle Crapo, Regional Representative; Lavere Arnold Ricks, Regional Representative; James David King, president of the Paradise Valley Arizona Stake; J. Spencer Cornwall, former conductor of the Tabernacle Choir; Bertha Reeder Richards, former general president of the Young Women’s MIA from 1948 to 1961; Percy K. Fetzer, patriarch and former temple, stake, and mission president; Monte L. Bean, prominent church leader and philanthropist; Dr. Albert Ray Olpin, former president of the University of Utah; Clare Middlemiss, personal secretary to President David O. McKay for thirty-five years; W. Creed Haymond, noted athlete and church leader; Dr. Barney Clark, recipient of the first artificial heart.
