Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Introduction

Cowley, MatthewPPRECORDED IN the journal of Sister Abbie Hyde Cowley is the following: "Monday morning at 3:00 a.m., August 2, 1897, I gave birth to a fine boy weighing 8 1/2 lbs. Sister Swan and Brother and Sister Hale were present and by the blessing of the Lord, I was safely delivered, for which I am ever grateful to our Heavenly Father." Thus is recorded, in the words of his mother, the birth of Matthew Cowley.

Cowley, MatthewPPOn September 26 of that same year, Elder John Henry Smith of the Council of the Twelve, while visiting in Preston, Idaho, accompanied the father of the baby, Matthias Foss Cowley, home, and there he named and blessed and gave to the baby—this boy—the name of Matthew. Two months following the birth of this fine baby boy, during the general conference in Salt Lake City, Matthias Foss Cowley was sustained a member of the Council of the Twelve. Because of this Church call, the family shortly left their home in Preston, Idaho, and moved to Salt Lake City. His childhood was very eventful because he was so active and full of fun.

Cowley, MatthewPPA good part of his summers was spent in Hyde Park in Northern Utah and in Cardston, Canada. He engaged in farm work and the usual activities of a farm boy during the summer months on these visits. He likewise traveled with his father on many occasions into surrounding states while his father was fulfiling his duties as a member of the Council of the Twelve.

Cowley, MatthewPPIn 1914, while Matthew was attending the L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City, he received a call to serve as a missionary in the New Zealand Mission. When he arrived in New Zealand, he was still only seventeen years of age, but because of his pleasing disposition and great ability, he soon won the hearts of the Maori people of that mission. He became fluent in the usage of the Maori language. At the conclusion of the normal three-year mission period, he received a special call from President Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church, to remain in New Zealand long enough to translate the Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price into the Maori language, and also, to revise and reedit the previous translation of the Book of Mormon.

Cowley, MatthewPPIn 1919, after completing five years as a missionary, he returned to his home in Salt Lake City. When he returned home, he was still in high school. However, through the efforts of friends, he was allowed to enter the University of Utah to begin his study of law. While attending the University of Utah, he was employed at the Federal Reserve Bank in Salt Lake City, and after completing one year of study at the university, he was admitted to the law school of George Washington University in Washington, D. C.

Cowley, MatthewPPHe attended school at nights and worked in the Federal Reserve Bank for a while during the daytime. He later was employed by Senator Reed Smoot as a special assistant to the Senate Finance Committee, and continued in this service until he graduated and returned home. He began his law career upon his return in 1926 and was shortly thereafter appointed Deputy Salt Lake County Attorney. After two years as a deputy, he was elected to fill the office of County Attorney. At the conclusion of this term, he returned to private practice until 1938 when he was called by the First Presidency to preside over the New Zealand Mission.

Cowley, MatthewPPDuring this time, he continued his activity in Church duties. He served on the Wells Stake Sunday School Board and was one of the most successful Sunday School and MIA teachers in the Church.

Cowley, MatthewPPOn July 13, 1922 while still studying in Washington, D. C., he returned home to be married in the Salt Lake Temple to Elva Eleanor Taylor. Their marriage was performed by President George Albert Smith, then a member of the Council of the Twelve.

Cowley, MatthewPPOn January 18, 1938, Matthew Cowley was set apart as President of the New Zealand Mission and departed the following day for his field of labor accompanied by Sister Cowley and their daughter, Jewell. During the first three years that he served as mission president, he had many missionaries laboring under his direction, but because of war conditions, these missionaries were all called to return to their homes or were assigned to other fields of labor; and he was left to handle the affairs of the mission without the assistance of Zion elders. He immediately organized the entire mission with its thirteen districts and approximately eighty branches under the leadership of local elders, and the mission prospered during this period as it had never done before.

Cowley, MatthewPPPresident Cowley and his family returned to Salt Lake City in September of 1945. In addition to their daughter, Jewell, they brought home with them a fine son whom they had adopted in 1939. They named him Duncan Meha Cowley, but he was affectionately known to his parents as Tony. On October 5, 1945, Brother Cowley was sustained a member of the Council of the Twelve as the Church met in solemn assembly in its semi-annual conference. In this conference, President George Albert Smith was sustained as the President of the Church, and his first call to the apostleship went to this young man whom he had guided and loved since early childhood.

Cowley, MatthewPPOn October 11, 1945, Elder Cowley was ordained an Apostle, the sixty-fifth of this dispensation, by President Smith. Approximately a year later, a new position of responsibility among the General Authorities of the Church was created, and Elder Cowley was appointed to fill the position as President of the Pacific Islands Missions. In this new assignment, he was given the responsibility of directing the affairs of the Church in the many missions of the Pacific. His headquarters in this assignment continued to be in Salt Lake City, but during the following three years, he traveled almost continuously in the islands of the sea. The entire Polynesian people now had the opportunity of being blessed by him as had the Maori people during the thirteen years that he had lived with them as missionary and president.

Cowley, MatthewPPHe had a great gift of language and was able to speak in the native tongue so that he could be understood by the people in all his travels. In addition to his travels in the islands, he visited in the missions of the Orient and in Australia. He visited the Philippine Islands, Japan, and China, dedicating China once again for the preaching of the gospel. After approximately three years in this special assignment, he was released, and from then until his death, he traveled extensively along with the other General Authorities visiting the stakes and the missions of the Church.

Cowley, MatthewPPAs a young man struggling for an education and later as an attorney beginning his practice, Elder Cowley received great assistance from his young wife. Still later as a mission president, presiding over a great mission without the assistance of missionaries throughout most of this time, he found in her the strength to carry on. Finally, as one of the General Authorities of the Church, he knew that by his side Sister Cowley stood to strengthen and sustain him in the great work and mission that he was accomplishing.

Cowley, MatthewPPHis idea of a happy family life was illustrated by his daughter Jewell and her husband, Val Jolley Sheffield, and their two lovely children, Karen Jewell and Val Cowley Sheffield.

Cowley, MatthewPPAt the time of his passing on December 13, 1953, he had become one of the most loved men of his time. Few men have ever been so greatly loved and so greatly respected. He affected the lives of everyone who knew him—he was not just a casual acquaintance to anyone.

Cowley, MatthewPPHe did not have the ability to go into a cleaning shop and leave his clothes without getting involved in the life of the cleaning man. He couldn't buy a steak or a hamburger without sampling the cheese and finding out how the butcher's wife and children were. When he went into an ice cream store, he couldn't buy ice cream as most people do. He was compelled to sample several different kinds, and before he left, he had woven himself into the life of the person serving him. Some of the closest friends that he had in life were people whom he had met in such a casual way.

Cowley, MatthewPPThe reader of this book will soon discover as he reads through each succeeding address and talk that nothing is complicated, but that Elder Cowley's entire thinking was based on simple fundamentals. It is this great simplicity that endeared him to the people of the Church and made him the beloved Tumuaki (president, leader) of the people of the islands.

Cowley, MatthewPPHis talks on prayer and faith and on repentance afford an insight into his own personal life. The influence of his great father and of the mother he so greatly loved was carried throughout his entire life. He often stated that the greatest sermons of his life were the prayers he heard while a boy in the home of his parents.

Cowley, MatthewPPTumuaki thrilled everyone who ever heard him talk. Through reading this volume, which includes but a small portion of his addresses and talks, those of us who knew him intimately will feel the warmth of this great spirit and hear him once again; those who only knew him as a great speaker and servant of the Lord will learn to know him better; and to countless youth and others throughout the entire Church, he will yet bear his simple inspirational testimony.

Cowley, MatthewPPIn our home, which he blessed so often, this book will be treasured and studied by all. He was our closest and greatest friend. These printed words and ideas of his will never cease to guide us.

Cowley, MatthewPPIt is our hope that the youth of Zion through the reading of this volume will be strengthened and inspired and that they too will have the privilege of coming under the influence of our great friend and "Tumuaki," Matthew Cowley.

Cowley, MatthewPPShortly before he passed away, in speaking to the student body of Brigham Young University, he told the story of two men who were discussing a recent stake conference.

Cowley, MatthewPPThe first man asked, "Who was the visitor?"

Cowley, MatthewPPThe other answered, "Matthew Cowley."

Cowley, MatthewPPHe then asked, "Did he teach you anything?"

Cowley, MatthewPPTo this, the second replied, "No, but he surely made us feel good."

Cowley, MatthewPPAnd Brother Cowley said, "Well, I guess there isn't anything that we can do greater in this world than to go around making people feel good."

Cowley, MatthewPPI believe if someone were to state his philosophy of life, that this brief statement from his own lips would give a great indication of what was in the mind and heart of Elder Matthew Cowley. He was a simple man in every respect. He was born simply; he lived simply. In the mission field, he repeatedly made the statement that the gospel of Jesus Christ was simply beautiful and beautifully simple.

BISHOP GLEN L. RUDD

Salt Lake City, Utah

March 10, 1954
