Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

"And, Lo, I Am with You Alway"

Address delivered Sunday of general conference, April 8, 1951.

I HAVE BEEN thinking, my brothers and sisters, since the meeting of the Twelve in the temple on Thursday, of the words of the Master when he was about to take his departure from the Twelve, and he said unto them: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

"Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:19-20.)

As this Council of the Twelve met in the upper room of the temple on Thursday, the Spirit of God bore witness to my spirit that Christ was saying there to the Twelve: ". . . and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." And where there is no Quorum of the Twelve in God's ministry upon the earth, Christ is not there as the leader of his Church and his kingdom. This testimony has sunk deep into my heart since that meeting and during this conference, which has been presided over by the Council of the Twelve with President McKay as its presiding officer. When Christ came to the earth he organized his Church, and at the head, under his leadership, he had Twelve Apostles. And when he left, he left his Church under the direction of the Twelve. When he came to the American continent he organized his Church, and at the head of that Church, under his leadership, he placed Twelve Apostles. And when he left them, he left his Church and his Saints under the leadership of that Twelve. And when the gospel was restored again, Christ came back and appeared unto him who was raised up to be the Prophet at the head of this dispensation. And under his direction the Church was organized for the last time, and at the head of the Church under the Presidency of the Prophet were the appointed Twelve. And when the Prophet was taken from the earth, sealing his testimony with his blood, the Church was left under the direction of the Twelve. And down through the years when the leadership of the Quorum of the Presidency has been taken away, the keys have remained with the Twelve.

". . . and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world."

As God has borne witness to me in that meeting in his holy house and in this conference, so I bear witness to you that where there is no Quorum of the Twelve, the true organization of Christ's Church is not here upon the earth, and that is my testimony to you, which I bear in all humbleness and in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
