Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

"Ask, and It Shall Be Given You"

Address delivered at the Oahu stake conference.

MY MIND has been over in China tonight. I wish these brothers and sisters would talk a little more Chinese. I learned a little while I was over there. I was there in the summer weather. It was hot. I learned two words. I would get a rickshaw, and I would say to the boy, "Cumbolle." That's where I stayed. As soon as I would get into the hotel, I would say, "Sit Sue." That's ice water. All my other Chinese I learned right here in Honolulu and my Japanese, too. Oh, I learned a little Japanese over in Japan, too. I learned how to say "doso." I will never forget the day we went down to the pier in Yokohama, the Clissolds and the Cowleys, to meet the President Wilson with the Robertsons and the Akis on board. My wife and I were joining them to go on to Hong Kong. Well, I thought they had moved Hawaii over to Yokohama when I went into Brother and Sister Aki's cabin. I have never detected such a pungent odor in all my life—dried fish. I later learned they were bringing it over for Brother Clissold's birthday. Well, I guess he thoroughly enjoyed it. I saw him eat a dried silkworm one day. He heard that the Japanese ate the silkworms after they were all dried, so he was determind to eat a silkworm, and I have watched him ever since, and it worked; his hair is getting silkier all the time. I think if he told you the truth, he would tell you that that silkworm is still right here in his throat. It was wonderful to have these experiences with these brothers and sisters, especially after they are over. That's when the experiences are all the best.

My heart goes out to these young people among whom these grand missionaries labored. To go over there and stay a short time and make so many friends, just get started and then have to leave and come back! Well, that's the way of the Church. You never know what's going to happen to you next. You know they had a strike here, and things were bad when that shipping strike was on. After all the times I have been down here and told you people to have a year's supply of food in your home, I hoped you had it. I don't know whether you did or not. In the homes I went to they had a good supply because I ate most of it. During that strike things were bad uptown. Business was bad, and stores were closing early. I went into Brother Aki's store. There were his son and son-in-law. I've never seen a sadder-looking couple in all my life. I said, "How's business?" They said, "Bad. Very bad. We don't want our father to know anything about it." I said, "Are you running your business right?" They said, "Well, it's the same as always." I said, "The man who is the head of this business is giving all his time to God. Now you call on God and tell him to get in your business fast. Your father's in his business." So we started a little prayer meeting in the back of the shop.

It is wonderful the opportunities we have, isn't it, to teach the gospel. Sometimes we teach it better on the outside of our homes than we do on the inside. We go out and teach the gospel to our neighbors, people we come in contact with, and then we go home and fight with our wives. Well, the prophet said we were a peculiar people and that has to be fulfilled.

Last night I was talking about fast offerings in our welfare meeting. The Church is finally coming around to ask the people to obey the principles of the gospel in order to comply with the welfare program of the Church. Instead of assessing people to death, having them produce cash budgets, the Church is asking the people to obey the principles of the gospel and by obedience raise the money which belongs to God, so he can put his money back in the business. So we talked about fast offering. Do you know how much you people paid for your meals last year? You paid about two cents per meal. That's what it cost you for your meals according to the report of your fast offering contributions. Now this is the place to live, if you can get by on two cents a meal. You all look well. None of you have the rickets; but at that rate you should all be in "scheboch" cases as they say in British countries. I said last night I was in a stake a few weeks ago where last year they made a per capita offering of sixty-five cents. There are only eighteen people in that whole stake who don't belong to the Church, and in that stake they paid $26.00 plus per capita for hard liquor. That didn't include beer. That was just hard liquor. Twenty-six dollars a head! Sixty-five cents for fast offerings! Yes, we are a peculiar people. Thirty million dollars in the state of Utah last year for liquor and beer, tobacco. There was less than a dollar per capita in offerings.

Now you know what God said and what Malachi the prophet said, "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee?" (Mal. 3:8.) And he says in tithes and in offerings. Now everytime that you have a fast day, and you don't fast, you are not obeying the gospel, and when you do fast and pay only two cents in offering, you are robbing God and robbing his children who need his help. There is only one thing for us to do, and that is to sit down and figure out how much a meal costs. Then when we fast on fast day from two meals, let's give back to God the offering. The thing I like about him is that he doesn't keep it when we give it back to him. He turns it right back into the business. He gives it right back to the blessing of his children who are in need, and so I am going to suggest here this coming year we pay an honest fast offering.

I had dinner in a stake president's home in Idaho. My, they had a huge roast on the table. I said, "How much did you pay for that roast?" He said, "Seven dollars and a half." I said, "How much fast offering do you pay?" He said, "I refuse to answer."

Now I think that would help us all out if we paid an honest fast offering. I know one thing it would do for us. We would eat more on the Saturday before fast day, and then we would figure out the cost of our breakfast the next morning as just a little bowl of Wheaties or something, skimmed milk, and then the main meal, a bowl of poi which we got for nothing from the welfare project. Then we would pay our offering accordingly. That's the way we try to figure things out, isn't it?

You know in Salt Lake and in Davis county last year, we lost ninety percent of our fruit by the frost. You know we can't control the weather, but you know who does. So when I was in Davis county, I told the people, "I see where you have lost ninety percent of your fruit crop up here this year. How do you like it? God took ninety percent this year and left you ten percent." That's what he did. They didn't throw it away. God took it. They had ten percent. Up in Ogden at one of their stakes there, I was reading their annual report. When I got down to the welfare projects, it said we lost all the fruit; but the raspberries were saved. Well, I thought that was going pretty far, for God to take all of their fruit and then give them the raspberries. But he can do it, you know. He can do it if he wants to. In southern Utah last Sunday we had special prayers and fasts so that God might open the windows of heaven and send down the blessings—moisture, rain or snow in the mountains. They are having a drought there in the wintertime, unless their prayers have already been answered since I left, and they probably have.

You know God is a pretty fine Father. We will fast and pray when we have to, and generally he listens. I don't know why when we spend only sixty-five cents a year on fast offering and $26.00 for liquor. Yet he will still listen to the prayers of the people.

You know, we never know who is going to be poor. None of us knows. You never know when we are going to need the help of God, and when we do need it, it should be available for us by the obedience of the people to the principles of the gospel.

Charity used to be a beautiful word, but now it has a different connotation. We think of it as something that we resent—the idea of being on charity. We should look up to the people in this Church who are the worthy poor and who are receiving the blessings they are entitled to. We shouldn't look down upon them. We should look up to them, because they should receive that which they are worthy of. Even if they are not worthy, they are ours, and we have to bless them if they need help.

Now, you haven't had difficulty down here in the Oahu Stake of not caring for your own because of your fast offerings, but don't say it can't happen to you. Don't ever say that. Be prepared. Always be prepared, and so when the deacons come around to your homes on fast Sunday morning, you sit down with the Lord. You sit on one side of the table—he will be there with you, Hawaiians, not with us haoles—but with you; you just sit down on one side of the table, and he will be on the other side. You say to him, "Now let's see, this is what I generally eat, and it costs this much. When your deacon comes around holding the priesthood, I will see that he gets it." When that happens, you know God gives it right back to you. He is a wonderful partner, isn't he? He is wonderful. My, how I would like to have a partner like him in life. I would like to be in business with somebody like him, have my partner come up to me and say, "Here, I'll furnish all the capital to start the business. I will furnish all the blessings. Then, you look after the business. Don't forget me. When the increase comes, you keep ninety percent, turn over to me ten percent. You use your ninety percent any way you want to, and I'll put my ten percent right back into the business." My, wouldn't that be wonderful? That's just the kind of partner we have in this Church. We keep the ninety percent and use it anyway we wish, sometimes to our destruction. We give him the ten percent, and here stands a temple; here stands a tabernacle. He puts it all right back into the business, into his business. God will finance this Church, brothers and sisters, if you will obey the principles of the gospel, and you will never be called upon to make a donation for anything—for a building or a temple or any other things. For a welfare project you would never be called upon if you obey the principles of the gospel—God's plan of economy!

I think in the days of Israel, they never even had taxes. All they had was God's plan: ten percent—that took care of everything even to the providing of the welfare and the sustenance of the priesthood, the Levitical priesthood, which didn't produce well, and so the others who paid their ten percent could take care of the priesthood.

Down in Tonga they don't have any taxes. They don't owe anybody in the world a penny. In their little kingdom down there, whenever a child is born, it receives eight acres of good ground. They don't wait until the parent dies down there and then fight over the estate. The child gets its inheritance when it is born. I think there is a reason why they have those blessings because they keep the Sabbath day holy! I suppose it is the only place in the world where everyone keeps the Sabbath day holy. It is in their Constitution. The seventh article of their Constitution says, "The Sabbath day shall be kept sacred forever in the kingdom of Tonga; there shall be neither work nor play on the Sabbath." On Sunday down there the wealthy man's yachts are out in the harbor anchored, and the poor people's canoes are up on the shore. The clotheslines behind the huts have no clothing hanging on them. If there is any washing after midnight on Saturday hanging on the line, the people are jailed or fined. Remember that, sisters, when you get up early Sunday morning to wash something out before you go to church. The only thing they can do down there on Sunday is go to church or stay inside of their own home. They mostly go to church.

I think God likes those people. Wouldn't it be wonderful to be where they don't have any taxes? Well, you can't get in down there, don't try. People are trying. When I talked to the prime minister, Mr. Reta, since passed away, he said that lots of the people in Britain wanted to come to Tonga. He said, "We are not going to let them in." I said, "Why not? You are a British protectorate. They are a great people." He said, "Oh, yes. They came here one hundred years ago, and they brought us God—their God, and we accepted him. They brought us Jesus Christ, and we accepted him. We still have them, but if we let those people in now, they would take away that which they brought us a hundred years ago, and they will take Christ away which they brought a hundred years ago. That's what they are doing over there and everywhere else in the world, destroying the God which we have accepted from them." So it is a good thing to keep the Sabbath day holy. You can't stop the Sabbath day from coming around, can you? It comes every seventh day. You can't stop it. It continues coming and going.

I may not be modern, but I still believe in the word of God. Let us continue, brothers and sisters, in all faithfulness, in all humility. Be active in your Church. If there are those here who don't belong to the Church, I admonish you to be active in your own church. If you don't know the doctrine of your church, study it. You can't be saved in idleness. The gospel of Christ is a gospel of work, of effort, of suffering. He was the example. You can't be saved by leaving your salvation to the minister who occupies the pulpit. Christ's gospel is universal. His priesthood is not a profession. It is not for the educated or the learned. It is not for those who go to ecclesiastical seminaries to be trained. It's for those who are called.

As Jesus went along the shore of Galilee, he saw humble fishermen, unschooled—the rough and tumble type of humanity; he saw them as they cast in their nets, and he said, "Come, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." They followed him, and then he said, "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. You have not chosen the ministry as a profession, but I have called you from your profesfessions to be fishers of men."

They tarried at Jerusalem until the Holy Ghost came, and then they went abroad baptizing by immersion, laying their hands upon those who were baptized, and giving them the gift of the Holy Ghost. That's what it says. I am simple enough to believe that.

I like that kind of thinking. That makes it possible for me, an insignificant person, to be called. That makes the priesthood universal so that you who sit in the congregation—you men and boys—can hold the priesthood of God, be saviors in your homes with your own families. I like that. I am glad I have something to do about my salvation. I am glad that my salvation doesn't depend upon the President of this Church, that it doesn't depend upon the President but that it depends upon me—my own personal life, my own personal obedience to the principles of life and salvation. Without that I cannot be saved. I must work, and you must work hard. You get nothing in this life unless you work if you are believers in sound and fundamental principles. If you have forgotten those, you may get a lot for nothing, and I want to tell you people who belong to this Church just as President Woolley has said, your temporal salvation, your temporal welfare, as well as your spiritual welfare is the problem of the Church to which you belong and not the problem of the government of the United States of America or the territory of Hawaii. If we don't have within this Church the ways and means for saving one another temporally and giving each other material security, then this is not the power of God unto salvation.

We don't believe in mixing the Church with the state. How often we hear that! Neither do I believe in the state assuming the responsibilities which belong to the church. That is wrong, so we must get back to that old fundamental concept that I am my brother's keeper. I am my brother's keeper. It can be done. If it can't then we are wrong, but we are not wrong; we are right and God will provide and is providing through the agencies which he has established upon the earth the temporal salvation for his children who follow his way of life. You know that as well as I.

I don't want to talk longer, but I leave with you my testimony, my witness that I know with all my heart that this is true. Sometimes there are those who tell us we brag because we say we have the truth. It may be bragging, but it is a sincere conviction, and I only wish that every person could stand upon his feet no matter what church he belongs to and say that he has the truth and that he can point to the book when it is open and convince others that he has the truth. If he can't do that, all I can say is "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find," (Matt. 7:7.) Pray, and God will reveal unto you in your heart where the truth is and after all, that is what we all want, the truth. That is our great objective in life: to find the truth and the truth will make us free.

God bless you brothers and sisters in your stake, in you organizations of the stake here. Your stake is growing. It won't be many years until there will be two stakes right here on this island, probably one on the windward side and one on this side. I don't know how these things happen, but these stakes of Zion grow like mushrooms; and when you divide one, it seems as if there are more people come to the halves that have been divided than came before they were divided. That's the way the work goes ahead, so you people be worthy. Let's be worthy of the land we have. The day will not be far off when instead of having those 6000 acres under cultivation by a sugar company, the bay will be under cultivation by the people of the Church for their security and for the building up of the kingdom of God. It is yours. The prophets of God purchased it for a purpose, and it is only because we are not worthy sometimes that those purposes are not fully realized.

Be worthy. I hope to live to see the day when my Maori people down there in New Zealand will have a little village out there with a beautiful Maori carved house. Oh, how they could teach you Hawaiians how to do beautiful carving and wonderful decorative work in their meetinghouses. The Tongans will have a little village out there, and the Tahitians and Samoans already have a good start—all these islanders of the sea! I know what President McKay thought when he saw the windward side one day, he thought from the Pauli down that side—he said, "I hope to see the day when our people will be all along here, living along here." Well, we will have hundreds of them and thousands.

We will have other stakes in this group of islands, and more than one right here on Oahu. Don't forget that because we grow! You can't stay the hand of God, and if you live your religion, you will get more than you ever anticipate. You Hawaiians, Japanese, and Orientals who belong to the Church, if you live the gospel of Jesus Christ, you are the finest-living people morally, spiritually, and physically that can be found anywhere in the world because your religion provides for moral cleanliness, spiritual growth, physical development. Aspire to become the great exemplar of the gospel of Jesus Christ in saving and regenerating human souls from every angle and viewpoint.

I know that God lives; I know that Jesus is the Christ; I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, that every word he uttered in prophecy which has not already been fulfilled will be fulfilled because God appointed him and raised him up to stand at the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times when all things which have been uttered by the mouths of the prophets from the beginning of time will be fulfilled. I know that with all my heart. I love you people with all my heart. Anything I can do for you at any time either here or at home don't hesitate to call on me whether you be Saints or whether you be sinners, and if you be sinners, come along and visit with me. We are kindred spirits. I will understand you. You will put your arm around me, and I will put my arm around you, and we will lift each other up together and help one another.

God be with you and bless the presidency of the stake and all the auxiliary organizations and the bishoprics of wards and the people. God bless the people. Bless this beautiful country that it may flourish and prosper and the problems which are arising here from day to day, the industrial problems, that they may be solved; and God will bless these islands, if on them there are a few who are righteous, just as he promised Sodom and Gomorrah if there were ten righteous, he would save the whole city. You people be righteous, and the future of Hawaii is secure. God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
