Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Earning the Right to Brag

Address at Logan stake conference, fall of 1953.

GOOD EVENING, my brothers and sisters and friends. I am very grateful for the opportunity I have of being with you this night. I am grateful for the testimonies we have listened to in song and words. We are a very peculiar people, we Latter-day Saints. I think we are about the greatest braggers. I have never heard such bragging in all my life as comes from the mouths of the members of this Church. We stand up and say we know we have the full truth. We have the fulness of the gospel, that our Church is the only true Church in all the world. My, isn't that wonderful bragging? They say a rooster has the right to crow if it has the right spurs to back it up. So I guess we have the right to brag if we have the evidence to back up our bragging.

But, after all, my brothers and sisters, this business of religion isn't a matter only for the minister, only for the priest. It concerns every individual, and every individual should have the conviction of the truthfulness of what he professes to believe. He should have a good reason for the hope that is within him. If he doesn't have a good reason for the hope that is within him, then his religion isn't worth much to him. So, as members of our Church we generally have a few reasons for the hope that is within us. Many of us go abroad in the earth and teach the gospel, hundreds of us, thousands of us, and we go because we are called. We don't go because we choose the ministry as a profession—no, we go because we are called. So we have a great advantage over most of the other churches in that the membership of the Church is called into service, called into the ministry. That's the way Christ did it. His disciples didn't come to him and say, "Now, Lord, I've decided to prepare myself for the ministry. I am going to work for you." No, they didn't do that. They were going about their business, their vocations in life—fishermen, tax collectors, etc. Then he came along, and he called them, and he said, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you . . . ." (John 15:16.)

Now, we have a right to brag about that because that is our system. We have not chosen him, but he chooses us and calls us. We are sent forth. Now, it was never my plan in life to be a minister of religion. I studied to be a lawyer; and I have been called into doing this business—not of my own choice. No, I would just as soon practise law, but a call came and said, "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." (Matt.5:19.) I had to drop my profession. I had a hard time becoming a lawyer. I had to work my way through school. It was a real struggle, and I hadn't practised law very long until I had to drop the whole thing—give it all up. I was sent to the islands of the sea to do missionary work. When I came back home, I was hoping I could go into the law profession again. I got back home, and I was called into this for life, at least during good behavior. So here I am. I don't have any choice in the matter. Now, wouldn't you think that I was absolutely crazy if I did this without having an inward conviction that what I am doing is right? I certainly think I am crazy if I don't believe this is right.

So this business of having an inward conviction is certainly right, isn't it? We have heard about God tonight—that he created man in his own image. Male and female created he them in his own image. Now, we have a conviction that that's right. We don't only have the conviction, but we have the evidence so we can brag about it. When the Bible is open, man is in the image of God. When the Bible is closed, he has neither body, parts, or passions. He is so large that he fills the universe, and so small that he enters into the hearts of man. When the Bible's open, Christ is the Son of God. They are not one Being, but they are two distinct Beings, and the Holy Ghost is a separate Being, a Personage of Spirit. That's when the Bible's open. When it's closed, God is the Father; God is the Son; God is the Holy Ghost. The Son is the Father; the Son is the Son; the Son is the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is the Father; the Holy Ghost is the Son; the Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost. Red is blue; blue is black; black is white; and they are all yellow. That's when the Bible's closed. When the Bible is open, Christ is the Son of God as has been stated here. Stephen saw him standing on the right hand of his father. When Jesus came up out of the water having been baptized by John, the voice of the Father came from heaven, and what did that voice say, "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." Not one being, but two separate and distinct beings! That's when it is opened. When the Bible is closed, eight-day-old infants are sprinkled. They call it baptism, but it isn't baptism. Baptism means to plunge or immerse. When the Bible is closed, babies are baptized or sprinkled. When the Bible is opened, they have to believe before they are baptized. The last injunction of the Master to his disciples was, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15-16.) An infant doesn't even know what is being done to him when it is sprinkled, has no conception of it, can't even recall it in later years. Besides that, the Master said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God," (Ibid., 10:14) and no one on earth has a right to forbid an innocent child from going into the kingdom of heaven. But when the Bible is closed, that's necessary in some churches. Of course, in other churches baptism isn't necessary at all when the Bible is closed.

I was reading one day not long ago the life of Harry Emerson Fosdick. He said that when he was offered the pulpit of that great church on Fifth Avenue in New York he would take it on one condition: That no one would have to be baptized to become a member of his congregation. That's when the Bible is closed, it says that. When the Bible is open, even the Son of God had to be baptized. John didn't want to baptize him, but Christ said, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matt. 3:15.) And he suffered him, and he went down into the water and was baptized by John. Now, if it were necessary for the Son of God, the Lamb without a blemish, the only perfect Being that ever lived to be baptized to fulfil all righteousness, how in the name of heaven can a sinning individual such as you and I fulfil all righteousness without being baptized? So when the Bible is open, baptism is necessary. "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) That's when it is open.

Now, of course the Bible is full of words of life and salvation. The only trouble is, we keep it closed, and then we get these other ideas into our heads. You know it is said that God scattered Israel because they broke the covenant, and he scattered them all over the world to the four corners thereof. Then he made a promise. He said, "As I have scattered you, so I will gather you." (See Neh. 1:8-9.) The only people in all the world who are going out to gather Israel and bring them into a oneness of faith are the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. You know God said through Isaiah, "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it." (Isa. 2:2.) Now that was a prophecy of something to come to pass in the last days. Where are the temples in the tops of the mountains to which all nations have come? Right here [in Logan], Salt Lake City, and other places in these mountains, and the people who come to these temples come from all nations of the earth. My, it is wonderful to brag! What did he say to Ezekiel, "Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

"And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand." (Ezek. 37:16-17.)

Where is the stick of Judah? Where is the record of Judah? Here it is—the Holy Bible, the record of Judah, the history of Judah, past, present, and future. If you don't believe in the Bible, study the history of the Jew in the past, at present, and then read your Bible; and you will see there the history of the Jew past, present, and future as it has actually taken place and will actually take place—the stick of Judah!

Now where is the stick of Joseph which is to be joined to the stick of Judah and become one in the hand of God for all the house of Israel? Who claims to have that stick? The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we have the record. You can't deny its existence. There it is: feel it, see it, read it. It is the story of Joseph and his descendants. You know back in Genesis it said, "Joseph is a fruitful bough . . . whose branches run over the wall: . . . unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills." (Gen. 49:22, 26.) This is the record of Joseph, the people who dwelled upon this American continent of whom the Indians are descendants. These branches came over the wall, and these two have become one in the hand of God. The only divine record in existence which is a witness of the divinity of the Holy Bible is the Book of Mormon, and the witness of the divinity of the Book of Mormon is the Holy Bible. "Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it . . . then take another stick, and write upon it . . . and these two shall become one in thine hand." That is in the Bible when it is open. When it is closed, only the Bible is sufficient, and then it is only sufficient when it is closed, not when it is open.

Oh, you can go on through there. In Malachi, the prophecy reads, "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:

"And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Mal. 4:5-6.) Where is this Elijah which was to come and turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers? Who claims that he has come? The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has the evidence that he has actually come. The fact the hearts of us the children have been turned to our parents; and their hearts have been turned to us; therefore we go into the temples of God and do the work for those who have not received this light.

Do you remember when Christ was on the cross, and he said to that thief who wanted to be with him, who wanted to be remembered: "Today shalt thou be with me"? (Luke 23:43.) We are the only people in the world who can say that, and when we go into the temples of God and we do that work for departed persons just as that thief died and was with the Master after, we can say that this day shalt thou be with me. And this gospel and its blessings are offered maybe to a thief, to maybe an unfortunate person who has died without the light and the knowledge of God's plan of salvation.

Oh, you can go all the way through. In Revelation, John lived on the Isle of Patmos; after Peter had died, there was still an Apostle of Christ living. On the Isle of Patmos there are some who claim that the gospel has never been taken from the earth, that it has been preserved, but this Apostle of the Master on the Isle of Patmos looked over the horizon of time and what did he see? He said, ". . . I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel. . . ." (Rev. 14:6.) Now it wouldn't be necessary to have another angel bring the everlasting gospel if it was never to be taken away, but he said, ". . . having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him . . . and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the seas, and the fountains of waters. . . ." (Ibid. v. 7.) Where is this angel that was to fly through the midst of heaven? Who claims that any such angel has ever flown through the midst of heaven? Only you great braggers—you are the ones. You claim it, and the best evidence you have that he did come through the midst of heaven is that you have the gospel as it was taught by Christ himself. That is the best evidence that that angel has come.

Oh, we could go on. So we do stand up and brag, don't we? You know we say in this gospel that the gospel will be preached unto all nations. Then shall the end come. That's what Christ said. How are you going to do it—you little handful of people? We have barely touched China. I don't suppose we have had a hundred Chinese members of this Church out of 465 million that are living now over there. We haven't touched India. We haven't touched Russia. Hundreds and hundreds of millions! Well, it doesn't say they all have to be converted. It says this gospel shall be preached as a witness, then shall the end come. How are you going to do it? Just a little handful of people? It's very simple, very simple, just through a salt shaker like this, that's all! I sit in the Tabernacle at conference time. A year or so ago I looked down—I was thinking about this—and right there on the first row in our Tabernacle sat a man who could speak Chinese, others who could speak Japanese, others who could speak Russian and French, others who could speak Italian, others who could speak all the languages of the islands of the sea, and right from that one pulpit the gospel of the kingdom can be preached as a witness unto all nations. One day there will be channels under the control of the Church whereby they can direct this message, this witness, unto any nation they desire, and it can be carried through the channels of the air in the very language of the people to whom the message is addressed. Oh, brothers and sisters, don't think you have to be a great Church, a large Church.

Now we have those in the Church who are married to those out of the Church. I dare say that those companions that don't belong to the Church are better Latter-day Saints than some of their companions who do belong to the Church. I have seen that, but if you know a member of the Church, a woman, for instance, who has a husband who doesn't belong, tell her not to preach to him. My, we men are stubborn! Just let us feel our own way alone. If your wife isn't a member and the husband is, that's worse. Don't ever mention it to her. She is more stubborn than the man. Just let her go.

I had two friends about my age, in New Zealand on my first mission. We were very close together. When I went out on my second mission, they were both married men. They both told me the same story. They said, "Oh, Tumuaki, we hate to tell you this, but we married out of the Church." I said, "Oh, is that so? Well, are you preaching to your wives?" "That's all we do is preach to them." I said, "Lay off, brothers; you are just keeping them out. Don't ever mention the gospel to them again. Don't even mention your religion to them again. Just keep 'mum' about it. You'll find out something will happen."

Within a year both those wives joined the Church. One of the husbands called me up at three o'clock in the morning, and he said, "The strangest thing has happened." "What is it?" I asked. He said, "My wife just woke me up a few minutes ago and said, 'Jim, I think I had better join the Church.' All these years I have been preaching to her and bearing my testimony, I wasn't getting anywhere, but just as soon as I shut up, she started thinking about it.'" It is wonderful, isn't it? I am telling you, brothers and sisters, we do have something to offer to married couples. We really do. You know what that is, don't you?

God is eternal. God is love. Therefore love is eternal. Marriage is the sweetest expression of love; therefore marriage is eternal. Now we offer to married couples the eternity of marriage—not until death do you part, but for time and all eternity. You know marriage is a beautiful adventure. But if you are married for eternity, there is one adventure more beautiful than marriage, and that's your death. Not even death can destroy the bonds of that eternal love. One may go first, surely, bringing sorrow to those left behind, but when the other one comes along, the line of death has not destroyed that bond of miracle love, and it goes on through eternity. After all, true love is where we are both looking in the same direction, right down through eternity, not one off one way and one off another way. That is what we have to offer.

You know I had an experience out in one part of the state here. I couldn't stay in the stake president's home because of sickness, and so the president of the Relief Society insisted that I go to her home. I thought that was wonderful. The lovely-looking Relief Society president and I went to her home with her, and we went inside. There sat a fine-looking man at the table playing a game with his children. I had never met him. His wife took me over and introduced us. She said, "You know, there is only one thing wrong with my husband." I said, "What is that?" She said, "He doesn't belong to the Church." So I said to him, "Hey, what's the idea? You're not supposed to be having home night with your children! That is our program. You don't belong to the Church. You are not supposed to be doing that." I was just kidding him along, you know. We got in quite a conversation. He said, "You know, I can't question the doctrine of your Church. Oh, I have studied it, and I have read the Bible, and I can't argue against the doctrine of your Church. It is right. But I go to fast meetings sometimes, and of all the silly, ridiculous things I ever heard in my life, are the fast meetings of the Mormon Church." I said, "What's that?" He said, "Those people actually get up and say, 'I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.' That's just silly." I said, "Do you think so?" He said, "Yes, that's ridiculous." I said, "Well, I'll tell you what you do. You get baptized, and the next fast meeting you go to you will be confirmed a member of the Church. Then if you have enough nerve, you will stand up on your feet, and you will say the silliest thing you have ever said in all your life."

A year and a half later I received a message from him. He said, "I've been thinking about what you said. Next Tuesday we are all coming into the temple." I opened my eyes. I hadn't heard that he had joined the Church. He said, "You know, six months after you were out here, my eighteen-year-old boy was ordained a priest. I got to thinking about it, and I went to him, and I said, 'My boy, you go to the bishop and get permission to baptize your dad.' That's the fastest running I have ever seen in my life. He got permission, and he baptized me. The next fast meeting I went to, I was confirmed a member of the Church. I mustered up enough courage to stand upon my feet, and I said the most ridiculous thing I have ever said in all my life. I said, 'I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.' Now we are all coming in next Tuesday." It was the year of all that snow; the trains were blocked. He said, "We are all coming into the temple, and we want you to be there." Well, I was there. We went into that room, and he and his wife knelt at the altar with their hands joined, and they were sealed for time and all eternity. Then we went out and brought in all those youngsters, and they knelt around the altar, and their hands joined with their parents, and there was that eighteen-year-old boy that was responsible for the whole thing. They were all sealed for time and for all eternity. The father is in the bishopric now. Last year I met his son back in the eastern states. He is preaching the gospel to his father's relatives in Pennsylvania. His father is an oil man. He came out to range the oil fields. He is well-to-do, yet he is standing up and saying that silly thing. He has turned into being one of the greatest braggers I ever saw in all my life.

Well, is there anything wrong with that? Is there anything wrong with that man and his wife joining hands through all eternity looking in the same direction and with those children sealed to them under an eternal covenant? Of course not. That's God's way. When Adam was in the Garden of Eden, he was not mortal. Death was not contemplated. When he was in that condition, God said, "It isn't good for man to be alone" and gave him an immortal woman as his companion as his wife, and neither of them being mortal that relationship was for eternity. There was no divorce contemplated, no death contemplated at that time. So when the Bible is open, brothers and sisters, marriage is for eternity. That which is sealed on earth is sealed in heaven.

Now, I know that these things are true. I love to brag. Now, we must be kind, we must be charitable, we are all our Father's children. We must have the utmost respect for each other's faith. We must not tear down the house unless we can build a better one, and so we must go about as members of the Church teaching this gospel more by our lives than by our words. The greatest obstacle we have in missionary work in this Church is our own people who are not living the gospel. They are the greatest obstacles we have. That doesn't destroy the gospel. That only destroys the individual. We all know and everybody will admit that if a Mormon lives his religion, he is as good a man as can possibly live on earth, morally, spiritually, physically, and in every other way. No one will deny that. He may say we are silly for living that way.

One fellow I know had taken up drinking. I go to the Alcoholics Anonymous a lot, you know. I said, "If you drink like that, you won't live half as long." He said, "What's the difference? I'll see twice as much."

We make our mistakes. We are all human. There are an awful lot of people in this Church who are not living right; but there is always the gospel of repentance, and some of those people who may not be any good now, may be your stake presidency in a few years from now. This old principle of repentance catches up with them. Repentance and forgiveness, my, they are beautiful principles! I love those two principles.

Well, God bless us, brothers and sisters. I appreciate your kindness, your association of this night, and the testimonies that I have heard. May the peace of heaven abide with you in your homes. May you have joy and happiness. May you understand one another, appreciate each other in your companionship with husband and wives and with your children. God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
