Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Maintain Your Heritage

Address given at Bern, Idaho, September 16, 1951

IAM INDEED grateful, my brothers and sisters, for the opportunity I have of coming here this evening and worshiping with you in this beautiful chapel. It is a great privilege for me to come here to Bern.

As I was reading the program, I was wondering how many descendants are here tonight of John Kunz the second, who came here in 1875 in answer to a call from President Brigham Young. How many of you here tonight are descendants of John Kunz the second? Please raise your hands. How many of you here tonight are married into the Kunz family?

This is one of the finest families I've ever seen in this Church, and I think there has never been a better family in the history of this Church than the Kunz family. I haven't known a great deal about them, except as I have met one or two in the mission field, and in my experiences today. What a wonderful thing it is to be worthy descendants of a worthy and noble ancestor. Of course, we must include the great woman who stood by his side.

I wonder how many descendants of John Kunz the second are out of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: I doubt if there are any—there may be one or two weak ones, I don't know—the law of averages would indicate, of course, that there were. You people are blessed in this community because of the integrity of the Kunz family—and when I mention the Kunz family, I mention all the others who have come here to live in these environments—you are all susceptible, and have been, to the great inspiration and impressions that have come from this great name.

Now, I was going to suggest that what I should do here tonight is not only dedicate the chapel, but also dedicate you people to the service of God: but as I think about it, there is no necessity for me to dedicate you people to the service of God—you have dedicated yourselves to his service, and that is more important than the dedication of this building. This is just a building, constructed by the hand of man—for God's purposes, of course, but you are God's children, and in dedicating your lives to him, that dedication dedicates this building. And it wouldn't matter how spiritual the dedicatory prayer might be, or how inspirational it might be; that is not nearly so important as the inspiration in your lives, and the spirituality of your lives.

So, brothers and sisters, continue to honor the name of the first pioneer to these beautiful environments. Continue down through the generations yet unborn, the great devotion, the great pioneer spirit which was exemplified and so well manifested in the lives of those who first came here. Remember that one of the most important things in religious life in our Church is the partaking of the sacrament. And as I think about that, there come into my mind the paintings I have seen of the manger where Christ was born as a babe in Bethlehem. He was born in a stable. Some painters have depicted it on canvas as beautiful—in a sense, a rugged beauty, open and airy—but I think they haven't depicted it truthfully—it was a stable of animal filth. There was nowhere else for the expectant mother to go to deliver her child, so she went to a barn, and there the child was placed in a manger. And what happened?

Just in the presence of that newborn babe there was sanctity, divinity; he couldn't speak yet, but that barn became a Holy of Holies. And there came there to worship that babe not only the shepherds from the hills, the great, natural temples of God, but also the wise men from palaces; and when they came, they went inside that stable to bow before that babe, and to worship him who was to be the Redeemer of mankind; and the wise men brought their presents.

Now this is the point I want to bring out, brothers and sisters: When we come into our chapels, not stables, but chapels such as this, with beautiful appointments—clean—we come before the sacrament board, not of the Babe of Bethlehem, but before Christ, and all of his consummate glory and divinity—King of kings, and Lord of lords—the Savior of mankind. What I would like to impress upon you at this time is the necessity of coming before the sacrament board actuated by a spirit of worship. Do not come into your beautiful chapel to partake of the sacrament and renew your covenants without a spirit of worship in your hearts because when a deacon who holds the priesthood of God brings you the emblems of the sacrament table, he is bringing you the Christ. "This do in remembrance of me." (Luke 22:19.)

And when you are partaking of those emblems in this beautiful chapel, let your minds be here and upon the service of the hour, not out in the fields, not over the hills, not along the streams where the fish abound, nor in the mountains where the deer roam. Let your minds be here and concentrated upon the things of God. How few of us partake of the sacrament with the right spirit—our minds wandering. How much better we would be if every time we reached forth to partake of these emblems we would be thinking upon the life, the sacrifice, the death, the resurrection of our elder Brother who was born in a stable.

Honor this building, brothers and sisters, by bringing into it a spirit of worship. Don't come into it to hear a sermon; come into it to worship. Too many people in the Church don't go to Church unless there is a well-known speaker to occupy the pulpit. When some of those who are known as the best speakers of the Church are visitors to the wards, you can't get into the building. But on other occasions when there are just ward members or stake missionaries to do the speaking, some of our chapels are almost empty. Why? Because too many do not come to Church, to partake of the sacrament with a spirit of worship in their hearts.

Sanctify these walls and this assembly room, this chapel, with your worship, and be not actuated by a desire to see what each other is wearing or to make it a place of social contact. Sometimes I think we are the least reverent of people in our Church. Sometimes I feel that there's less reverence in the Church of the Latter-day Saints than in the cathedrals of the Catholics, the tabernacles of the Baptists, the chapels of the Methodists, and yet, we are the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! Have reverence for your building. Oh, I don't say not to visit in it; it's good to be sociable, but don't desecrate it with frivolous sociability.

It's a place we are presenting to God as an abiding place for his Spirit. Let us always consider it as such.

We are a Church-building people. I suppose we have under course of construction right now in the Church upwards of four hundred chapels. We have more than a million people come to the temple grounds every year. My, what sermons those buildings preach to those people! They are told about Brigham Young coming to the temple site there within a day or two after the arrival of the pioneers, and placing his cane in the ground, and saying: "Here we will build a temple to our God." And on that day there was only one lone tree growing in the entire valley—the soil was sun-baked; it was a God-forsaken desert. There were no prospects as far as man's vision was concerned of any means of survival in those valleys; and yet this man of God said, "Here we will build a temple," and there the temple stands, and a tabernacle, which was built when there were not nearly enough people to fill it. There were no facilities in the building for heating it; and there were not enough people going there to Church to keep each other warm; so they built the Assembly Hall on the same block. They built the Tabernacle for the future. Now, it's even outgrown the future, and it isn't large enough for those who attend our general conferences, but those buildings are the center of the greatest mission we have in the Church today. Over one million people come to inquire about our faith. We are not going to them, but they are coming to us; and so there is great virtue in these buildings, great sermons in the buildings themselves; and the little story we have heard about this building makes it a sermon, a sermon of co-operative efforts, contributed labor, faith, and ambitious purpose. My—how we can use some of that in the world today. Two dollars a day for labor on this building! Two-hundred dollars for 20,000 feet of cut timber! Why—I could build an empire with a group of laborers who would work at that rate of pay, and furnish the materials at that cost.

How times have changed, as Bishop Kunz suggested. One man contributes 100 days of labor, another 25, and so on. Now, we have our hats and coats on, and are ready to run when the four o'clock bell sounds, or the four o'clock whistle blows, and we do less and less, and expect to get more and more, for doing less and less. So, we have building problems. We have material problems. The history of this Church is different. Within a week after the pioneers came to Salt Lake, the city was surveyed, and in less than a month, there were twenty-seven buildings. They had housing problems. What did they do about it? They built houses. They built houses with the materials they had at hand, and when they didn't have work at hand, what did they do? They built that wall around the temple block, so that there wouldn't be idleness. What a world we'd have today with that kind of work. Men were industrious, and were building when they had nothing else to do.

God bless you, brothers and sisters, in this wonderful ward, this beautiful site. It's a wonderful landscape from the situation of this building here, and a more glorious sight I have never seen. So, I pray that God will be with you, that you will prosper here, because of your faithfulness, your obedience to the principles of the gospel. I bless you, that you may never want for the necessities of life, that your soil will produce, that your flocks will increase, and that health and vitality will be your portion, and it will, if you continue faithful, and true, and devoted to the great heritage which is yours, as descendants of one of God's noblemen, who gave a listening ear to the request of a prophet of God to come here and settle. The spirit of that man is here. It will hover about this building. You will keep him alive through yourselves and your children and your children's children if you will continue to walk steadfast in the path which he prepared here before you. He came to prepare the way. Follow, my brothers and sisters, in the way which he prepared, and God will not withhold the blessings which you need. I leave my witness with you, that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that God sought out your ancestors, and mine, from faraway lands, and brought them here to establish their feet solidly upon this western land, and that we might grow, and prosper, and by our obedience be saved, and exalted, in the celestial presence of our Father in heaven.

May we so live, that that will be our boon, and our blessing. I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
