Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The Dedicatory Prayer

For the Bern, Idaho, meetinghouse, September 16, 1951.

OUR FATHER who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. We are grateful this night, holy Father, for the blessings which thou hast given unto us. We are grateful for the restoration of the gospel of thy Son, in this dispensation, and for him whom thou didst raise up to be the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and whom thou didst grant the privilege of sealing his testimony of thee with his blood. We thank thee for the establishment of thy Church and kingdom upon the earth. We thank thee for its growth and for its development. We thank thee for thy Saints, who have gone, as they have been called to go to various parts of the nation, and especially in this western area, to establish themselves, to build the integrity of their families, to create wards and stakes of thy Zion.

We thank thee, Father, for those who came to this spot, who came here to settle, not because they wished it in and of themselves, but because they sustained thy servant as thy prophet, and they knew that in listening to him that they were complying with thy will, and that they could not fail. Holy Father, we are grateful for their fortitude, for their devotion, for their love of truth, for their knowledge that thou wouldst bless, as they did deserve, and that thou didst breathe into the soil of this place the breath of life, that it would produce and sustain those who would come here to serve thee, and keep thy commandments. We thank thee for the integrity of the families who have settled here. May that integrity be preserved. We thank thee for those who have gone forth from this ward to the mission fields of the earth to carry the gospel of glad tidings to thy children, in the nations of Europe, and on this continent, and to the islands of the sea. Grant, holy Father, that they will be rewarded for the service they have rendered.

We thank thee for those who dwell here now, within the boundaries of this ward. We thank thee for their love, not only for each other, but also for the stranger within their gates, for their generosity, for their goodness. Holy Father, vouchsafe unto them the security which they deserve in these times of trial. We thank thee, Father, for this building which has been erected as a place of worship. We thank thee for the labor which has been contributed to the construction of it. We thank thee for those who have made donations, whether they belong to the Church or whether they are friends. Bless them for the contributions they have unselfishly given.

And now, Father, we have assembled in this house, as thy children, to present it unto thee as a place of worship. May all who enter herein have thy spirit as the actuating force in their lives. May none enter here to scoff or scorn, and if they do, may they stay to worship, and may there sink into their hearts the Spirit which will dwell here, and may they recognize through that Spirit, the divinity of thy work. We ask thee to bless this building as we present it unto thee as a place wherein the children of the community may be taught the principles of truth and righteousness. Bless the teachers in the classrooms. May there never be a teacher within the classrooms of this building who does not have a testimony of the divinity of the work which thou hast restored to the earth as thy plan of salvation and regeneration. Bless the children who come to the classes, that they may acquire a knowledge of the gospel from the standard works and revealed word of thy Church and of thy Son.

We ask thee to bless those who preside in this ward, and who will conduct the services in this chapel, the bishop, his counselors. May they be one, Father, in their service and their ministry, and in being one, we know that they will be thine, and therefore, privileged to officiate under the inspiration of thy will and be the recipients of revelation from thee, pertaining to all of the work they are assigned to do.

Bless the people that they may come here to serve thee, that they may come to keep their coveenants in force, by partaking of the sacrament. And may they come often, and may thy Spirit be here, and may they, when they partake of these emblems, be willing to take upon themselves the name of thy Son, and above all to keep the commandments which thou hast given them.

Father, we dedicate this building unto thee. We ask thee to bless it and preserve it from the foundation to the roof. Bless all the beautiful appointments herein. Bless all that pertains to it. Preserve it from the elements. Preserve it from vandalism. Father, grant that it may only become old by use, and inspire the people to use it, and to use it well.

We present it unto thee, our Father in heaven, and ask thee to let thy Spirit be in, and abide here always and, Father, we ask thee to bless the homes of the people in this ward. May they bring righteousness from their homes into this chapel; because unless there is thy Spirit in their homes, unless they are obedient to the principles of the gospel as family units, in their abodes, they cannot bring into this holy house, and chapel, the spirit of worship. We are grateful for their devotion and for their homes, Father. May they be preserved, as we ask this building to be preserved.

Father in heaven, we ask thee to bless this ward, that it may flourish, that it may prosper. Bless this stake of Zion, that it may grow, and Father, cleanse this stake of Zion from all influences, which are contrary to the spirit of the saving power of the gospel of thy Son.

Bless us all with testimonies of the truth, and, holy Father, by the authority which I hold, I present this chapel to thee, and dedicate it to thee, as thy house, as a house of worship, and I do it in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ. Amen.
