Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Make It Easy for Them to Believe

Address given at the semi-annual conference of the Deseret Sunday School Union, Sunday, April 5, 1953, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

VERILY, he has risen. Not only did he rise from the tomb in the Holy Land, but he has risen in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints in all parts of the world.

I was thinking, as I witnessed the demonstration of our Navaho friends, how we have neglected these relatives of Samuel the Lamanite. On the islands of the Pacific we have had missionaries continuously, except during wartime, for more than a hundred years. We now have more than 30,000 members on those islands. They are relatives of these fine people.

But we have not been so interested in the work among these people in our own country as we have been in those people in the far-flung areas of the Pacific. The other day in a temple I heard a mission president report that there were distributed in his mission last year 23,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, 23,000 copies of the history of these people, our people. I wonder if there have been 23,000 copies of the Book of Mormon—of their story distributed to them in all the history of the Church.

Soon after the organization of the Church the Prophet Joseph Smith sent missionaries to the Indian people. Four or five different times we have started missions among these people only to stop the work. Now, when we go among them and tell them we have come to bring back to them their story and their blessings, they ask us, "How long are you going to stay?" It is like the story of Ali Hafed and his diamonds; we go all over the world in search of these diamonds, and we have them right within our own environs.

Let us keep the missionaries among the Indian people. I have never seen a missionary yet who labored among these people and did not love them. Their faith is great. It is easy for them to believe in the story of the Great White Savior, in the story of his birth, in the story of his resurrection. I would like to see some of our Polynesian friends come from the islands to labor among their relatives here on the American continent.

The Lamanites are a wonderful people. There is much they can teach us. They have a fine culture. They dress modestly and beautifully. I have been on the reservation, and I have seen these fine Navaho women walk from their hogans—maybe four or five miles in the desert dust to a trading post. But when they go to a trading post, even though they may not pass another soul upon the road, they are beautifully dressed in the finest they have—their beautiful velvets and their fine adornments of silver and turquoise.

Among the Hopi Indians I have learned some fine lessons in culture. When the Hopi Indian comes home from a hard day's work and enters his home, he is met by his wife. The first word she says to him is, "Esquali" (thank you). In other words, "Thank you for your labors of this day in working for the sustentation of your wife and your children." Now I suppose our wives when we go home after a hard day think, "Thank you," but I wonder how many of them say, "Thank you" when we enter the door.

In the Polynesian language there is no filth. You cannot take the name of God in vain in any of the Polynesian languages. I doubt if you can do it in the Indian languages.

I think Polynesian may have been the language which was spoken in the Garden of Eden because there is no filth in it. If you translate English filth—and there is a lot of filth in the English language—into one of the Polynesian languages, in the process of translation it is cleaned up, and when it gets into their language, there is no filth in it at all. The worst thing you can say in the Maori language is, "Go boil your head!" How God loves people who cannot take his name in vain. He loves those who can take his name in vain, but who do not.

I don't know what tribe of Israel the Japanese people belong to, but they have in their veins the blood of Israel. When they bear their testimonies—when they have submitted to the impact of the gospel and its regenerating influence—they are melted down until they are filled with emotion from the crowns of their heads to the soles of their feet.

Regarding temples, we are pushing the boundaries of Zion across the earth. We should one day have a temple in Japan. They know a little about our temple rites. At some of their places of worship they take a little panel of wood with the name of an ancestor on it and immerse it under water. I hope the day is not too far off before these people themselves can go down into the water and be immersed for their ancestors.

What would be the value of the gospel if there were no story of the resurrection? If we could not say and cry out to all the world, "He has risen!" we would just become another sect. But we can say that. We have not broken the covenants. We have not changed the ordinances. We have the gospel in its pristine beauty and fulness.

I have heard of worship rites among the natives of Polynesia similar to our temple rites. Some Indian ceremonial rites, also, are similar to our temple rites. But in the restoration we have the fulness. We know that there are fragments of truth in the rites of other associations, in other organizations, in college fraternities; some of these rites we have in our temples. Fragments of truth are in the Masonic Order; fragments of truth are in other churches.

But in the restored gospel, we have the fulness; all of the rites.

When we go into the holy temples, we shall think of our dead. There we shall work for them.

One of the last promises of the Master was to a thief—a thief who wanted to be remembered—who was justly being punished for his sin. When he pleaded with the Master to remember him, what did Christ say? "Today thou shalt be with me."

When I go into the temple, I take the name generally of a Polynesian because I know he will always accept it. As I go in, I say to that departed brother, "Today thou shalt be with me." And he receives the blessings and their fulness.

Oh, he has risen, of course, in this dispensation! He is risen as he said! Do we appreciate the risen Lord? Do we appreciate his forerunner, John? As I think about the Maori people, I remember when I first read the Maori Bible, and came to the name of John. There I read his title. I wondered where they got it. Where did they get that name in the Maori Bible? The Maoris have a word for baptize; they have a word for immerse.

Those early Christians, who translated the Bible into the Maori language, did not want to put that word in the Maori Bible because they knew that if they did then they would not be able to sprinkle the Maori. They knew Maoris would not permit it. And so they put a word in that has no reference whatever to baptism, and they call John, "John, the Hanger," not "John the Baptist," but "John the Hanger"—"Hone Kai Iriiri." Iriiri means to hang as a picture on the wall; and so when the Maori reads the Bible, instead of reading John the Baptist, he reads, "John the Hanger."

Yes, brothers and sisters, he is not John the hanger; he is not John the sprinkler; he is not John the pourer. He is John the Baptist, John the Immerser. And he who started his ministry by submitting to the immersion taught by John wound up his mission after the resurrection by enjoining his disciples to go into all the world and teach the gospel. "He that believth and is immersed (using the English translation for baptize) shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." He never said, "Go ye into all the world and sprinkle and pour." He said "immerse." Thank God for the restoration of this gospel in all of its beauty and purity.

God grant that in this great Sunday School service we may teach these children. I've enjoyed the few cries from babes—typical of the Sunday School, isn't it? They should be here, for we have a nursery class, and from the cradle to the grave we have our people in the Sunday School. God bless those who labor in this wonderful organization, this auxiliary.

Before I conclude, may I say that this night I have felt near our beloved brother, John A. Widtsoe. As I heard these people from Europe singing these hymns, I was thinking of him. I could see him smile. I could feel of his genial personality. I could see in panoramic vision the life of that man born in faraway Norway who came to this country with a widowed mother and a brother; and because of the energy, the ambition, the industry of that mother, he and his brother became great educators in this country.

But I think of him most as a servant of God, a humble man believing in the gospel of Jesus Christ and a man in whom there was no guile, and whose faith was never contaminated nor tarnished by his knowledge of science. I pray that God will bless his memory in the hearts of all of us—and also Brother Milton Bennion's.

Brother Bennion was a New Zealand missionary, you know. Many years ago, he taught a little school in what we call the Great Barrier Island down in New Zealand. We've started many of the schools there. They have developed now into public and government schools. He was one of the first teachers. And I thank God that President McKay is now directing the establishment of schools in all those islands.

I hope the day is not far off when we can have schools among the Indian people, when they can grow in an understanding of the gospel under the tutelage of bearers of the priesthood and good sisters in the Church. God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
