Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Preserve Our Heritage

Address delivered at the M I A June conference speech festival, 1953.

I HAVE BEEN inspired this night by these beautiful talks and this wonderful music. I have never had a more earnest desire to reach out above and beyond and to get hold of something to say that will not be an anticlimax to what we have already experienced.

I must confess I have had some thoughts as I have looked about me and witnessed some of the things that are going on in this country of ours—about America fulfilling her destiny. As I have listened to these speakers tonight, I know you as well as I have had all thoughts erased from our minds. America shall fulfil her destiny.

We came here to a speech festival. I know we are going away stimulated to do something about America and her destiny. They say that when Cicero used to speak those who heard him would go away commenting on the eloquence of his delivery, but they say that when Demosthenes spoke that all would arise. I feel that we have heard here this night a message that would cause us all to arise, and we know that the destiny of this great country shall be fulfilled.

You and I have the greatest heritage of all Americans because we can reach back before the founding of this great republic to God himself who selected this as a land choice above all other lands, and he said he would fortify it against all its enemies. In the past, how true that has been. This country has never been prepared for war, and it has never lost a war. God said anyone who would fight against Zion would perish, in other words, be defeated. We call America Zion. God called it Zion; but there is another meaning of Zion. Zion is the pure in heart. Without the pure in heart, this country will not fulfil its destiny.

I like the motto of the old Hawaiian flag and on the old coin, "The strength of the land is preserved in righteousness." Where there is no righteousness, there is no God to defend it. As I see what is going on about us in this country, the building of great armaments, implements of war, I wonder whether we are not departing from the American way. I said we have never been prepared for a war and we have never lost one, and history shows us that every great empire which has built its greatness upon armaments has gone down to defeat. Every nation which has prepared for war has finally become a decadent nation.

I worry about the program in America today—building the greatest air force, the greatest navy, the greatest army in all the world. When I look about into the history of great military nations, fear strikes into my heart. We do not need armaments to defend America. All we need is the God of heaven who is our king. If we depart from following after God, then of course we will never fulfil our destiny.

How our hopes have been renewed this night. I would like to read a few figures which I have written down from a recent broadcast by one of our national newscasters. He was thinking a little bit about the destiny of America. This is what he had to say: "The population of the United States is now 154,000,000. By 1960 our population will be 160,000,000. People sixty-five and over will all be retired—49,000,000 of them. That will leave 111,000,000 of us to do all the work. Of those, 56,000,000 will be under twenty-one and receiving a free education from the government. That will leave 55,000,000 to do all the work. At today's rate of federal employment, 29,000,000 of those will be employed by the government in non-productive capacities. That will leave only 26,000,000 to do the work except that there will by then be 11,000,000 in the armed services, leaving 15,000,000 of us to do the work. There will of course be 12,800,000 in city and state work, so for industrial and business and hands and feet and head work, there will be only 2,200,000. But remember of these we have 2,000,000 so called unemployables, meaning bums and others that won't work, and counting the 126,000 in hospitals there will remain only 74,000 of us to do all the work. As destiny can project the figure, there will be 73,998 of our people in jails, so actually the balance that will be left to do all the work will be just two of us." Now these are figures based upon fact. If you don't believe them, work them out for yourselves. You can acquire this information from government sources, from chambers of commerce, etc. In 1960, just eight years away, there will only be one or two men left to do all the work for all America, and I say to them, "Stay on the ball!"

Now there is a lot of meaning in these figures, brothers and sisters. They should be considered seriously. Millions on the government payroll in non-productive activities! Millions in the armed forces not producing! Millions retired, not producing! Millions receiving free education, not producing! Millions in jail! Millions refusing to work! That is the present picture of the United States of America, and it was never intended by the founding fathers or inspired by God to draft the Constitution of the United States that all these millions of Americans should become wards of the government; not only Americans becoming wards of the government, but we are making all of Europe wards of the United States government. We talk about being isolationists. Americans don't like that word today. We are becoming isolationists, brothers and sisters, not because of our own desire, but as long as we pour our millions, our billions into Europe, they will isolate us, and we will become as isolated from Europe and our debtor as if we were a leper colony.

I was in a foreign land not many months ago. I carried a United States passport in my pocket. I saw road-building equipment, and on the side of every bit of this equipment were the words, "Marshall Plan," and I with an American passport in my pocket was being investigated as an American spy—not as a Communist, but as an American spy. Yes, the Statue of Liberty stands there at the gateway of America, holding aloft that sacred light. That light has been a beacon to the downtrodden, to the oppressed, to the poor of Europe, for more than 150 years. But when those poor and downtrodden and oppressed have come to these shores, as they passed under that torch of liberty, they threw overboard ideologies, and they accepted America and all that it stood for, the Constitution with all of its articles and amendments, and they left behind them, all that they had known in their homeland. Now when they come from Europe, too many of them are slipping under the darkened torch of the Statue of Liberty and bringing into this country under their claim to their rights of democratic freedom, ideologies which will destroy the very concept of Americanism and all of the freedom that this nation has stood for.

As our dollars go to Europe, as our Marshall Plan equipment goes to Europe into these foreign lands, if those dollars and that equipment do not carry with them the ideals of America, the principles of American freedom, and by the impact of those dollars and that equipment implant into the hearts of our friends in foreign countries those principles which have made America great, then we are not blessing our friends across the sea; we are the greatest curse they have ever had. You can't make people wards of the United States government and give them the impelling force to reach out for freedom.

Now we have heard that there are 42,000,000 people in the United States who didn't vote at the last election. That means there are 42,000,000 people in this country without freedom because no man has freedom who refuses to use his franchise to vote, regardless of the outcome. I was in Japan—that is a free country now. Why? Because following in the wake of war and the defeat of that country, the republican form of government which America knows was taken into that land, and for the first time in all of its history, men and women alike had the right to vote. After one election one Japanese woman way up in the north of Japan said, "What good is it to vote if the man you vote for isn't elected?" Now being a Republican, I know just what she meant. But there is a value in being able to vote, even if you are a Republican.

I would like to read one other item here. I don't know where I got these figures, but they are true. I can't understand them because it involves too much. "In 1952-53 we will have a budget in the United States of $85,000,000,000. That will make our national debt $330,000,000,000." Now how much is $330,000,000,000? I don't know. You get up to $100, and I don't even know what that is. Now, if someone stood out in front of this building and gave out a crisp $100 bill every second, $6,000 a minute, eight hours a day, no time out for lunch, every day of the year, he would be standing out there three hundred and fourteen years. That is the national debt of the United States.

But we shall fulfil our destiny. God is still here. You here in this hall represent a leaven of righteousness which will make God want to bless this entire nation, and I thank God for our young men and women who are going into the armed forces. I am sorry they have to go. Sometimes I wonder if it is necessary. I don't know yet what they are fighting for, but they are going, and I thank God that they are going with a spirit of peace in their hearts, not a spirit of destruction.

The integrity of the family is what makes America great. You destroy the integrity of the American family, and you have nothing left to fight for. Behold Germany and Italy—children betraying their own parents in the concentration camps. When they died on the battlefield, their last cry of agony was, "Heil, Hitler." In Italy I suppose when those Italians fell dead, their last cry was "Heil, Mussolini." But America—when our boys rolled over in their fox holes, with their dying breath they cried out, "Mother, sweetheart." That's America, brothers and sisters. That's our heritage, and that's our destiny. The integrity of the family, not temporary, but united for time and for all eternity. With that sealing power no wonder God wants to reach down from his celestial realm and be the king of this land. God grant that he may continue to do so. You young people who are approaching the voting age, be sure and vote. Select men who will give us a new birth of freedom under God; who will erase from the stage of political activity, corruption, bribery, and all the concomitants which attend the political office.

I plead with you to think well when you go to the ballot box and cast in your ballot. Think upon God as your king. Think about the home you came from as you proceed to the voting room. Think about the family you belong to. Think about your brother wearing the uniform in a faraway land and then cast your ballots that this nation may be preserved and fulfil its destiny.

God bless us all with that urge, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
