Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Keep Your Beams in the Right Channel

Address given at the M I A June conference, M Men-Gleaner department, 1953.

I'VE BEEN introduced as Matthew A., Matthew C., Matthew D., and all the way down to Z, but I haven't been introduced with those two initials yet. I have no middle initial. Now he's put "L" in me. That's the first time I've had that.

The Maoris in New Zealand have a proverb (spoken in Maori) that means, "The first have food to eat, the last have only saliva to swallow." I appreciate the meaning of that proverb now. I think all the food has been given and masticated. I hope it hasn't all been digested yet. I always carry a penny around with me. One day after a stake conference a little girl came up to me and said, "I want to pay you for your sermon." I am carrying that around with me now. She had a wonderful sense of values—that little girl.

Now, brothers and sisters, I am very grateful to be here with you. I never was an M Man; I never was a Gleaner Girl; and I'm just the right person to invite here to talk to you leaders of M Men and Gleaner Girls. That's the way we do things in this Church. We don't apply for the positions we get; we are just called to them; and whether we want them or not, we are called and we generally accept.

I've been aware here this morning that this is a marvelous organization, wonderfully organized. You have a lot of fuel gathered here this morning and given to you to place upon the hearthstones of the human souls under your charge. You have the fuel, but there must be fire come from that fuel, and that's your responsibility—the greatest responsibility, I think, in this group. The fire must not come from you. It must come from heaven, and it is up to you to bring the fire down from heaven and to light the fuel in the hearts and souls of these men and women who are under your direction. Unless the fire comes from heaven, there can be no warmth in this business you are engaged in of saving human souls, and that's the business we are all engaged in—everyone of us in this Church.

I appreciate the fact that we have many problems in the Church. We have many problems among our members—we have those who are active and those who are inactive. We have those who are active today who will be inactive tomorrow. We have those who are inactive today who will be active tomorrow, and so our greatest challenge, I suppose, is first our challenge to ourself. My greatest challenge is myself. If I make good at meeting that challenge, I think I will slip into the celestial glory by a hair's breadth. If I don't make good, I will probably be in one of the lower glories.

Our next challenge, of course, is in our service to others, in this instance service to those who should belong in your groups. To the M Men and Gleaner Girls President McKay said yesterday—and I hope that you will all remember his sermon and read it because it could well be the talk I am giving here. He said, I believe, "The destiny of the country is in the hands of those under five and twenty." Now, I suppose, the destiny of the Church is in the hands of the M Men, in the hands of the Gleaner Girls because they are in that age group. Youth has always been vital in the progress of this world. Christ was a young man. He was young when he died. Many of our greatest leaders in political science in the political field have been youngsters. I believe that I recall that Charles James Fox was a member of Parliament in England when he was only nineteen. He was a great orator, a great statesman. William Pitt the younger was only twenty-three when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer. He was only twenty-five when he was Prime Minister of the British Empire—just an M Man. In our own country Alexander Hamilton, I believe, was only eighteen when he was personal aide to George Washington in the War of the Revolution. Thomas Jefferson drafted the Declaration of Independence—there were five, I believe, on the committee; he was the youngst of the five. How well we know that much of the destiny—not only the destiny, but the history—of this country has risen from that great declaration of human rights!

In our own Church youth has always been vitally important. The Prophet Joseph Smith who experienced one of the greatest, if not the greatest theophanies that man has ever experienced, received that great manifestation when he was only a boy, and then he was instrumental in organizing the Church of Jesus Christ here in this dispensation. In that organization there were Twelve Apostles chosen. The average age of that first Quorum of Twelve was twenty-nine—just young men. I think one of them was twenty or twenty-one, and so there is always a place for youth in every organization, political or religious.

Now you're the leaders of youth. As I was thumbing through your manual or one of the papers that was handed to me, I noticed one question: "Do you consider your assignment a job or a call?" My, there is a lot of difference in that. If you make it a job, you are not going to be happy. If you accept it as a call, it is going to bring you real joy and real happiness.

When I was first called into the Council of the Twelve, before one of my first visits to the Pacific, President Clark called me into his office. I shook hands with him to say good-bye, and he said, "Now, my boy, kid"—he calls me kid—"Now, kid, don't forget rule six." I said, "What's rule six?' He said, "Don't take yourself too darn seriously." I said, "What are the other five?" He said, "There aren't any." I have appreciated that instruction. I think sometimes we can take ourselves too seriously, and sometimes when we do take ourselves too seriously, especially as teachers, I'm afraid those whom we are endeavoring to teach get the impression that we are trying to frighten them into the celestial glory. Don't ever try to frighten anyone into the celestial glory. Joy is the pathway to the celestial glory—joy and happiness. We must lead with love and charity and happiness those with whom we are working to get them into the celestial glory.

Have you ever been frightened about the principles of the gospel? I have. I've been scared to death in my own home but not much! My parents, I am thankful to say, always wanted us to feel good about the gospel, about obeying the principles of it, getting joy and happiness from it. It's supposed to lift us up, not depress us. I have in my office every day good and faithful members of this Church who are depressed, who are frustrated, who think they are not being saved, and most of those people whom I see are just as worthy as I and some more worthy. Why they are frustrated, I don't know, unless someone is trying to scare them into the celestial glory. I like to get fun out of this business—good, wholesome, righteous fun—get a kick out of it. When I obey the principles of this gospel, I am the happiest man on earth. When I don't, then I am depressed, then I have a right to worry about myself; but, when I am trying to do the best I know, then I tell you, I am having the time of my life.

I learned this philosophy from the natives out in the islands. They are a simple people. They know how to repent, and they know how to repent often. They know how to be forgiven, and they know how to forgive themselves. I learned that from them. Why, they can come in every week and repent for the same offense, and if you forgive them, they go out walking on air, the happiest people you ever saw; but over here I have talked to people who have been forgiven thirty-five years ago and who have been almost perfect ever since, and they are still saying, "I'll never forgive myself. I'll never forgive myself." Brothers and sisters, teach these youngsters how to forgive themselves when they are forgiven.

Another thing we need in this Church is a willingness on the part of the people who need help to come to us for help. Too many of them feel that there is a barrier—between them and their bishop, for instance—that they have sinned, and as a result they hold this within themselves. It breaks them down, and eventually they can't stand it any longer, and they go to somebody to bare their hearts and their souls, and then they discover that they've wasted a lot of time being depressed, frustrated, and worried because there is forgiveness in the Church for the repentant soul who honestly and sincerely repents. We are all God's children as President Smith used to remind us in every sermon. We are all his children, and he loves us all. I am convinced of that.

I was at a stake conference recently. A man came up to me Saturday night and said, "Brother Cowley, will it be all right if we have a meeting with you between the morning and the afternoon sessions of conference?" I said, "Yes, who are you?" He said, "The Alcoholics Anonymous want to meet with you in the tabernacle between the two sessions of conference." The most inspirational meeting of that conference was with those sixty men and women who had been confirmed alcoholics but who had turned their lives back to God again and who had learned how to repent and purge from their lives all the assorted things which came to them from the use of alcohol.

Brothers and sisters in this Church, the last words President Smith said to me when I visited him in the hospital, and he could scarcely speak, were, "My boy, you will always find good in everyone if you look for it." Remember that when you see these young men and women in your ward. Remember that if they are drunk Saturday night, maybe a year from now one of them will be the bishop of the ward, or two years from now. I know a man not far from here who was a chain smoker for fifty years, who didn't go to church much. He is a bishop now—a wonderful bishop because he speaks the language of those who need help. That's an important thing in this business we are in, too—trying to understand the other fellow's viewpoint, trying to find out what caused him to do this. Maybe it was family background. Maybe you and I have just been luckier than he. To us Providence has been kind. As we read in that hymn, "Let each man learn to know himself." To us has Providence been kind. Consider all of those things.

I had a lovely woman in my office yesterday. She was a little worried about her husband. I asked, "Well, what's the matter with him? He pays his tithing; he pays his offering; he keeps the Word of Wisdom; he goes to sacrament meeting; he teaches an elder's quorum." I said, "What more do you want? What's wrong with him?" She said, "He swears." I was just about to swear myself. I said, "How wonderful that is, how wonderful." To be frank with you, I did. I think it made her feel a little easier.

Another thing we want to keep in mind is that there are a lot of things out here we can't see, you know, but they are there. This is an age of miracles we are living in. The story of the Prophet Joseph Smith, years ago when I was going to college and passing through that skeptical age, was rather hard for me to believe, except by my faith. It sounded very fantastic that that young boy could get down on his knees in a grove and pray and then have the Father and the Son come down before him. Now it is the simplest thing in the world because we are all doing the same thing, not with God necessarily, but with man. Do you know how radar works? I didn't until I was on a freight ship one day on my way to Tahiti. I was up in the skipper's chart room, and I said, "Where are we now?" He showed me on the map. I said, "How many miles are we from our destination?" He showed me how many hundred miles we were from there. He said, "Would you like to see where we are going?" I said, "Sure." He walked over to a little cabinet with a screen on the front, turned a couple of dials, and the next thing I saw was the most beautiful island I had ever seen. He said, "That's where we are going. That's Tahiti." Now there were no wires connected on that ship with the island of Tahiti. No one down in Tahiti was taking a picture and then sending it to the ship. No, there was nothing out here except the elements we can't see or can't feel. I said, "How do you do this?" He said, "In this cabinet there are both a transmitter and a receiving set. I direct the beam toward Tahiti, and when that beam reaches Tahiti, it bounces back and brings Tahiti with it."

He turned the beam in another direction, and we saw ships hundreds of miles away at sea en route to Australia. Can you tell me that that boy couldn't get down on his knees and direct a beam to God and have that beam reach its objective and bring back God the Father and Jesus Christ, his Son? No, don't tell me that cannot be done when I can do it myself clear across the world. Why, this universe is full of elements we can't see, and we are using them all the time. Why, you are using them right in your own home. Just turn a little gadget and have a political convention right in your front room—who wants that in your front room—the President of the United States being inaugurated. There are no wires connecting you with Washington, D.C. These sets which reach out and get these channels—amazing, isn't it? Then we say that it is too fantastic to believe that God could do that, if man can do it, God can, can't he? He can't have these beams reach in and then answer. That's what some people say.

Of course, there is one reason we don't get through. In this radar business there is a way of jamming up the whole thing. In the last war our pilots could send out a radar beam, see the Japanese planes, know the distance they were, know how to direct their guns and so on; but if they had radar in the Japanese plane, our pilots knew how to jam up the Japanese beams so that they wouldn't reach their planes and take back the picture of the plane and the location of it. They would send out something that would jam up the whole atmosphere and all the channels. Then the enemy couldn't even see the American planes. I am afraid that's what we do sometimes. We jam up these channels out here so that they don't get through.

We jam the channels by our own lives—that's the way we jam them. In Los Angeles the other day I saw a demonstration of a television transmission—at the one end of the table a little television tower, at the other end another little tower. The tower on the right had a phonograph playing. The music wasn't coming out of that one. The music was coming out of this one over here. Then my friend who was demonstrating it said, "Put your hand up between those two towers." I did and the music stopped. The machine was still going in there, but the music had stopped. I had jammed something up in there. I don't know what it was, I couldn't see it or feel it. I put my hand up when the music stopped, took it away, and it played again.

When you pray, do you put your hand up there or do you have it down? Some nights when I pray I'm sure it's up there. I get on my knees and say, "O Lord, consider thy servant, O how weary and tired. I'll try it again tomorrow morning." Did you ever feel like that? But even then I think he considers it. He knows we have these human weaknesses. We get tired, you know.

Well, brothers and sisters, it is wonderful to be here with you. I want to congratulate you on your assignments, your calls to this wonderful work. Live close to the Lord. Pray regularly. Send the beams out to him. Get them in the right direction. People are complaining because there are no more frontiers to conquer. They used to be on the western shore, on the eastern shore, these frontiers moving here and there. We can't go in those directions any more, I suppose, but we can go up and down.

I was up in Wyoming the other day in Big Horn Stake, and I saw a friend of mine up there with those oil derricks all over the place. There is a little town up there named for my father. He said, "Do you know your father was up here many years ago? We were all discouraged, brokenhearted, lonely, so far away from Salt Lake City, and your father said to us, 'Brethren, you're standing on untold wealth. Get all the land you can and keep it.'"

It was about fifty cents an acre then. I don't think many of them kept it, because I saw the Ohio Oil Company signs all over the place. These frontiers are now either down or they're up. These channels are up through which we reach God. There is untold wealth under the earth. Let's be careful when we direct our beams down. They might not reach that wealth that's under the ground, and if they miss, you know where they'll go. Now these powers are in the universe, brothers and sisters. Men of the priesthood, you have the power to use these forces. You have the authority. All you have to do is turn the right dial, get in the right channel, and you will have these things happen.

When I was practising law, especially when I was county attorney, we had lawsuits where injury was involved. We would call in doctors as expert witnesses, and they would qualify before the courts as expert witnesses. Then they would testify, and we had to accept their testimony. The jury had to accept it because they qualified as expert witnesses. Well, I have been in this missionary business for sixteen, seventeen, or eighteen years. I thought I had repented from being a lawyer in this business and I am an expert witness about it. It annoys me no end when someone comes to me and challenges me as to what I say, about experiences I've had, about the things I've seen and done, about the gift of native languages I've had, to deny that I have had that when I can qualify before any court on earth as an expert witness, not only from studying but from practice and experience. Teachers, be expert witnesses before your classes about the divinity of this work and you can be expert witnesses because you are doing God's work, and he wants to use you for that very purpose. Live what you teach, and then your lives will be your greatest sermons, your greatest lessons. May your lives be consistent with your teachings. May your testimony always ring true and carry conviction to the hearts of these M Men and Gleaner Girls. Reach out for those who are wayward, not only for the wayward but also for the wilful, and you will turn them into the paths of righteousness, and you will be able to meet this great challenge we have in the world today of making righteousness as inviting as sin. That's one of our great problems.

Sin is made so much more inviting than righteousness. It's up to you to make righteousness more inviting than sin. You know what I mean. Turn on your television. You see a wonderful baseball game, great athletes. Then all of a sudden a commercial—Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer, Luckies, Camels. Why you'd think the greatest athletes in the world trained on beer and cigarets. They make that advertising so inviting. Look at the covers on your magazines. You would think there is nothing in the world but sex impulses, and that's what the world is trying to instil within us—sex impulses, rather than the control of these things which have brought about the destruction of the greatest empires that have ever existed in this world—Rome, Greece, Babylon. What a challenge!

Brothers and sisters, don't get discouraged. The youth of Zion is as strong or stronger than it ever has been. I am sure of that. In the face of all these conditions which exist—the wars, the frustrations, the confusions which exist in the world—in face of all of this advertising which makes sin so inviting, the youth of Zion shall not falter! God bless the M I A.

I congratulate all of those who have been elected to these wonderful organizations of Master M Men and Golden Gleaners, and I am especially proud that the President of the Church and the President of the Council of the Twelve have finally made the grade. I am proud of them. [President David O. McKay and President Joseph Fielding Smith were made Honorary Master M Men.]

God bless us all, and I leave my witness with you that I know that he lives and that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, and I know that he saw God and that he saw Jesus Christ, that his beam was directed in the right channel. And they did not fail him! Down they came and appeared unto him, and through him there was restored to the earth the knowledge that God is a Being, not an essence, that Christ is a Being, not an essence. This is eternal life: That they might know he is the only true and living God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. God bless us with that testimony and witness I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
