Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Live the Simple Life

Address delivered by Elder Matthew Cowley on December 8, 1953, in the South Eighteenth Ward M I A Special Interest Class.

IT'S A WONDERFUL privilege to be here this evening, my brothers and sisters, and to be in my own ward for a change. I'm glad to hear the name of it tonight, I believe it's the South 18th, isn't it? I was glad to see these fine native girls here do a little on the program. I knew both of these sisters down in Samoa. The maiden name of one is Aumu, and the name of the other is Rivers. Rivers means Aumu, and Aumu means Rivers.

And speaking about your lessons on health reminds me that these people, the Polynesian islanders, at one time were about the healthiest people in the world, that's before the white man met them. When Captain Cook went to the Pacific Islands and discovered these Polynesian people, he estimated their population to be about two million in what they call a Polynesian triangle, which includes the Hawaiian Islands, Society Islands, Samoan Islands, New Zealand, and Tonga Islands, Cook Islands, and a number of smaller islands within this triangle. But a few years after so-called Christianity reached these people, their population dwindled to less than 200,000—from more than two million to less than 200,000. Now that wasn't entirely because of the white man, but because they were more susceptible to the evils of the white man than they were to his virtues, and so these people were practically decimated because of the so-called civilized customs which went among them.

The average age of those natives at death before the white man came, was about 100 years; their average height was 6 feet or more. In the Smithsonian Institute in Washington, D. C., there is a life-size cast of a Maori of New Zealand, the old type Maori, and on the base is written, "The Maori of New Zealand, probably the finest type of humanity that was ever discovered." They were a magnificent race, all these Polynesian people, because they lived right; they lived a simple life. We'd all live longer if we went native, but there's something about us; we're too proud to go native.

In New Zealand the Maoris lived in the high places before the white man came. They lived up in the high, healthy levels, and their villages, or paus as they called them, were always immaculate. They lived on the fish from the sea and especially seaweed, which is one of the finest foods in the world because the minerals from the hills and all the fine nourishment from the soil go down into the ocean, and the seaweed grows from that wonderful soil. So those people lived on fish and seaweed and wild pigeons, and were a magnificent race.

When I went to New Zealand in 1914, I never saw a native, I don't care how old he was, who didn't have good teeth, wonderful teeth. When I went back in 1938, I never saw a native who did have good teeth. Between 1919, when I came home, from my first mission, and 1938 those people had gone with the pack. They'd turned over to the white man's food. They drank tea; they ate a lot of sugar; all their drinks were sweet drinks; they ate meat three or four times a day, and cake, and every other kind of food which they had never known before the white man went there. Now the white man's trying to get them back on a good diet, trying to teach in school the foods which will build up their bone structure and cause them to have teeth longer than they do now.

And they lived that very simple life; and they were virtuous; they were moral. The breach of the moral code meant death to both parties before the white man went down there. The Fiji Islanders were black, but they were the strongest people to resist the onslaught of the white man and all of his evil. They are also a magnificent race, even though they are black people, and they're the finest example, those people down there, of what can happen to a race of people when they do not eat properly and do not live properly. Now they're a wonderful people; they have great dignity, especially the Samoan people, whom these young ladies represent, one of the most dignified races of people any place on the earth. See the old chiefs sitting around in their council meetings, and they may be just exploding inside of themselves with anger, but they never let it out. They just sit there and with great dignity discuss their problems. I don't mean that they don't have tempers. They do have tempers, but only on occasion do they let loose.

Now these people know how to relax; that's one thing we don't know how to do. I don't know how to relax; I wish I knew. All the years I've spent among the islanders I never learned how to relax as they do. When they work, they work very hard; and when they relax, they relax just as hard as they work when they work. It's magnificent to see those people relax. I was on a freight ship one night in the stream off Apia, Samoa, and they were loading the ships. The ships can't go right up to the shore because of the shallowness of the water, so they stay out in the stream, and the lighters have to come out with the bananas and so on, and these natives would be loading the ships, and just as soon as a lighter would go back to shore, the natives on the ship would lie flat on their backs, and they would be asleep instantly, and then they would wake up again when the next lighter came to be unloaded. They can do that twenty-four hours a day; they can sleep any time; they can stay awake any time. It's marvelous. Even in the big cities of New Zealand as these natives walk along the streets, if their feet hurt them, they sit down on the curb and take off their shoes.

We used to have a dear old sister that would come to our branch in Auckland. We were right on the main street of the city, a city of 300,000 population, and this native sister would come to the chapel on the hill. Generally by the time she reached the chapel her feet were pretty sore, so she'd take off her shoes and tie them together and throw them over her shoulder. She would sit down, leaving her shoes over her shoulder until meeting was out, and her feet were entirely rested, and then she would put her shoes back on. Now wouldn't we love to do that some time? My wife does it in the movies. She just slips her shoes off; doesn't think anyone knows it. If she thought anyone knew about it, she never would do it. That is a good thing to do, and I do, too. I wear elastic shoe laces. They're just like house shoes; I can slip my shoes off without any trouble and slip my feet back in and have them right on. So when I'm in a movie or somewhere like that, I slip my shoes off. Some of my neighbors next to me don't care too much for it, but they don't know the source of the disturbance, so they don't say much.

But you know it is a wonderful thing to live a simple life, and we just don't do it. We don't know how to do it, I suppose. But those people know how to do it. They know how to relax, how to let themselves go. They can sit down and be off to sleep in a second. We're on a tension all the time, but if we ate more of the types of food that they ate, not that they eat now, but that they used to eat, it would be wonderful. I used to keep kelp in our home in Auckland, New Zealand, powdered kelp and seaweed, and I used to take a teaspoon of it two or three times a day. I think it did me a lot of good out there because the foods out there, the vegetables, lack a lot of the minerals and the other elements which are necessary for keeping the body constitutionally fit.

They live simply in their homes. Now you see a native with a beautiful home down in New Zealand. Some of them are well-to-do and have beautiful houses, but if they don't know when you are coming to visit them, when you walk in, you will see them sitting on the floor with their laundry all over the best furniture, because they're more comfortable sitting on the floor. It is easy for them to relax and to lie down when they want to. It would be a good thing for us if we would lie down on the floor once in awhile, especially after we eat, to stretch out for twenty minutes. Even your doctors tell you to do that.

Well, if we just did know how to live, and I think we do, but we don't follow it. Sister Widtsoe has been talking about it a little bit here. If we really knew how to live this Word of Wisdom which we do have, it would be a wonderful thing. I had a doctor in my office one day who came from Canada, he was one of those brothers who has a heart foundation. They with several years of experimenting have discovered that pure wheat is the best heart medicine there is. When he was in my office, I said, "Well, we've always known that. That's a revelation from God," and I quoted it to him, "Wheat for man." He said, "Well, that's absolutely right." He said people never dropped over with heart attacks and coronary occlusions before they made white bread. He said in the old days when they didn't know how to make it people never had these heart attacks. He proceeded to tell the figures on it. He showed the results of the administration of pure wheat germ, very potent, to people who have varicose veins. In fact, that's the way they discovered what wheat would do for blood clots. They treated some prospective expectant mother who had varicose veins. One of these doctors was an obstetrician, and he treated her with this wheat, and her varicose veins disappeared. She was one of those women who had a child every year. She had him on a retaining basis, I guess, but anyway he went several years giving her that wheat treatment, and she never had varicose veins. Then he decided to let it go a year without giving her the wheat, and back they came.

He and his brother thought, if it will do that to the veins in the legs, it certainly should help heart conditions when there's some kind of clot in the heart or an occlusion. Their mother was the one they decided they would experiment with. She was in her seventies, and she hadn't walked across the room for a number of years because of her heart, and so they loaded her up with this wheat germ, and within a matter of weeks she was working out in the garden. So, I guess there's something to that revelation regardless of what some of our people think of it and how they criticize us for referring to it too much.

And so, my brothers and sisters, the simple life is the life we are expected to live, and we all appreciate that, when it's too late. We realize that we could have been healthier; we could have lived longer; had we lived a very simple life. Now I'm positive that Sister Widtsoe kept her husband alive as long as he lived because of the way they lived. Now I knew her husband's brother, and he died very prematurely, and I'm sure that he would have lived longer, had he followed the same plan of life that Dr. Widtsoe did. So we do see the fruits of this in many cases. I remember Dr. Joseph Merrill lived a very simple life. He said he never was in bed a day in his lifetime from illness, and he lived to be eighty-three. He said his parents put him to bed one day, thought he had the measles when he was a child, but it turned out not to be the measles, so they let him up again. He never had a sick day in his whole life, and he went peacefully to sleep and never woke up. Now that was certainly a beautiful life, and I'm sure it was due almost entirely to the fact that he was so strict in living very simply and having very simple eating habits.

Now this is a wonderful thing to talk about after what we've been eating here tonight. All this turkey and candied sweet potatoes and all of this thing. Now you see they have these vegetables. The islanders have them, but they don't fix them up like this. They just generally make a pot out of them or else they bake them a little bit or boil them a little bit, and they're really very wholesome food. But over here, we fix them all up with everything we can get hold of. Of course, we're to blame for many of these conditions, and it is each individual's responsibility to take care of himself and herself. But it's wonderful to live, isn't it?—wonderful to eat some of these things, my, I like it!

That's one thing I like about going out to stake conferences. You know, the sisters of the stake presidencies put on the most wonderful food you ever saw, and I don't like to insult them, so I eat it. I really enjoy it, but it isn't good for me.

Well, there's another thing we can talk about that's along the line of simplicity, and that is simple faith. That's another thing these islanders have, and that is very simple faith. You know their minds are not all confused with psychology, psychiatry, and all these other things. All they know is just a simple faith in God and his power. They have implicit faith in the fact that they have been preserved down through the centuries. They know, I think, down within themselves, that they are God's children; that they are of the House of Israel. At least, if they didn't know it before we went among them, they know it now. They have accepted God's power as the simplest thing in the world. In the matter of illness, they send for an elder and have him bless them, and that's that. He represents God, that's all there is to it. As a result they have wonderful manifestations of their simple faith.

I know one of our dearest friends in New Zealand who is now reaching the end of his life, he's only two years older than I, and it's entirely due to his eating habits. He owned a taxicab company out there in one of the cities; every cab in the town he owned. One day he was stricken and started to have a hemorrhage from the nose, which couldn't be stopped. So they took him to the hospital, and the doctors couldn't stop it. So they sent for his family, and they came to be there when he passed on. When the family was standing around and the nurses were still working on him, he said to one of the nurses, "You go to the phone and call my switchboard at the taxioffice and tell the girl to send a couple of my drivers out here quick." Every driver of every cab he owned was an elder in the Church. The nurse went to the switchboard and called her and said, "The big man wants you to send a couple of his drivers out here to the hospital fast." She knew what it meant, so out went two drivers. "Fix me up, I want to go home." Just like that you know. One anointed him; the other sealed the anointing; and he got up out of bed and went home. The hemorrhage had ceased immediately. It was the simplest thing in the world, wasn't it? He didn't have any doubt at all about the power of God to heal. Medicine had failed; medical science had failed, so with simple faith he had his taxi drivers bless him.

It's a wonderful thing to have taxi drivers that hold the priesthood. I was in a cab here one day, and there was a woman driving the cab. She recognized me, and I said, "Why do you drive a taxicab?" She said, "To keep my two sons on missions. I have two sons on a mission, so I'm driving a taxicab to help keep them there." She said the priesthood quorum also was helping, but she said, "I want to help, too, so I'm driving this cab." President George F. Richards heard about it, and whenever he wanted a cab, he sent for her cab so he would contribute to the well-being of her boys.

Sometimes I think we lack that simple faith; on the other hand there is a lot of it here. Many people have that simple faith in the priesthood of God. As we go about blessing the sick, we see people with faith. On the other hand I guess there are many who when we walk out say, "Well, I'm not going to make it," and then there are many elders who walk out after they've given a blessing say, "Well, it's too bad; she won't make it." Just after he's exercised the priesthood of God to bless her!

Sometimes I wonder whether there aren't many people who die because we don't exercise our priesthood right. Maybe not, I don't know. When the disciples tried to cast the dumb spirit out and couldn't do it, Christ came along and cast the spirit out and healed the individuals, and then the disciples were curious and wanted to know why they couldn't do it. They had the priesthood of God. Christ, himself I guess, had given it to them. So they said, "Why could not we cast him out?" You know what he said, ". . . this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting." (Matt. 17:19, 21.) They hadn't done enough you see. They hadn't exercised the priesthood enough. And so I wonder if some of us are the same way.

Of course there are times when you don't have time to fast much; you don't have time to pray much, emergencies, you have to rush. But on the other hand I think if we have a little time, and we intend to go and bless someone, it doesn't do any harm to do a little fasting. I think God accepts of that fasting.

We have a mutual friend down in Honolulu, Sister Widtsoe and I, a man who is a young bishop down there, very wealthy, and yet a young man with a lot of humility. He was called one day from the Queen's Hospital to come and bless a boy who had polio. A native sister had called him. He was her bishop, and she said, "Bishop, come up here, my boy is stricken with polio, and I want you to come up here and administer to him and bless him." All day she waited for him, and the bishop never showed up. All night he never showed up, the next morning he never showed up, but early in the afternoon here he came. She turned loose on him. She called him everything she could think of. "You, my bishop, I call you and tell you my boy is here stricken with polio. And you your own boss, you have your cars; you have a beautiful yacht; you have everything you want; and your time is your own; and you don't show up. You just come now after a whole day." After she had finished and couldn't think of anything more to call him, he smiled and said, "Well, after I hung up the receiver yesterday, I started to fast, and I've been fasting and praying for twenty-four hours. I'm ready now to bless your boy." At five o'clock that evening the boy was released from the hospital entirely cured of his polio. ". . . this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting."

Now I doubt very much if he had gone up there the day before that would have happened. I think that prayer and that fasting were needed. So I think that we who hold this priesthood sometimes don't exercise it enough. You have to keep in condition, you have to keep in training with this priesthood which we have, then we'd always be prepared when we go out to officiate in the offices of the priesthood to give blessings and so forth.

A little child who lives on B Street was hit by an automobile, down in American Fork. For seven months that child lay on that bed up there at home. It never spoke; it was unconscious, had to be fed intravenously. I was speaking down in the old Granite Tabernacle, for a Japanese girl's farewell. The girl was a hairdresser, and the mother of this child was one of her clients. So after the meeting, she came up and said to me, "I wonder if you would have time to come up and bless my little girl?" I said, "Yes, I would be glad to; where do you live?" She told me, and I said, "That's not far from where I live." So the next day we went up. I called a young bishop and away we went. We went up there and saw this child. Now, I believe if I hadn't been among the natives down in the islands, I wouldn't have had a bit of faith. There was that child helpless, all crippled up, and after that I went up once in a great while, once or twice I went fasting. One day I picked up the telephone at home, and the mother said to me, "Just wait a minute." So I waited there a minute, and I heard a little voice say, "This is so and so." And it was that little girl. Last summer she was baptized, and she asked me if I would baptize her. So I went down to the Tabernacle and baptized the little girl. Now she is going to school; her vision isn't perfect yet, but it is coming back. She is walking, and she is playing; she is talking, and she is singing. Now to me that was just as miraculous as raising the dead.

And so God does work through us brethren if we are simple enough to let him, if we don't try to rationalize all these things. Of course we need medical science. All wisdom I think, comes from God. The Spirit of Christ permeates the universe, and all of these things are part of God's great program. We should appreciate them; we should use them. But on the other hand, medical science sometimes has to lay the burden down, and there's always a Power that can pick it up. God wants it that way. And so, my brothers and sisters, let's be a little more simple in our faith. A little more simple in our living, and we don't need to have a lot of money, a lot of wealth. We don't need luxuries. Many of the most unhappy people in the world are people who have everything they want.

I went in a little home the other day; I was riding along with the bishop of the Fourth Ward. I was going to Logan, and we passed a little home in his ward, and he said, "Wait a minute, let's stop here a minute and give sister so-and-so a blessing." I've forgotten her name. So we went in her little home way down there on the west side. I've never been in a more comfortable looking little house and a cleaner place in my life than that little home, and it was a welfare home. It belonged to the ward. There were that elderly man and his wife who had been in bed for seven months, and that place was immaculate. Every comfort in the world was in that little place. I have been in other homes where they had everything; all the luxuries, and I haven't felt the spirit, the sweetness, the spirit of satisfaction, the spirit of comfort as I felt in that little welfare home down there in that ward.

Well, that's the simple life. People who are not envious; who are just willing to live life, simply and if they have that spirit, why naturally they're going to be very happy.

Now there's another thing that I'm always interested in. Another subject, and that's this business of loving our fellow men. I spend a great deal of time with members of the Alcoholics Anonymous and other alcoholics.

Two weeks ago in Logan, in our tabernacle up there, we held a public meeting of the AA, and I was there as one of the speakers. The other speaker was a member of the AA, and I wish you could have heard his story. He's a man that came from one of our best families, and a large family, and he was the only one of the family that didn't turn out as good as he should. He'd been on a mission to New York; he was a great street preacher. They called him "Foghorn" back there because he was such a fine street preacher. He came home from his mission, got married; he didn't marry right. He became a salesman and started traveling. Then he started drinking, and he thought he was all right; he thought he could drink and have control of it.

Then he said one day he blacked out, and it didn't bother him. Then later on he started to black out quite often with his drinking. Finally he lost his job; he didn't make any money. One day a police officer came after him; took him up to court. He said, "What's the trouble, what's the charge?" He said, "Forgery." He walked right into the judge, and he said, "I want to plead guilty." He pleaded guilty and got from one to ten years in the penitentiary. He didn't want to come out of there. In fact, twice he attempted suicide. When he went there, they had a hard time getting him to eat or to to do anything. He wanted to stay in his cell and die.

Finally he started getting around a little bit, and as he was walking around in the prison, he noticed a sign that said "AA" on it. He said to himself, "What kind of place is this anyway? Automobile association in the penitentiary? Nobody's going anywhere. What on earth they got an automobile association out here for?" Then he walked up closer and read it, and underneath it said, "The Golden Rule Chapter." Then he inquired about it, and one of the prisoners said, "Oh, that's the Alcoholics Anonymous. They have a chapter out here." This fellow said, "Are you interested in it?" He said, "Oh, no. I'm not an alcoholic." So the other prisoner brought him twenty questions and said, "If you answer three of these questions in the affirmative, you're an alcoholic." He said, "I answered all twenty of them in the affirmative and put six more on that weren't on there."

He became interested in Alcoholics Anonymous out there and joined. He's been out now for several years and hasn't had a drink, and has a good job again. He had a big diamond ring on; he's a fine citizen and trying to be a good Latter-day Saint. Those men have goodness in them. Somebody has to reach down and get it.

I had an alcoholic come in my office one day, a man I grew up with. He came from one of our best families, and he used to live in this very ward. He came to see me, with his wife. He was intoxicated; she was going to mortgage her home and send him to Denver and put him in an institution over there.

I said, "No, you're not going to do that."

She said, "Well, I won't tolerate him any more." I said, "Well, if you mortgage your home and send him over there, you'll lose your home, and they'll just build him up physically so that when he comes out, he'll get on the biggest binge he's ever been on, and then your home is gone, and he's still an alcoholic."

What he wanted was a blessing from me. He said, "That's all I need; that's all I need." He was crying, and I said, "Well, I'm not going to give you a blessing now, but if you'll do what I tell you to do, then one day you come in, and I'll give you a blessing."

He said, "I'll do anything you say." So I turned around to the phone, and called up another friend of mine who belonged to the Alcoholics Anonymous, a young man whom I went to school with. I told him so-and-so was in my office, and he promised me he'd do what I told him. Now what is the next step? He said, "You tell him to meet me in the Felt Building tonight at 8 o'clock in such and such a room, and I'll take over." That was three years ago next month. He hasn't had a drink since then. He's teaching his priesthood class up in his ward, never misses meeting, and here he was just throwing his life away with reckless abandon, losing every job he ever had. But now he's a good, faithful, active, Latter-day Saint. They still have their home.

So, brothers and sisters, let's be very kind to one another. None of us has lived his life yet. We don't know what the morrow is going to bring, you know. Men who haven't touched a drop today may next year be alcoholics. Men who are alcoholics today may in a couple of years from now be bishops of the South 18th Ward. You can never tell. That's the gospel of Jesus Christ. We should always keep in mind that two of the most glorious principles in this Church are—repentance and forgiveness.

I always remember President George Albert Smith's last words to me, as he held my hand and said, "My boy," and he could hardly speak. "Always remember that you can find good in everybody, if you will just look for it." My, there's a lot of truth in that.

And so we approach the Christmas season when we think about the simple life of the Master and how he came to the sinners, not to the righteous. Let us remember that we are our brothers' keepers and that we do have great problems, and that there are ways of reaching the hearts of those that need us. Maybe I'm not the right one to do it, but if I'm not the right one, somewhere there is someone who can touch the lives of these men.

I was in Manti at a stake conference. On Saturday afternoon a brother came up to me and said, "Would you mind holding a special meeting after the morning session between the two sessions?" I said, "Well, I would be glad to; what's it about?" He said, "The Alcoholics Anonymous." Between those two meetings we had a meeting. There were sixty-six there. Every one of them was a member of the Church; all lived in that stake; all had been drunkards of the worst kind and were all now active in the Church because they had reached out to God and let him take control of their lives. Naturally, when they get back into sobriety, they belong to our Church, so this is the Church they come to. This is the Church where they receive their great strength. There may be a very inactive member in the Church staggering down the street tonight, and in a couple of years he may be very active and have a position in the Church.

I was at a stake conference in Idaho, and there the stake president and one of his counselors had been teachers in the Aaronic Priesthood just two years before, now one of them was the stake president and one of them was his counselor. Now many people say we're narrow-minded. Well, we are narrow-minded about the truth; we musn't be broad-minded about that. But when it comes to love, consideration, and affection, why, we're the grandest people in the world. We are our brothers' keepers, and we must always appreciate that.

Now, brothers and sisters, I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of the living God. I know that we have the power of God with us in this Church. I know that he uses us to accomplish his purposes, and we should sense that great responsibility which is placed upon us. Just think, God uses us for the accomplishment and fulfilment of his purposes here upon the earth! Why, that's enough to stagger us. The great responsibility which rests upon our shoulders; he called the simple souls of the world to do his work. There was Dr. Widtsoe, one of the greatest educators we ever had in this country. A great scientist, but a simpler man never lived. The simple gospel controlled in his life. There was never any question about it, and that's, I suppose, one of the finest examples of a simple life that we could possibly have.

And so let us just be simple souls, my brothers and sisters. When Christ called his Apostles, he went along the seashore and called the rough-and-tumble characters and said, "Come, follow me." When he left them, he said, "Thou shalt see greater things than these." (John 1:50.)

You see what a great influence he had upon their lives; what the priesthood meant to them.

God bless us in this ward. May we be united, sustain one another, sustain our fine bishopric, our Mutual officers, and all the officers in the ward. I don't sustain them very actively, but I sustain them with my faith and prayers. I know they are God's servants, and I know they're doing his work. Therefore, they are entitled to our support.

God bless us all during this season of the year. I think I'm coming up to one of the sacrament meetings during the holidays, I hope so. I like to come at least once a year to the ward. And until then I say, God bless you, brothers and sisters, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
