Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The Missionary Call

Address given at a stake and missionary conference, March 9, 1947, Honolulu, Oahu.

MY DEAR brothers and sisters: Why do we have more than one word of greeting? The Hawaiians have one; the Samoans have one, and the Japanese. By the way, may I say that the only servicemen who have been decorated for bravery at the White House have been Japanese servicemen from Honolulu? Even General Marshall was decorated from the Navy Building and not the White House, but the Japanese servicemen who received decorations received them right at the White House.

I have been very much inspired tonight with the music. I have been trying to draw imaginary pictures in my mind what 1950 will be like. As I sit beside my Maori brother here from New Zealand, I was thinking what a fine thing if their choir could come up in 1950 to the centennial. It would be a marvelous thing, wouldn't it? You have a fine building here for a meeting, and you could save your money and send for them.

I have been thinking just how precious, how valuable the souls of the members of this Church are. The gospel has only been in New Zealand for some sixty years, but during that sixty years 1,200 missionaries have come from America. The average length of a mission has been three years, so that all together we have had 3,800 missionary years, and during those years of service we have only had a very few thousand join the Church. When you consider that those years have been given at the expense of the missionaries themselves, you can appreciate how many millions of dollars have been spent to give this simple message to the people of that island mission, which is about the size of Colorado. You have had many more than that come to Hawaii in your one hundred years, and comparatively few have joined the Church. But small as it is, we do appreciate the fact that one soul is precious in the sight of God. One soul costs the expenditure of a lot of money, a lot of sore feet.

My brother, when laboring in Hawaii, was over at Kona, and I remember how he said his shoes wore out walking over the lava. One hundred missionaries here are now doing that very thing, only you Hawaiian missionaries do not walk over the lava of Kona. You ride over it in a car, and the Central Pacific missionaries walk behind and inhale the fumes from the car. With all due respect to the Hawaiian missionaries, for my own good and salvation, I would rather be the one walking behind. There is a saying that a man with a dog's nose goes along and tunes in everywhere. I think that proverb must have come from the Maori people watching the Mormon missionaries walking around. I know I have done a lot of that. I wished I could smell out some of those places I couldn't see.

We are all missionaries in the Church. Every man and woman has the responsibility of being a missionary. Our slogan, our theme in the M I A this year is, "Let every man know for himself that this work is true." Just ponder for a moment. I wonder if there is any minister of religion that would stand up in the pulpit and tell all of the members of his congregation to find out for themselves, by their own study, by their own prayers, whether or not that which they have is true. Yet that is our theme. We call our missionaries out from homes, schools, and families, and send them out into the world to preach the gospel, and if we didn't have a conviction in our souls that everyone of these missionaries sent out into the mission field would find out for himself that this work is true, we wouldn't dare send them out without training them in seminaries and colleges, because as J. Golden Kimball said, "It is marvelous to me that the missionaries haven't destroyed the Church." But that is our charge. Everyone should know for himself and herself that this work is true. It is the only way. What good is a man's religion if he can't give a good reason for the hope that he has within himself? If you would have to say, "Go to my minister; he will tell you," that would mean that the man who was asking you would know just as much about your religion as you do. So as I stand here tonight and look down at you, I am not a priest looking down at the lay members. I am a priest looking down at priests. I am the priesthood talking to the priesthood, and this means that everyone knows for himself that this work is true. The great opportunity the members have in this Church for development is their mission. Sometimes we come out into the mission field, and we think it is a fine thing if we can talk about the philosophies of men and what we have read and all that, but that is not the gospel of Jesus Christ. What we are to preach and what the world needs is faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost.

The Church of England has recently published a booklet in which it is making an appeal for a renewal of faith in their great church. When I heard it read recently, I thought that they had copies of our articles of faith. They said we have to get back to the fundamentals of religion. We have to get back to faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. If we could get back to that, we would have a oneness of things and not a diversity. We would be united in our faith in God and the obeying the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I am telling you, brothers and sisters, I wouldn't exchange my mission in New Zealand for all the opportunities the world affords for education. I wouldn't exchange my seven and a half years there and my associations with the missionaries I had down there for any education I have had in my lifetime.

A year ago now I was ill and in bed almost two months. When I was stricken, I sent for two of my missionaries to come and see me. One of the missionaries who came in had on his working clothes: the other missionary was a man who cleaned poultry. I said, "I want you to bless me." They administered to me, and they told me in the name of the Lord I would get well. A few months ago I was watching at the bedside of my daughter. She was very ill. A few days later I was sitting in my office, and a friend called me up. He said he wanted to come up and visit for a little while. I said, "Let's go out to lunch." He said, no, he didn't want lunch. I said "Why not?" He said, "I am not eating lunch today." I kept urging him to have lunch, and finally he said, "Well, if you must know, your missionaries are all fasting this day for your daughter."

Would you exchange this, brothers and sisters, for anything in life—that these young men of their own volition would get together and fast and pray for a member of my family and then while they were fasting, go about their work? Are these things worth while in life today? Is it worth anything to know that people pray? How many of you people in the morning and in the evening get down on your knees and pray? How many of you are teaching your children to pray?

When I was in the U. S. Senate, a number of years ago, I was in the office of Senator Smoot. He was chairman of the Finance Committee. He was the greatest worker I have seen in my life. He worked sixteen hours a day. I thought he never had time for anything but work. I used to go over to use the phone in his office, and more than once I went into that committee room, and there on his knees was that man offering up his prayers to God, as a Senator of the United States government. I recall now that when the first World War broke out, he stood up in the U. S. Senate, and they wondered what he was going to say, and he bowed his head and prayed to God for the salvation of America and what it stands for.

I want to tell you, brothers and sisters, that I have prayed so many times and so much during the last few months that almost unconsciously I have caught myself getting down to pray right on the street. The integrity of the Mormon home is founded on prayer in the family circle. The Holy of Holies in this Church is not in this tabernacle or in the temple, but it is in your home. That is where you are testing the saving powers of the gospel of Jesus Christ. How I used to appreciate my father when I was away at school or out in the islands doing missionary work. For eight months I was very sick. I had boils, sunstroke, tapeworms, was kicked in the abdomen by a horse, and it was just one thing after another. I used to wake up in the morning, and I would say to myself, "Well, all of them at home, my father, mother, and brothers and sisters are down on their knees offering up their prayers in my behalf." And when the dusk would come and night would fall, I would know that over 8,000 miles away my family were on their knees offering up their prayers, and that in their prayers my name was being mentioned. That meant something to me. I thank God that the integrity of my home was never broken—my father's home. Even after I was married and went to my Father's home, before I got out of the door, he would say, "Come back here, I am still the patriarch of this family, and you are entitled to my blessing," and he would pray. He poured out his soul to God, but all the time he was preaching the gospel to me through prayer.

The King of England made an appeal to the British Empire for everyone to get on his knees and pray. We did the same thing in this country. The President of the United States called upon us all to pray. I wonder if God heard our prayers. I have an idea that the prayers he heard were the prayers of the young men in the service who were always praying and the prayers of their loved ones who were always praying. Abraham prayed to God, "If I find one hundred righteous in the cities of Gomorrah and Sodom, will you save them?" When he couldn't find them, he said, "If I find fifty, will you save the cities?" Then, "If I find ten?" When ten couldn't be found he saved Lot's family, and the cities were destroyed. I am simple enough to believe that if God was on our side in this last war, it was because there were ten or fifteen or one hundred who were righteous and who knew how to pray before they got into this war. We always want him when we need him and forget him when we don't need him.

So many teachers destroy the faith of their students in college now. I wouldn't dare go into a classroom and teach speech or science or some other subject that is not in my field, but these professors go around trying to destroy the faith of young people. I have two cousins who were ousted from the Brigham Young University because they tried to destroy the faith of students in Joseph Smith. They said it was a psychological thing. They talked themselves right out of the Church university. You know, you administer to babies. They don't know what you are doing. Could that be psychological? I have seen the blind healed, by the administration of elders. I have participated in it myself. The child didn't know what was being said or what was being done. I don't know what the psychologists would have said about that, but it seems to me that God had something to do about it. Brothers and sisters, what we should do at this 100th anniversary of the pioneers coming to Utah, is get back to the integrity of our home, back to humility. Humility should be in every home where there are children, because they are God's children. You can't explain how they come to you. Scientists are doing great wonders, but they still can't explain the creation—the birth of a child. I can't figure it out, so they are God's children. You are responsible to him for them. Teach them in your home. You are the missionaries right in your own home. That is where our missionaries are made. Today you have the missionaries here in your midst, set apart by those in authority to come to these islands to teach the gospel. They are not boys and girls. They are men and women, with a man's job. When you see them acting like children, help them to see their responsibilities. Remember someone back home is providing for these missionaries, either that or they are providing for themselves, and they must go back home with honorable releases, with testimonies of the gospel that they may be anchored to the faith.

A few years ago we made an application to the radio commission for a sending station powerful enough to reach all the countries of the earth, and the time will yet come (it has already come to you people here) when people all over the world can sit in their homes and hear the gospel preached from Salt Lake City, or maybe from Honolulu, and preached in the language of the people to whom the waves are directed. These children here have seen more, and taken for granted more miracles than the Prophet Joseph Smith or Brigham Young ever saw. Joseph Smith never saw a motor car, never saw television, never saw radios, never saw airplanes. Brigham Young never saw most of these things. The great minds of the Church never saw these things: not physically, but they saw them in vision and prophesied about them, but all these children here and you and I see all of these things. I was in Washington, D. C., two or three weeks ago (look how marvelous). I was visting my brother, and I said, "If I weren't so tired, I would like to see a hockey game." He said, "Let's go down and see it." I said, "No, I am too tired." I am always too tired, except when I am speaking. He said, "Sit right there," and he walked over to the television and tuned into the hockey game, and there right before my eyes I watched the hockey game from beginning to end. I heard everything and saw everything, and I was sitting in a big easy chair relaxing and taking it easy.

There is only one thing about television. They tell us that we will have to brush up on our manners, so accurate is it that we have to do everything right. One man wiggled his nose, and another blew his nose, and so we have to wake up on our manners when this television comes along!

Well, the brother here said I could talk as long as I wanted to. I don't want to talk any longer. You have it soft here in these islands. Down in New Zealand we go to meetings at 7 a.m. and come out at 10 p.m. at night. When we get some of those Maoris up here, we will have a reunion in these Hawaiian Islands.

Brothers and sisters, it is a wonderful thing to be here with you. I feel easy here. I am pleased to be with you. I hope we can accomplish something together. I am not here to take the place of the mission presidents. I will sustain them. Everything they do in righteousness, as long as they are mission presidents, I will sustain. The time will come when we older ones will have to stand back and see the young ones go ahead. Let us get together here and work together in harmony and peace and rejoice in what the other man is doing. I used to appreciate my father when my brothers were going to the Agricultural College and I was going to the University of Utah. We would lord it over each other when games would be won. My father used to say, "Well, always rejoice in the victory of the other man, and the accomplishments of the other man." That is an achievement for you to aim at. There is always someone who can do it better than someone else. There is no place for jealousy or pettiness in the Church of Jesus Christ because a person who does not have a position in this Church of Jesus Christ has just as much right to reach the highest kingdom of God as the President of this Church.

I know a good old Samoan lady down in New Zealand, and I know as I know that I live that when the great judgment comes, and I look off into those glories, that I am going to find out that Sister Clark and some others, and men, too, who never held responsibilities in this Church, are up just a little higher than where I am going to be. When someone criticizes someone else and does not have charity, I say, thank God that He is going to be my judge and not my brother. Christ recognized the righteous only, not the wealthy and educated. He went along the seashore and said, "Come with me." We will have a hukilau (Hawaiian word meaning catching many fish in a net) with humanity. And how they annoyed him. One denied him three times. One didn't believe he was resurrected when he saw him. They couldn't understand his parables, and he was always telling his Apostles, "Oh, ye of little faith," and yet not one of us would dare criticize Peter, James, and John. You missionaries, greater things than Jesus did you can do because you have the Holy Ghost. You have the authority of the priesthood of God. He has sent you the Comforter. You are not boys—you are not girls—you are servants of God, and if any of you does not have the spirit of missionary work be honest with your mission president and with God and ask your mission president for a release and go home.

May you all have the spirit of missionary work and be real missionaries I ask in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
