Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The Welfare Program

Address at Portland Stake conference, March, 1952

THIS HAS been a wonderful day for me, my brothers and sisters, and I enjoyed very much the meeting we held last night. The music has been inspiring. The testimonies have thrilled me. The hospitality of the stake president, his counselors, their wives has been almost more than I can stand. As for the wonderful meals I have had at their homes, I think I will check on how much fast offering they pay.

I have enjoyed the opportunity I have had today to set apart some men for offices in the stake, wards, and to ordain seventies. The Church is in need of seventies if they will go on missions. If they won't go on missions, I don't know why anybody should be a seventy, because he is a minute man and primarily a missionary.

I am sorry I didn't get out to the welfare farm this afternoon to see the wonderful cattle and livestock they have out there and see how well the work is going ahead. It is great business, this welfare business. It didn't originate in this dispensation. I think we read about it back in the book of Genesis. Joseph sold into Egypt, confined in jail and there he interpreted the dreams of two or three men! Then Pharaoh the king rewarded Joseph by sending for his family and giving them land. But Joseph said, "No, they are shepherds. They want a welfare project to work on where they can earn their living, their bread by the sweat of the brow." The integrity of Jacob's family was preserved by Joseph. He didn't put them on a dole in Egypt. Pharaoh would have given them all they wanted. They could have sat around and done nothing, but Joseph saw the evil in that. That is the devil's plan—idleness. Have you ever heard that before, "The idle mind is the devil's workshop"?

We have had these welfare programs down through the ages and those that have been directed by God have succeeded. Those which have not, have failed. I read in the paper recently where a man went into a butcher shop in Boston to buy some meat and when the butcher wrapped it up he told him how much it was. There had been an increase in the price. He said, "Keep it, and I will eat my greenbacks." Well, you can't do that; you can't do it. You can't eat what is given to us under what is called a social security plan. You can't eat it, but you can eat what is given to you under God's plan of economy, and you can work for it.

I mentioned briefly this morning about John the Baptist. He knew the welfare program. He came from the wilderness. He had been living in it for years. What did he live on in the wildreness, this great prophet of God, forerunner of the Messiah? He lived on locusts and wild honey. What was his garment? Camel's hair. Not these beautiful camel's hair coats you pay two hundred dollars for, but he came out from the wilderness in that attire having lived on locusts and wild honey and he cried repentance to the people.

The people said, "What on earth have we got to repent of?" The first thing they had to repent of was selfishness. "He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that has none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise." (Luke 3:11.) He never said, "Go to Caesar with your poor, with your needy." He never said, "Apply for social security funds from the Romans." He said that if you had, you were to impart to those who had not. That is God's plan of economy. He went to the tax collectors. My, if anyone needs to repent, it is the tax collectors. And he cried repentance to them.

And when they said, "What have we got to repent of?" He said, "Exact no more than that which is appointed unto you." (Ibid., 13.) To the people generally he said, "You that have give to those who have not." To the government he said, "Tax only what is appointed unto you."

Then he went to the soldiers, those wonderfully attired Roman soldiers. They were proud and haughty men and he cried repentance to them. They said, "What have we got to repent of?" And he said something like this, "Do not bear false witness against your neighbor," or whatever it was. At this point I know he did say, "Be satisfied with your wages." They were working for the government. He said, "Be satisfied with your wages." People who work for the government don't produce wealth. They just use it. They eat it up and don't produce. Now, he was telling the Roman soldiers that they should be satisfied with their wages. I used to work for the government. I was never satisfied with my wages. My, how I could sympathize with those Roman soldiers. When I was working for the government, I wasn't producing anything. Yes, I guess I was. I was going around trying to get the people who were in need to come and sign the roll in Salt Lake County to receive help, to receive their social security. I couldn't get them to sign up. They were too proud. Oh, we didn't have a welfare program in those days. It is too bad we didn't. I couldn't get them to sign, and now I go around and try to tell them to get off these rolls, the same ones I tried to get them on. It is harder to get them off than to get them on. They have lost their pride. They will take all they can get and more, too. They are not satisfied with their wages.

What has happened to the integrity of the family? What is the trend? In Germany they had a youth movement. They took children out of the home, put them in uniform, and when the crucial time came, what did the children say? They said, "Heil, Hitler" and betrayed their own parents into concentration camps because they were divorced from the family and were the children of the state. That also happened in Italy. That's what happens in every state where the family is destroyed, and the children become instruments of the state for carrying out the purposes of the government. Our government wants universal military training. You know what that will do, don't you, you parents? They say it can't happen here. Brothers and sisters, it is happening! It has happened. The state is taking our youngsters. They won't even let us have any ministers any more, if they are of military age. Have you heard of that? It is unconstitutional. Our boys and our girls are going into these camps, and one general said, "I wouldn't give a d-a-m-n for a marine that wouldn't get drunk."

During those war years when I was in New Zealand alone, with no missionaries, how I thrilled when our servicemen would come into our home, come into our meetings on Sunday, and worship. Sometimes we would turn the whole service over to them, let them conduct the service and do everything—administer the sacrament, do the speaking, the praying, and the singing. Most of those young men belonged to that very outfit about which the general said, "I wouldn't give a d-a-m-n for a man in this outfit who wouldn't drink, who wouldn't get on a drunk once in a while." But we have a leaven of righteousness. That is the reason God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah because there was no leaven of righteousness left. Just one little family and he saved that family by telling them to flee!

Now, how much is it: two dollars and ninety cents per capita will finance your welfare program. Two dollars and ninety cents, and yet as has been said, "Some will have to pay more than that because others won't pay anything." We have a lot of assessments in this Church. I don't like them. We have a lot of contributions we are called upon to make. I don't like them. It is God's Church, isn't it? Let him finance his own business, that's my philosophy! Do you agree with that? Let him finance it. We build chapels; we dedicate them to the Lord. We present them to him. Well, why doesn't he finance them? We are always being dunned for a contribution, and I am getting sick and tired of it. I want the Lord to finance his own business, and he will do it if you will give him his money. That is the whole trouble. You wouldn't have to pay $2.90 for any project in this Church if you were turning over to the Lord his money. Do you believe that? If it is his plan, he has provided a means for financing it, not by contribution, but by obedience to the principles he has given us.

President Stratford, here, for instance could say to me, "Brother Cowley, we will go into business together. I'll furnish all the capital, all the blessings, all the resources. You look after the business. Call upon me when you need me for any advice. I'll be around. I'll be available if you need me. If you have any difficulties, call on me. Then when the profits come in, you keep ninety percent and give me ten, and then I'll put my ten percent right back into the business. How would you like that?" My, I would like to have him for a partner on that basis. Well, that's the kind of partner we have, brothers and sisters. The sun, the rain, the blessings of heaven, the windows are open. My, how they are opened here in Oregon. The windows of heaven are open, and down it comes. The lands bear fruit. "You run the business," God said. "I am there to give you counsel, and when the increase comes in, you keep ninety percent and give me my ten, and I will put every penny of it right back into the business." That is just exactly what he does. Every penny of his ten percent comes right back into his business here upon the earth.

There is something in the Doctrine and Covenants, which says, "And there shall be a great hailstorm sent forth to destroy the crops of the earth." (D.&C. 29:16.) I said hail. What are you going to do when that happens? Ah, brothers and sisters, put your $2.90 in your welfare project, and when that happens and if you have your year's supply of food in your home, let the hails come, and the winds blow, and our storehouses in our homes, in our wards, and in our stakes will be full just as they were in the days of Joseph, and we will be preserved.

I like that plan. What good will be our greenbacks that we get from the government for security when all the crops of the earth are destroyed by hail?

You know in the days of Israel, they worked this plan. They worked this welfare plan to a fareye-well. They never had any taxes. How do you like that? No income taxes, no property taxes, no luxury taxes, no dog taxes, or whatever taxes they have! But they never had them in the days of Israel. They had just one law! "You give me what's mine, and that will take care of everything," and so they gave God his ten percent and besides blessing the people who produced wealth, that ten percent paid for the expenses of the Levitical priesthood who were engaged in the ministry and didn't produce. The tithes took care of them.

Next conference you will probably hear the clerk, President Clark, or whoever might get up to do it, read the financial statement, and he will tell you that the allowances of the Church Authorities and the salaries of help in the Church office building do not come out of tithing. I don't know why they say that. Why shouldn't they come out of tithing? But, brothers and sisters, I can tell you one thing they don't say when they see my car going down the street. They don't say, "There goes my fast offering." Everybody knows where that goes—which isn't very much. Up here you have one ward which pays the biggest fast offerings per capita I've seen during the six years I have been in this work. They pay over $3.00 per capita in one ward. Twenty-four meals into $3.00—now, somebody that knows how to work figures, figure that out. How much is that a meal? Fifteen cents a meal, and you should see what I ate today. My, this is the place to live, brothers and sisters. You ought to sing that song over and over again about Oregon ready to reap the harvest. This is the place.

Fast offerings—why that's part of your welfare program. You wouldn't have to be called on for $2.90 if you paid an honest fast offering. If the people in this Church paid an honest fast offering, it would take care of all the financial end of the budget, the money end. But we don't obey. Obedience is all the Lord asks for. He doesn't want your money. He wants obedience. He doesn't want your money at all. He wants his from your obedience and that would finance his plans here upon the earth.

Now do you think if some ward in this stake would write down to the Church and say, "Everyone of us in this ward keeps the Word of Wisdom, everyone of us has the Church section of the News in the home. Everyone has The Improvement Era, The Children's Friend, The Instructor, etc., and we want a chapel. It will cost $150,000." Do you think the Church Presidency would write back and say, "The Church will pay for the whole thing"? Do you really think they would write that back? Well, I don't know, but I've seen that happen.

We have a branch out in the New Zealand Mission—the most perfect branch in the world. I don't know why it hasn't been translated. They wanted a chapel. It cost so many thousand pounds. I wrote to President Grant. I said to the First Presidency, "Brethren, here is a branch that wants a chapel. The estimated cost is so much. I have heard the brethren in this Church preach from time to time from the pulpit and make the statement that if everyone obeys the principles of the gospel, he would never be called on for contributions. Every member of this branch keeps the Word of Wisdom literally. Every single member pays a full tithing. Every single member fasts on fast day and pays a full fast offering. Every single member keeps the Sabbath day holy. The people cook their Sunday dinner on Saturday evening. Every single member goes to sacrament meeting every Sunday unless there is sickness. Every home has The Children's Friend, The Mission Periodical, The Improvement Era, The Relief Society Magazine, The Instructor, The Church Section of the News. Every home has family prayer." I got a cablegram back from President Grant which said that the Church would pay for the chapel—the whole thing. Well, I never told the branch that he said that. I said, "We have the green light on the chapel, so let's go ahead." The first thing I knew one member of the branch donated the land—a half acre of ground. The next thing I knew one man donated one tree which had 23,000 feet of timber in it, and we needed 13,000 feet of that particular kind of tree for that chapel, and he gave the other 10,000 feet to the mill for milling the 13,000 feet which we needed in the building. The priesthood got out and did most of the work. When the bills came in, the Church paid about eight percent of the cost of that building, and they had said that they would pay for the whole thing. Well, I tried to start spending money around that place then. I went down there to dedicate the building, and my car got stuck in the mud. I said, "Let's put cement all over the place around here." The next time I went down there, the cement was all over the place, and I hadn't received a bill and never did get one to this day. You see how it worked.

Oh, brothers and sisters, "Prove me now herewith," (is that what he said?) "if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3:10.) Is it worth trying? That's part of the welfare program of this Church, the greatest plan of economy we have ever had.

How many people do we have in the United States? 160,000,000. What if every person in the United States fasted on fast day and gave one dollar to represent the cost of the two meals he or she would have eaten. It would amount to $160,000,000 a month. Multiply that by twelve—God's plan. Would taxes be reduced? No, they would spend that and increase your taxes. But in the Church it works.

I used to collect for the Community Chest. Oh, I did pretty well the first year. The next year I went around I didn't collect so much. I went to two offices where I had big contributions the year before—very prosperous concerns. I went to the manager of one of them, and he said, "I am not giving to the Community Chest this year." He drew a circle on a piece of paper. "That's the pie, the Community Chest pie." He cut out one big piece of pie. He said, "That's for overhead." He cut out another piece of pie, "That's for the salary of the secretaries that run the Community Chest." He cut out another piece of pie. He said, "That's the cost of distribution." Then he drew another circle. He said, "Now, that's the pie I like. That's the Relief Society of your Church, and every piece of pie goes to the person in need. Not one piece is cut out for overhead, for distribution, for salary, or for anything else."

I said, "Well, you had better contribute. If you don't, you will have sixteen or seventeen agencies calling on you for contributions. In this way you will only have one." Well, he finally contributed. I went to another office. These two men must have been together talking this thing over. He told me the same thing.

Now, brothers and sisters, that's God's plan. Amazing how it works, isn't it? I dedicated a chapel in New York City. President Clark had been advertised as the one who was to be there. He was in Georgia and didn't show up, and so I had to dedicate the chapel. The place was packed—a lot of friends of President Clark—several dignified ministers. After the meeting three of these ministers came up to me and shook hands with me, and one of them said, "I would like to ask you a question." I said, "All right, what is it?" I always know the answers to all of these questions. My answer is generally, "I don't know." He said, "Do you have a paid ministry in your Church?" I guess he had been talking to a missionary and couldn't believe him. I said, "Well, we have more than 100,000 (I didn't know the number, but I put it at 100,000 or more) who hold the priesthood in this Church. Of that more than 100,000, we have fewer than one hundred who receive any allowances whatsoever, not a salary, just an allowance." He said, "You don't have any paid ministry. Thank you. That's what I wanted to know."

Paid ministry. My, what we accomplish without the expenditure of money. The time the bishops will put in, the stake presidencies and the other officers of the various organizations, day after day and night after night, and they receive no monetary remuneration. The funny thing about it is that when you release them they get sore. That's one thing I have never been able to figure out. You have a good bishop who works his head off, loses his health, and you think he ought to be released, and it breaks his heart.

Well, it didn't affect me that way when I have been released from positions of the Church. I was down in New Zealand about eight years as president and I got a cablegram which said, "You are released." I pretty near hit the ceiling. I let out a war whoop. My wife asked, "What on earth has happened?" I said, "We have made it."

So we came back home. We are on the welfare plan now. Don't laugh at that one. If you think we are not on the welfare plan, you just look at the brethren in this Church—President McKay. What does he have since he has been in the Council of the Twelve all these years? He was an educator. He was president of a school. Look at President Clark. He is one of the greatest international lawyers in the United States, Ambassador to Mexico. I know one client who was paying him $5000 a month while he was in Mexico assisting Mr. Morrow, that's who was giving it to him I am sure and while he was at the peak of his earning capacity and at the peak of his career doing the thing he had struggled to do, he heard a voice that said, "Come, follow me." He gave it all up and went on the welfare plan. He gave up his business at which he was acquiring considerable wealth.

President Richards, Brother Bowen, Brother Widtsoe—look at Brother Widtsoe: You know the story of that good man and his brother and his mother. They were brought over from Norway. The mother took in sewing to get those boys an education. What great ambition she had for them, and they became great educators. Dr. Widtsoe graduated at the head of his class in Harvard. Later he went to school in a big university in Europe. He became an authority on irrigation in the United States and was recently called by Canada to help them. He was president of the University of Utah, doing the thing he had struggled for years and years to do, for which his mother struggled and toiled and slaved. He was sitting in his office, and he got a call from someone who said, "Brother Widtsoe, can you come down to the temple for a few minutes?" He went down to the temple. He was on the board of education of the Church. He thought that was what they wanted of him, to talk about some educational problem, and he told me, "I was down there, and in twenty minutes I was a member of the Council of the Twelve and was no more president of the University of Utah. I went home to my wife and told her what had happened. She said, 'Well, what are we going to do now?' I said, 'Sell the car and fire the maid. We can't keep them any more. We haven't got the means. We won't have the money to do it.' It is a little better now, but not much."

You go right down the line. There is Brother Moyle who sits next to me—a man who loved to make money, a great lawyer, great businessman, a man of great wealth. He was in New York City, and he got a phone call which said, "Come, follow me. Hurry home. Conference is on, and we want you here," and he was called to give up his profession and give up his business activities. I will never forget the day he was ordained as long as I live. After he was ordained the President said to him, "We would like to hear a few words from you, Brother Moyle," and he stood up with tears in his eyes and tears in his voice. He said, "President Smith, from this moment forward I consecrate my life to the Church and everything I possess, all my wealth, all my property, everything I own is on the altar. Take it whenever you want it or whenever the Church needs it."

I was in Brother Stapley's home, down in Arizona, three or four weeks before the conference at which he was called. I went into this beautiful, magnificent, new home. You could look out of the big windows at the back over a beautiful golf course. He had in that home a private room, a private apartment for the visiting Church Authorities. He was president of the stake. Well, he came up to conference. President Smith went into the Hotel Utah to meet him, and he said, "Come, follow me." I don't think that he lived in that home two months, and he followed. He was a man of large business interest in Arizona; now he lives in a little cliff dwelling near me.

Now, don't you ever tell me that we are not on the welfare plan, brothers and sisters—don't ever do it. Don't ever say that those brethren have the security that they want while others suffer. Why, they look after the widow's mite, brothers and sisters, with more care than they look after their own means if they have any. Now you just think of that once in a while. Oh, it's all right for them to talk about the welfare plan. They have all they want. A woman here recently said, "My, look at the Cadillac cars behind the Church office building." Only one of those Cadillac cars was purchased by the man who drives it. The others were presented by the one man I think who drives a Cadillac car. People don't understand these things, do they? Do you know, brothers and sisters—this is the little secret I will put you in on. If I were going to buy a home and I had enough money to make a down payment I couldn't keep up the monthly payments. Do you know when I went into the mission field, I had $20,000 in life insurance. Do you know I came home and didn't have a penny of life insurance? I went to an insurance company, and they turned me down. Now I can never get any insurance because I have a bad heart, but I am happy. I am happy on the outside, crying on the inside. I used to know that song.

I love this work, and I love this welfare program. While I was down in New Zealand—that's where they use the welfare plan. My goodness, how they work it down there. You walk into a house, and you hang up your hat, and if somebody in the family wants the hat, he takes it. I lost two good hats that way, but I got something back. I would walk in and see something I wanted, and I would get it. I used to go around and tell those people about the welfare plan. I didn't know anything about it. I was just thinking it up as best I could. I had had nothing to do with it. I would read in the Church papers about the welfare plan. I would go around the mission telling them what to do, how to operate this welfare program, and I told them to put away some sugar. The first thing I heard one day one of our good Saints got up and said, "Brother Cowley comes around and tells us to live this welfare plan, to store away sugar. I stored away seven bags of sugar. The other day my wife went to the doctor, and he says she has sugar diabetes. That's the way it works."

Well, anyway, I have two or three homes out in New Zealand that are very dear to me—next to my own home. There is one of those homes I lived in for about three years when I was doing some translating. A very well-to-do native owned it. He and his wife fixed up a beautiful room for me—new furniture, down quilts, feather mattress, beautiful overstuffed set. They had the room dedicated for me. Every morning I would get up and get dressed and walk out to do my work. The lady of the house would walk in my bedroom. She would take my pajamas, shirt, socks, anything she saw there, take them out and wash them, and when I went to bed at night, there they were all clean and ironed—every single day. For two years I lived there. Every day that room was kept spotless for me. Well, I was on the welfare plan there.

When I went out to preside, of course, I visited there, but it wasn't very often. After I got a home and became a member of this Council I went back on two or three trips. The first trip I went back I went to the city of Auckland. I came over from Australia in a flying boat, and I stayed in Auckland at the home of one of our good native Saints. I didn't stay at the mission headquarters. They make you work there, but I stayed at this home. The good lady would do my laundry and put hot water bottles in the bed when it was cold. Oh, I liked that.

We started on a trip. Her husband had a taxicab. He doesn't belong to the Church yet, but he is a good man. He had a taxicab and he always insisted on driving me around the mission in a taxicab. He would take the meter off before he left. I always insisted on that. I would never pay anything. I would tell him that I traveled without purse or scrip. He said, "That's all right. We will go." So his wife fixed up my clothing for me and put them in my bag, and away we went. When we got to this home where I used to live when I was translating, I went to go to bed, and I opened up the bag and didn't have any pajamas. So I went out and said, "I guess Kathleen forgot to put my pajamas in the bag." The mother in the home laughed and smiled and looked at her daughter, and she smiled. My, they acted like they were tickled to death, and they were. Then the daughter went out of the room and came back in a few minutes with a brand new pair of pajamas and handed them to me. I said, "I can't wear those." Her father weighed about 350 pounds, and I thought they were his pajamas. I said, "I would rather sleep on a bed than in a tent." They said, "They're not his pajamas. They are yours." I said, "Mine, how come?" They said, "Oh, you used to come around here and tell us about the welfare plan to put away some clothing for a day of need, and we have just been praying for this day. We put away a box of clothing for you, and we have been waiting for the time when you would come around and need something." I said, "By the way, I think I forgot my socks, too." My, it is wonderful. Those good people are just like my own brothers and sisters, like my own flesh and blood, and when they put away their welfare clothing, they also put away some for me.

I used to go to another home there. They had a beautiful room in this nice new home. No one went into that room except the mission president and his wife, and when I went back as a member of the Council of the Twelve, I called them up long distance. I was going down there to a conference. I said, "Now, don't worry about me. You just have the mission president and his family stay in that room, and I will go somewhere else. It is about time." The man broke right down on the phone and cried, and I hung up and I felt bad. Then I called him back. I said, "Well, I will come to your house. Sure, I couldn't go anywhere else."

So when I went down there, I drove into the yard. I said, "What on earth has happened to this house?" It was larger. You know three months before when he heard that I was coming down to be at that conference, was coming out from home, he said to his wife, "How much money have we got in the bank? How much have we saved from shearing sheep last year?" She told him. He said, "All right." They drew every penny out of the bank, and they built another room on the house for me, and they moved the furniture out of that other room and put it in there. Now, I love this welfare plan.

I went into another home out there one day. A woman had a beautiful baby, and she was letting her aunt have it. The mother was a Catholic, and her aunt was a member of the Church. I said, "You can't let her have it. She has had twenty-five children just like that. She is getting old, and she isn't strong. You keep it. If you are going to give it away, I'll take it." Well, I've got it. Imagine that. That's the welfare plan for you.

You know how missionaries are. Well, we got that little boy. He is thirteen now. He is not a Catholic any more. When he was eight years old, we baptized him. Now he is a Mormon. You ask him what his name is and he says, "Anthony Ronald Hamiora, Bradley Nopera Duncan Meha Cowley." I said, "Is that so? What does that mean?" "Well, Anthony Ronald Hamiora Bradley, that's my Catholic name. Nopera Duncan Meha Cowley, that's my Mormon name." We call him Tony.

Well, I will have to quit. I don't want to miss my train. This is a great welfare program. I used to come through Honolulu. I got in a conference once like this up there. My, I love those people. In fact one day after meeting a white woman came up to me and said, "Brother Cowley, next time you come won't you say something good about the white people?"

They were making a lot of money down there. Employment was good. The wages were high, and I was giving them counsel. I said, "Don't waste your money. Save it. Buy things. Store them up. Don't buy these expensive foods you don't need. Why, in my home, we don't buy meat. It is too expensive. We don't buy butter. We buy a substitute."

You know that was the best thing I ever said down there. When I got home and opened my brief case, I took out an envelope that a man had given me, and I opened it up and it had $50 in it—a fifty dollar greenback and a little slip of paper which said, "For butter and meat." And you tell me the welfare plan isn't wonderful. I never once went through Honolulu after that but what somewhere in my effects was a fifty dollar bill for butter and meat, and then I was a long time between trips. I got in an airplane one night down at the John Rogers Airport flying to San Francisco. I pulled a handkerchief out of my pocket and out came a hundred dollar bill. I hadn't been there very recently—one hundred dollars for meat and butter. Well, we didn't buy meat and butter with it. We tried to keep a Maori couple on a mission in the Cook Islands who used to keep us in their home down in New Zealand. So I used to send this money out to that couple.

That's the Church—our brother's keeper. Love one another; help one another. You can't beat it—the blessings of the gospel. Get out on your welfare project.

I was down in Preston where I was born, and the stake president got up and announced, "Brothers and sisters, we are doing very well. We have a budget which calls for thirty-seven cows. We need some more. We haven't reached our quota—our budget." I got up—they are my people in Preston—and I said, "I want cows and more cows, and this is no bull, it is cows we want." Well, I saw him a few weeks after in Salt Lake, and he said, "Come up again. We have 139 cows."

Well, $2.90! A measly little $2.90! My goodness, brothers and sisters, we are not a $2.90 Church. We are a thousand dollar Church, five thousand! So you get the spirit of this welfare program and make it a part of your lives. That's the genius of it; we realize that there is always a purpose in God's plan and when his prophets speak, let's listen like Pharaoh listened to Joseph and saved the Egyptians and his own family. Let's preserve the integrity of the families.

My, I am glad I have the wife I have and the mother I had. I have never had an unclean thought come into my mind in the presence of my mother and my wife. I am glad to know that while I am standing here that my wife and our little boy are home, and they are on their knees, and they are praying for the preservation of the integrity of our little family for my safe return. I hope that when that boy grows up, someone can say to him, "Son, behold thy mother. Woman, behold thy son," and that that son will keep her in his home and will never shift the responsibility of looking after his mother in her hours of need. My, I hope he learns that.

I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ, and I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God. I know that there is inspiration in this Church, and I could talk to you for hours about that. This Church is guided by inspiration. I have had inspiration. I have had come into my heart when I have been officiating in this Church in various capacities inspiration which I did not know I was going to receive and which has solved my problems.

I was lying in bed in Sydney, Australia, worried to death. I had been fasting and praying. We had an enormous problem in one of those missions. I didn't know but what within a few weeks the whole mission would be closed up. All of a sudden there flashed in my mind the words of a cablegram, and I got dressed and couldn't wait for the post office to open so that I could send that cablegram, and I went and sent it word for word just as I had seen those words flash into my mind in a vision while I was awake. That cablegram solved the whole problem.

Live close to God, brethren in the priesthood. Magnify your callings. He is very close. He wants to use you. Let him use you for the building up of his kingdom. I leave my blessing and witness with you that this is true, every bit of it, and I do it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
