Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

December, 1938—

Te Karere (New Zealand mission paper).

"WE HAVE tried Christianity for eighteen hundred years, now let us try the religion of Christ."

Thus spake a German philosopher almost one hundred years ago. During the past one hundred years since this observation was made, there has been little change in the attitude of Christian peoples. Christianity is being tried, but what of the religion of Christ?

Christian nations are engaged in civil war, in racial persecution, in the suppression of certain of the inalienable rights of man. And there is scarcely a Christian nation upon the face of this world that is not preparing for a wild rush into war; not a war of Christian nations against heathen nations, but a war of Christians against Christians. This is a Christian world gone mad; a Christianity that is being crushed under the juggernaut of "isms" and "schisms" of modern trends in government. This Christianity is failing, and it is failing because it is divorced from the religion of Christ.

Christianity, so-called, is an entangled mesh of many various, diverse, and conflicting opinions and tenets of faith. Its fruits have been and ever will be confusion. Every generation of ecclesiastical authority in the Christian churches attempts a new mold of Godliness to reflect the current thoughts of the church ministry.

The religion of Christ, however, is Christ. It is truth, and therefore, it is the same yesterday, today, and forever. It is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism." Its fruits are harmony, peace, and love. It is beautifully simple, and simply beautiful. It needs no scholarly interpretation to enable men to comprehend its power. The full comprehension of its regenerative force may be found only as it is interpreted in the lives and conduct of its adherents.

At this season of the year when man's thoughts should turn to Christ, and when the birth of the Son of God is again to be commemorated, the peoples of the world would do well to give up Chrisitanity, as a hopeless, purposeless failure and make way for the religion of Christ. If man would adopt the religion of Christ as the impelling force of his life, then again would the "Prince of peace" walk among men, and man would again be "his brother's keeper," rather than his "brother's destroyer."

To the Latter-day Saints in the New Zealand Mission, we extend our thanks and appreciation for your devotion to the religion of Christ and also for your cooperation in carrying on his ministry in this beautiful island country; all of which has made this one of the happiest years of our lives.
