Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The Sacrament Service

Editorial, Te Karere, February, 1941

"WHEREFORE whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

"But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.

"For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.

"For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep." (1st Cor. 11:27-30.)

The most sacred service of religious worship is that of the sacrament. Through this service the religionist is brought into proximity to the spiritual force and exalting power of the perfect character of the Son of God.

The law of the sacrifice instituted in the days of Adam was fulfilled in the death of the Savior. The greater law, that of the sacrament, is fulfilled only in the eating of the bread and the drinking of the cup, worthily, during the sacrament service of the Church.

There is no substitute for this divine ritual in God's plan of redemption and regeneration.

Adam and his posterity, down through the ages, offered the firstlings of their flocks and the best of their fruits in anticipation of the fulfilment of the law of sacrifice in the death of "The Lamb without blemish," which fulfilment would bring to them a redemption from transgression of divine injunctions.

Only the best was acceptable to the Lord as a sacrifice. The excellence of the sacrificial offering was a convincing reminder that a redemption from sin would come only through the supreme sacrifice of one possessed of the attributes ascribed to Jesus the Christ.

As the day approached for the fulfilment of the old law, the new law of the sacrament was instituted. Christ, as the days of the earthly ministry drew to a close, called his Apostles together and administered unto them the sacrament of the last supper. He blessed the broken bread and the cup, and as he passed to each the sanctified emblems, he admonished the disciples to "do this in remembrance of me, for as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come."

In showing the Lord's death by obedience to this holy ordinance, the partaker of the sacrament solemnly reaffirms the baptismal covenant to take upon himself the name of the Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he has given him.

The Lord, being aware of man's tendency to transgress the law, and that "it is human to err" has enjoined his Church to "meet together often" and partake of the emblems of his redeeming sacrifice, and to offer up their sacraments that they may more fully keep themselves unspotted from the world.

The administration of the sacrament as a component of religious worship is so essential that the words in the prayer of sanctification have been given by direct revelation from God for this specific purpose. Words other than those contained in the revelation will fail to sanctify the bread and the cup to the souls of those worthy to partake of them. In the blessing pronounced upon the sacred emblems of the Master's great sacrifice, the priest repeats God's own words—words which carry inspiration to the heart and soul of every participant in this holy ritual.

The Sabbath is the day appointed for sacrament service. In the religious worship of this day every member of the Church is expected to present himself before the sacrament board and renew his covenants with his Redeemer. For those who neglect this duty, there is no covenant renewal, and the Lord will not hold them blameless.

The vitality of the Church lies in the obedience of its members to the divine plan, and this vitality comes from the frequent communion of the Saints—meeting together often, and with contrite spirits, partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

"But remember that on this the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord."
