Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Tithing

Te Karere, October, 1944

AS THE FISCAL year of the mission once more draws to a close, we must again remind ourselves of the necessity of balancing our accounts with him who is the source of all life and its sustenance. If we have been honest in our partnership with God, our records for the past year will show a payment of ten percent to him of all our increase and a distribution to ourselves of the remaining ninety percent.

No one who acknowledges God as the giver of all blessings would suggest that his economic plan is unfair to anyone but himself. Yet if the increase of all members of the Church were honestly tithed this small portion of our means would be sufficient, with some to spare, to defray all expenses of the Church and to guarantee economic security to all in times of need—to say nothing of the spiritual uplift that comes to all who obey this divine principle. Too often, in fact, we look to the Lord for prosperity in the material things because of our obedience to the law of tithing when we would do better to consider the increase in spiritual wealth that comes from obedience, not only to this principle but also to all others in the plan of mankind's regeneration. Whatever is required at our hands for the building of God's kingdom upon the earth is of spiritual significance. "Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.

"Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual." (D. & C. 29:34-35.)

The testimony which anchors one to his faith is the testimony founded upon obedience. The testimony of the non-obedient is unstable and has no permanent value. A testimony derived in any other way than from obedience lacks a firm foundation. It is like building a house upon the shifting sands of the seashore. Also the sincerity of the bearer of such a testimony may properly be questioned. The honest sincerity of one whose obedience is consistent with his testimony can never be doubted. Especially is this true of the tithepayer. By paying the Lord's portion of his increase to the Church, he acknowledges God both as the source of all blessings and as the head of the Church.

During the past seven years there has been a steady improvement in the mission in the payment of tithes; both in the amount paid and in the number who have paid. The increase in the number of tithepayers is, of course, more important than an increase in the total amount paid; provided, however, that the tithepayer pays one-tenth of his increase.

Notwithstanding this encouraging growth in the tithes of the mission there are still far too many members whose names do not appear on the tithing records of the Church. The names of all who receive an income and of all who have been blessed with an increase in their crops and herds should appear upon the tithing records. The fiscal year ends on the 30th day of November, so there is still time to start paying the Lord's share to his Church so that your name will appear on the report for this year.

For almost seven years I have been blessed with the grand privilege of presiding over this mission, and inasmuch as this is probably the last message I will write for the president's page on the subject of tithing, I want to express my appreciation to all, both parents and children, for the way you have sustained me in the matter of paying your tithes and offerings. God has blessed you for your obedience to this principle. I have seen these blessings both in your homes and in your chapels. There is still plenty of room for improvement, and this improvement will come just as sure as the sun rises if you will continue to obey the law of the tithe. More chapels are needed, carved meetinghouses are desired, more and better homes are necessary to the welfare and development of the people. All these blessings will be yours if you will but get into the tithing habit so that the Lord will open the windows of heaven and pour them out upon you. All members of the family should be tithepayers.

Boys and girls should be taught to pay tithing while in the parental home. True, they are generally furnished clothing, food, shelter, and education out of the family budget which, presumably, has been tithed by the head of the family. But this procedure alone does not teach young people to pay tithing. The setting up of a cash allowance for personal needs beyond those furnished out of the family income, the setting aside of a piece of ground, the raising of a calf or other livestock for the purpose of providing income to young people provides excellent opportunities for teaching tithing. Appreciation for the principle of tithing is most effectively developed during youth—it is hazardous to delay this teaching. Many faithful Latter-day Saints have never missed paying their tithing since they were baptized at eight years of age. Their parents taught them and made it possible.

The wife's tithing is properly paid in the husband's name unless she has a separate income. In this case, her tithing should be paid in her own (given) name.

"When computing tithing let us remember it is God's law. We are dealing with our heavenly Father. He knows the amount we should pay. Does that which we actually pay agree with that which the Lord knows we should pay?" (From Presiding Bishopric.)

There are some in the mission who were regular tithepayers during the early period of my mission but who, for some reason or other, have since stopped obeying this principle. If they have discontinued because of anything I may have said or done, I beg their forgiveness and make an especial appeal for them to start again so that their names will appear before I leave. Nothing would give me greater joy before leaving the mission than to see those names again on the tithing records.

"Behold, now it is called to-day until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming." (Ibid., 64:23.)
