Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Maori Chief Predicts

Te Karere, November, 1950

IN MARCH, 1881, a convention was called of representative natives of the Ngatikahungunu Tribe of the Maori race for the purpose of discussing political, social, and religious problems of racial importance. The convention was held at a native village near Masterton, New Zealand, in what is known as the Wairarapa district. The meetings of this conference were convened in a historic, native meetinghouse, the name of which was Ngatauewaru, meaning "The Eight Years."

Many of those in attendance were old enough to have seen the coming of the first Christian missionaries to New Zealand, and all were devout adherents to one of the several churches which had already been established among them. Some were Catholic; some of the Methodist faith; and some of the Presbyterian belief. As the history of Christianity among them was reviewed by the speakers, the question arose as to the necessity of the existence of more than one Christian church—if all Christianity was of Christ, why were not all Christians affiliated with but one church? Why, if prior to the coming of Christianity to their shores, a unity of religious belief and practice obtained, should there now be, with the so-called "greater light," a diversity of belief and a confusion of ideas? It was evident to the native mind in view of the difference in doctrinal and religious profession of the several churches that not more than one of them could be the recipient of divine inspiration nor be recognized as the Church of Christ.

The great native leaders assembled at this convention could conceive of nothing of more vital importance to the well-being of the race than to know the answer to the questions: "Which is the church? Which one should the Maori join so there will be once again a unity of religious belief among them? Where was the power of God unto salvation for the Maori race?"

The questions were discussed and debated at great length, but the answer evaded them. At last it was moved, and the motion approved, that the all-important question should be propounded to one Paora Potangaroa, the wisest chief and most learned sage among them. To him the question was directed: "Which of the churches is the church for the Maori race? Which of them should we join?"

Potangaroa's answer was one word, "Taihoa," which means "wait," or "wait awhile," and which, in this instance, implied that he would answer the question later after he had given the matter serious consideration. The old sage then left the assembly and retired to his own residence, which was nearby. There for three days he was occupied in prayer, fasting, and meditation about the problem which had been presented for his solution. He was aware that the true answer would not come without prayerful meditation and without invoking divine aid. After having been thus engaged for three days, he returned to the convention and addressed his people.

Freely translated these were his words: "My friends, the church for the Maori people has not yet come among us. You will recognize it when it comes. Its missionaries will travel in pairs. They will come from the rising sun. They will visit with us in our homes. They will learn our language and teach us the gospel in our own tongue. When they pray they will raise their right hands." After saying these things, as a partial answer to the question, he called Ranginui Kingi to act as scribe and to write what the chief was about to dictate as a further answer to the inquiry of his people concerning which church would bring salvation to the Maori. That which was written was called by the sage: "A covenant for remembering the hidden words which were revealed by the Spirit of Jehovah to Paora Potangaroa, and which words were proclaimed by him to the people assembled at the 'eight years house' located at the head of the island: and these hidden words of the Spirit were proclaimed on the 16th day of March, 1881." In March, 1881, when these words of Potangaroa were reduced to writing, the missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had not yet come to his people. The "covenant" continues: "First this is the day of the fulness (1881.)" Later in the year the fulness of the gospel did come to this people. The missionaries came from the "rising sun." They traveled in pairs. They lived in the homes of the people. They learned the Maori tongue and taught the people the gospel in their own language. When they prayed, they raised their right hands—all of which Potangaroa had foretold when he told his people that the Church for the Maori had not yet arrived. Continuing, the "covenant" sets forth: second, the year 1882, he said, would be the year of the "sealing" (or the year they would learn of the sealing ordinances). Third, the year 1883 will be the year of "the honoring"—of "great faith"—as it is written: "render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour." (Romans 13:7.) The year 1883 was a year of great honor and great faith among the people of Ngatikahungunu, the tribe of the sage and chief, Potangaroa. Members of this tribe joined the Church of Jesus Christ in great numbers, and in doing so, they gave tribute to whom tribute was due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor. Members of other tribes of the race also joined the Church in considerable numbers during the same year.

The "covenant" says further: "This covenant is to be remembered by the generations which follow after us. And the fruits of that which is set forth above (in the covenant) are—we are the lost sheep of the House of Israel. (We will learn of) the scepter of Judah; of Shilo; of the king of peace; of the day of judgment; of the kingdom of heaven; of the sacred church with a large wall surrounding; of the increase of the race; of faith, love, peace, patience, judgment, unity. All of this plan (contained in the covenant) will be fulfilled by the people of Ngatikahungunu Tribe during the next forty years." Then follows the date "March 16, 1881," on which the covenant was written: and the name of the scribe, "Ranginui Kingi."

At the top of the "covenant" is drawn in ink an "all-seeing eye," also a drawing of the sun rising beyond the ocean, indicating the east, from which direction Potangaroa said the missionaries of the true Church would come. The words in the covenant, "the sacred Church with a large wall surrounding" of which they would learn, are descriptive of Temple Square in Salt Lake City. The drawing of the "all-seeing eye" is also significant in this respect.

Missionaries had been doing work among the people in New Zealand prior to 1881, but only, with one or two exceptions, among the Europeans. It was in 1881, the year Potangaroa said "the fulness" would come, that Elder W. M. Bromley of Springville, Utah, arrived in New Zealand to preside over the mission, and he was told before leaving home "that the time had come to take the gospel to the Maori people."

At the conclusion of the "covenant" it was set forth that all that was written would be fulfilled by the Ngatikahungunu Tribe within the next forty years. Forty years from 1881 would be 1921. During that period of years the only Maori people who received all the covenants of the fulness of the gospel came from that one tribe. Thousands belonging to all native tribes of the Maori race had joined the Church, but only Church members belonging to the tribe referred to in the "covenant" came to the temples during that forty-year period and thereby fulfilled all the ordinances. After 1921 Latter-day Saints from the other tribes started coming to the temple and since that date have received the blessings of the sealing power in considerable numbers. As it was stated in the "covenant," they would learn that they were "the lost sheep of the house of Israel." Also they would be assured of "the increase of the race." During the years prior to 1881 the population had been consistently declining, and there were those who prophesied that within fifty years time the Maori race would be extinct. Believing that the Maoris were of Israel, the Latter-day Saint missionaries re-assured them that their number would increase, and since that time the population has more than doubled.

To commemorate the occasion of Potangaroa's prophecy, and the writing of the "covenant," a cement monument was erected in the historic meetinghouse where the convention was held, and the "covenant" was placed in the monument. In the year 1929, members of the Ratana Church, a sect of New Zealand origin, destroyed the monument for the purpose of recovering the "covenant." They were expectantly hoping that they would find in the "covenant" prophetic utterances with reference to the establishment of the "Ratana" movement and would thereby be able to convince the natives that their sect was the church for the Maori race. When the monument was broken into, however, there was no "covenant" to be found. Not having been hermetically sealed in the stone, time and moisture had damaged it beyond any hope of recovery.

During the year 1944 when the writer was presiding over the New Zealand Mission, he attended a Church conference in the same vicinity where the convention of March, 1881, had been held, and the incidents referred to above took place. While speaking at one of the meetings of the Church gathering, Brother Eriata Nopera told of his being present, as a very young man, at the convention of the leaders of the Ngatikahungunu Tribe in 1881, and of hearing the prophecies of Potangaroa about the coming of the true Church to the Maori people. At the close of the meeting a Maori sister requested her husband to proceed immediately to their residence a mile or so distant and bring back a document which he would find rolled in brown paper at the bottom of her trunk. Upon his return he handed the package to his wife, and she then invited Brother Nopera and the writer to accompany her to another room where she handed it to Brother Nopera. Upon unrolling the brown wrapping paper, he discovered that it contained a photographer's picture of the "covenant" which had been sealed up in the cement monument in Ngatauewaru meetinghouse in 1881.

A photographer doing business in Masterton in 1881, having heard of the prophecies of Potangaroa and that the written "covenant" was to be placed in a cement monument, asked the natives for permission to photograph it. Permission was granted, and thus a true copy of the "covenant" was preserved. It had been in the possession of one family down through the years and concealed from public view as a sacred document until it was presented to Brother Nopera in 1944. It is now in the possession of the writer.

Potangaroa was only one of several native prophets who foretold the coming of the Latter-day Saint missionaries to the Maori people.
