Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Understand the Unfortunate

Address to Alcoholics Anonymous, November 24, 1953, Logan, Utah

MAYBE I shouldn't say, "We of Alcoholics Anonymous." The other day I heard from a sister who belongs to the Church, and she said, "If you can belong to Alcoholics Anonymous, I am going to stay with my drunken husband."

I first came in contact with this organization in 1945. I had been away for about eight years, and I was walking down the street in Salt Lake City. I met one of my friends whom I grew up with—not a member of my Church. He came up and shook hands with me and welcomed me home. He said, "When you have a few minutes, I would like to visit with you and talk to you about true religion." I thought he was going to bear his testimony to me about the church he belonged to. I never thought anymore of it until on one occasion I heard something about Alcoholics Anonymous. I had a very dear friend who was drinking, and I thought maybe Alcoholics Anonymouse could do something for him. I got in touch with a member of the AA and was invited to come to one of their closed meetings. At that time they were holding them in the Newhouse Hotel. I got hold of my friend and took him down to the AA meeting, and at the AA meeting I saw this man that I had met on the street, who told me that he wanted to tell me something about true religion. After that meeting I knew what he meant because he had been the town bum for many years—one of the worst drinkers I have ever known, and he had now been a member of Alcoholics Anonymous for several years and hadn't touched a drop.

I was very much inspired with that meeting. I didn't understand all there was to understand about it that night, and I had some misgivings. At the time I was suffering with a little breaking out, and that is sometimes the outbreaking of alcohol on the face. Of course, I knew that wasn't the cause of mine. I had been on a mission for eight years, and that was what was causing it. When I came out of there with my friend, he started to laugh. I said, "What's the matter with you?" He said, "You were the only one in there that looked like an alcoholic. I am sure glad I am not an alcoholic." He had been drunk for twenty-seven years that I knew about and had gone through $400,000.

Well, I decided that I was in the business of saving souls, and I saw in this group of men many men whom I had known all of my life. Several of them had been my neighbors. I never will forget one fellow who was there. I used to run on the other side of the street when I would see him coming. He was an alcoholic if there ever was one. When I was county attorney in Salt Lake County and I couldn't find anyone else to prosecute, he would always show up and accommodate me. He not only drank alcohol, but he would also take this canned heat—I used to see him open a can, take his knife, dig it out, and put it in his handkerchief. Then he would squeeze the handkerchief and lick out that ooze from that canned heat, containing alcohol. He took goof balls, too. Well, I saw him there. That fellow hasn't had a drink now for a number of years. I always said if there was any organization in the world that could sober that man it was a great organization. His wife had left him. He has his wife back again now and a lovely home. He is in business. He calls in to see me regularly. In fact, he wants to be a good Latter-day Saint. He is having quite a time at it. I said to him one day, "How are you getting along with smoking?" He said, "Well, I smoke Kools, and I think anybody that can smoke Kools can beat the tobacco habit." One day I asked him how he was getting along, and he said, "Well, I'm not doing so bad. I started to drink Postum. Isn't that the nastiest darn stuff you have ever tasted?" He is making a great effort—wonderful man.

There is one thing that I have learned from these men—they don't sanctify themselves. There is no self-righteousness in them. They are a bunch of screwballs. Well, that's about what they are, I suppose. A lot of others that are screwballs have never touched a drink. This humility and sincerity appeal to me in this organization. That is what the worlds needs today, the language of sincerity. These men and women have to be sincere. I sometimes have people in the Church think that there may be some ulterior motive in this organization. Some of them have told me that they thought the liquor interests were financing them, and I think the liquor interests would be smart to finance some organization like this. I have had a great deal of pride in going around and discussing the little problems of AA with our own people. Sometimes our own people get the idea that AA is a religion. That if you join AA you may be taken out of your own Church. Oh, no. No, when a Mormon joins AA, he becomes the best Mormon he has been for many years. When a Catholic joins AA, he becomes the best Catholic he has been for a long while—or a Methodist, or a Presbyterian.

Nothing controversial enters into their deliberations or their discussions. They never discuss the matter of sectarian religion. They never discuss political matters. They sometimes will say, "Well, if you want to be a moderate drinker, that's all right with us." But at the same time they don't drink. They are all concerned with one problem and that is staying on this raft of sobriety—that's their only goal, their only objective. All other things are just secondary to them.

As I go around the Church, I generally mention AA. Recently I was in Oakland, and I said something about the AA organization. After the meeting up came some of our Church members and quietly whispered in my ear, "We belong." One of them was the superintendent of the Sunday School down there and a member of AA.

They do the things we would like to do in our Church. Of course, I want to talk about our Church. If you don't belong to our Church, just forgive me because I can't talk to you about your church. All I know is about my Church, and I don't know enough about that. I can see that within our Church activities where we are vitally interested in helping these men and women who are alcoholics we find it very difficult because we don't have understanding; for instance, if I should see a man drunk out on the street tonight, and I recognized him as a brother in the Church—and we have a lot of brothers in the Church who are drunk tonight, if I walked up to him and put my arm around him and said, "Bill, why don't you cut this out? It is no good for you." Well, he might be respectful, and he might not. But anyway, when he would get away from me, he would say, "He ought to go and get on a bender himself. He doesn't know what it is all about." As long as he thinks I don't understand him, it is just the same as if I didn't understand him, even if I do. But these men understand each other. You see when one of these men goes to the bedside of an alcoholic and talks to him or to her, they are kindred spirits. There is an understanding—a common understanding. There is a willingness to receive the help, and they do receive it. It is a thing they call group therapy—a wonderful way of helping each other in their groups.

I used to think that our Church had more meetings than any other Church or organization on earth. The Alcoholics Anonymous have us beaten. They are meeting all the time. If you get tired of going to fast meeting and attending long testimony meetings, you ought to go to these closed AA meetings, and then you would be very happy to go back to fast meeting and hear the testimonies of the brothers and sisters of the Church. That is all they do is hold meetings—stick together, stay together on this great program. It is a simple program, only twenty-four hours a day. They stay sober for only twenty-four hours a day. They get up in the morning—no drinks for the next twenty-four hours. Get up the next morning, and no drinks for the next twenty-four hours! That's easier than saying, "I am not going to take a drink in my whole life." Twenty-four hours is much shorter than a lifetime. So it makes the program much easier.

They believe in prayer. They believe in the efficacy of prayer. There is no question about that. Many of these men have tried everything else. They have been in institutions; they have been to psychiatrists, they have been to medical doctors; and they have come away still alcoholics.

So, I would like to say to you people who are members of the Church, you who are officials of the Church, you don't make a mistake if you avail yourselves of this organization to assist you with these problems, and there are genuine problems.

I was in Honolulu, and I went to the AA meeting there. I went to this meeting because I noticed it in the paper. It was a public meeting, so I went. The special guests that night were from the nurses from the Queen's Hospital in Honolulu. I got a real kick out of watching those nurses when they came in and started walking around and mingling with these alcoholics. One of them would go up to a man and say, "I had wondered where you had been. You haven't been in the hospital for months. I haven't seen you for a couple of years. This is the reason. You belong to AA." Yes, they belong to AA. I'll never forget the testimony of a woman in that meeting. She was one of those who had nothing further to do—the end had come. She was hopeless and helpless, had lost all power of resistance. She went to her room, intoxicated, and when she reached her little room, she turned on the light, and in her drunken stupor she just fell to her knees—this is her story—before a chair, and there as clearly as she could utter any words she told God that she was through. She told him to take her life. She said, "I have come to the end of things. There isn't anything I can do." When she finally opened her eyes, she noticed on the chair a newspaper and her eyes immediately saw the letters AA and a telephone number—AA for Alcoholics Anonymous. She went to the telephone and called this number, and she has never touched a drink from that day until the day she was telling the story. That had been three or four years.

I mentioned in our leadership meeting one day a little about the Alcoholics Anonymous. The next morning the president of the Rotary Club called me up. He was a member of the Church and had been to the meeting. He said, "I wonder if there is a chapter of AA here in Honolulu?" That was before I knew that there was one, before I had attended that meeting. I said, "There must be. Why, do you want to join?" He said, "No. Last Tuesday the speaker at Rotary didn't show up. I called him up and asked him what was the idea. He had promised to come and speak—a very influential man in Honolulu. When I called him, he was drunk, and he told me over the telephone, 'Fred, I am all washed up. I am going to lose my business. I am going to lose my family. I am just a drunken bum, and there isn't anything I can do about it.'" So Fred called me and asked me if there was a branch there or a chapter. I said, "The newspapers will know," so we went up to see Mr. Riley Allen, the editor of the Honolulu Star Bulletin. He says, "Yes, there is a chapter of AA here," and he went to his desk and got out a phone number. He said, "You have your friends or whoever it is that wants to get in touch with AA call that number and make an appointment with the man who will answer the phone." It has been seven years now. That man made the phone call. He still has his business. He still has his family, and he keeps his speaking appointments with Rotary and all other organizations. He belongs to AA, and he hasn't had a drop.

There isn't anything I can say that is too good about this great organization. I have attended the meetings. I am always glad to give whatever support I can. Now, of course, we should always help the alcoholic whether we belong to AA or not. You won't find any Communists in Alcoholics Anonymous. They are all real, patriotic, God-fearing Americans—men and women who are not afraid to get down on their knees and pray to God, not only for their own health and sanity, but also for the well-being of humanity and for the good institutions of this great nation.

Now, there is one thing I have learned, and it has been a wonderful thing for me as a religionist in my present position. I've learned from these men that there isn't a man living who isn't greater than his sins, who isn't greater than his weaknesses. That's a wonderful thing to know. It is a wonderful thing to know that even though a man may sink so low that he is at the bottom of the gutter, yet within him there is a greatness that can regenerate him if he will submit himself to the right influences and to the power above and beyond himself. When science fails and medicine has to lay the burden down, those who are afflicted with alcoholism can reach out to God, and he takes over and that is what science, medicine, fails to do. So I say, "God bless these men in their great undertaking. They are their brothers' keepers. They are engaged in the business of rehabilitating the unfortunate, and they rehabilitate each other."

Now, of course, in our Church we don't believe in the use of alcohol in any form. There is a reverend somebody—I've forgotten his name right now—who writes to me regularly from South Carolina. He doesn't believe in any kind of non-drinking organizations. He is quite annoyed with me because I believe in AA. He is a strong prohibitionist, this man. Well, the other day I wrote him a note, and I said, "Well, Reverend Sir, if all the drinkers in the United States belonged to AA there wouldn't be any liquor business left in this country. If every drinker would become a member of AA, there wouldn't be any need of any prohibition movement or any other temperaance movement because the AA member never takes a drink." It has been said here, "One is too many, and a billion is not enough, so he doesn't take the one."

Now, in conclusion may I say, too, that we do not drink. Don't think that we are not alcoholics because we don't drink. At least one out of sixteen of us is alcoholic; and if we started to drink, we would be alcoholics.

I ask God to bless them and bless us, especially in our endeavors to help one another, to be our brothers' keepers and realize that we are all God's children and as his children, we should be in the business, all of us, of saving one another, not only spiritually, but also materially, physically, and every other way. I want to join in thanking those who have made this building available to us tonight. It has been time well spent. I have enjoyed these testimonies of these members of AA, and I appreciate the lessons I have learned from them. They bring into my heart a spirit of humility and a spirit of sincerity.

God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
