Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Achievement

Address given at Brigham Young University May 18, 1953

IT IS a great honor to be here this morning, fellow students, members of the faculty, and witness the presentation of these awards to those who have achieved. As I have looked at them, they do not look different from any of the rest of you sitting here.

When I think of achievement, I think of the salesman who sold two milking machines to a man who only had one cow, and then took the cow as a down payment. I cannot think of any greater achievement than that in the field of salesmanship. I hope that, some day, someone with money—it will not be me, of course—will make an award to the individual in the school who puts forth the greatest effort to achieve and yet doesn't make the end result. I studied law with a young man in George Washington University who never passed in any of his subjects except one—and the professor of that class was called before the faculty and reprimanded for passing him. He was told that he certainly knew that this young man wasn't passing in that class. The reply of the professor was that to get to his own office in the school he had to go through the law library. And he said, "Every time I go through the library to my office, this young man is there studying. It does not matter whether it's a holiday, or between classes or in the evening. He is there, digging out the law." He said, "I pass him because of the great effort he is making to learn the law. Some day he will be a valuable man in some firm because he will know where to find the law. He will know what books to refer to." So this professor passed him because of the effort he was putting forth. I wish that I could have had professors like that when I was going to school.

I saw one of my high school instructors the other day who now lives in Honolulu. I met him in a restaurant, and he reminded me that I took first year French from him for two years, and that I got a better grade the first year than I did the second. It all goes to show that "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but to him that endureth to the end." Endurance is achievement. It is great achievement. And I know that as we go through life—those of us who are getting older every day—that the greatest achievement in life is not the acquisition of money. The greatest achievement to me is coming to the end of one's days, having been true and loyal to one's ideals. I can think of no achievement greater than that.

Maybe you have heard this report of a meeting that was held in the Edgewater Beach Hotel in Chicago in 1923, but I want to read it on this occasion:

"A very important meeting was held at the Edgewater Beach Hotel in Chicago in 1923. Attending this meeting were ten of the world's most successful businessmen and financiers. Those present were the president of the largest independent steel company, the president of the national city bank, the president of the largest utility company, the president of the largest gas company, the greatest wheat speculator, the president of the New York Stock Exchange, a member of the President's Cabinet, the greatest 'bear' in Wall Street, head of the world's greatest monopoly, President of the Bank of International Settlement. We must admit that here were gathered a group of the world's most successful businessmen; men in the business of making money, at least, men who had found the secret of making money. But twenty-five years later, let's see where these men are. The president of the largest independent steel company, Charles Schwab, died a bankrupt and lived on borrowed money for five years before his death. The president of the greatest utility company, Samuel Insull, died a fugitive from justice and penniless in a foreign land. The president of the largest gas company, Howard Rapson, is now insane. The greatest wheat speculator, Arthur Cutten, died abroad, insolvent. The president of the New York Stock Exchange, Richard Whitney, was recently released from Sing Sing Penitentiary. The member of the President's Cabinet, Albert B. Fall, was pardoned from prison so that he could die at home. The greatest 'bear' in Wall Street, Jesse Livermore, died a suicide. The head of the greatest monopoly, Ivor Kreuger, died a suicide; the president of the Bank of International Settlement, Leon Frazer, died a suicide. All these men learned well the art of making money, but not one of them learned how to live. What an achievement. All they learned was the art of making money; and generally when a man makes money, he thinks he has achieved that which is greater than any other thing on earth."

Money is, of course, very necessary; it is a necessary evil. I wish I had more of it. But I would rather know how to live and have ideas and ideals to live to, than acquire wealth because I know that when I come to die it doesn't matter how much money others have, they will not take with them any more than I will. Achievement! It's a wonderful thing. I think now of Michael J. Dowling, a young man who fell from a wagon in a blizzard in Michigan when he was fourteen years of age. Before his parents discovered that he had fallen from the rear of the wagon, he had been frostbitten. His right leg was amputated almost to the hip, his left leg above the knee; his right arm was amputated; his left hand was amputated. Not much future for a young lad like that, was there? Do you know what he did? He went to the board of county commissioners and he told them that if they would educate him he would pay them back every penny. During World War I, Mr. Dowling, who was at the time president of one of the largest banks in St. Paul, went to Europe to visit the soldiers—to visit those who were wounded. I remember reading that upon one occasion he was in a large hotel in London, and he had before him the wounded soldiers in their wheel chairs. They were in the lobby, and he was up on the mezzanine floor. As he started to speak, he minimized the seriousness of their wounds, the fact that the one had lost an eye, another had lost an arm, etc., were no grounds for complaint. And he got those fellows so wrought up that they started to boo him. Then he walked over to the stairway and down the stairs toward the lobby, telling them as he walked how fortunate they were, and they continued booing. Finally, he sat down on one of the steps and took off his right leg. And he kept on talking and telling them how well off they were. Well, they calmed down a little bit, but still they resented his remarks. Then he took off his left leg. Well, the booing stopped then. But before he arrived at the bottom of the stairs, he had taken off his right arm and flipped off his left hand, and there he sat—just the stump of a body! Michael Dowling was the president of one of the biggest banks in St. Paul. He had married and was the father of five children. Now is there anybody here complaining because he can't get an education? Because someone is more fortunate than he? Because he has some impairment, or infirmity that prevents him from getting ahead? If so, just think of Michael Dowling! He knew how to live, and he knew how to make money, and he knew how to rear a family—and he finally died as the result of the strength he gave in encouraging the wounded soldiers of World War I.

There are many instances like that in history. When I was employed in the Senate, I knew two Senators who were both blind: Senator Gore of Oklahoma and Senator Schall of Minnesota. Senator Gore used to go to the ball games. There was no one that scolded the umpire like Senator Gore. He couldn't see the ball players, he couldn't see the plays, but he could catch the spirit of the game. And he would go to the movies. He would go to the movies, and he would have one of his clerks with him—they didn't have talkies in those days—but the clerk would read the continuity of the screen, and he would sit and appreciate the picture. Both men were able Senators.

And so, if men with these great handicaps achieve, why can't we? We can all achieve—at least we can put forth the effort, and maybe we shall find a professor now and again who will pass us because of the effort we are putting forth, rather than because of the grades we're not getting. I think now of the great play, Cyrano de Bergerac. Edmund Rostand was the author of it. Many years ago Walter Hampden played it. I will always remember the final scene in that great play. You know, Cyrano was a man with a long proboscis or nose. If people made fun of his nose when they were in his presence, it meant a duel. Well, Cyrano had been disappointed in love. He had the "Dear John" experience. But a greater lover never lived than Cyrano. He was in love with a beautiful woman, but she thought she was in love with someone else. At the end of the play, she is seen in the garden of a convent. Cyrano, whose custom it was to go to the convent garden and visit with her and tell her all the news, was there on what was to be his last visit. He had been critically wounded, and his head was bandaged. His life was slipping away. During his lifetime he had worn a helmet in which a white plume was always to be seen. That white plume was the symbol of his ideals, symbol of his ethics in love and war and everything he did. There he was, in the garden, visiting with this woman whom he had loved and lost. Then with his last breath as he stood before her at attention with his sword held high he said these words:

"There is one crown I bear away with me,

And tonight, when I enter before God,

My salute shall sweep all the stars away

From the blue threshold!

One thing without stain,

Unspotted from the world, in spite of doom

Mine own!—That is my white plume."

What an achievement! This man who had been disappointed in his love, who had been defeated in war, could come to the last day of his life and say with his dying breath, "I go true to my ideals."

Now, my brothers and sisters, we have ideals. They're the highest in the world. No one has higher ideals; no one's plume is whiter than the plume you and I wear in our helmets. Our greatest purpose to achieve in life should be to come to the last day and say with Cyrano that we take with us, clean and unsullied, our ideals. And if we can do that, indeed we shall sweep with grandeur the threshold of heaven as we pass and we shall enjoy the fraternity of him who is perfect.

We all have the opportunity to achieve. There is no institution in the world better than this to give us the urge and the ambitious purpose to keep the plume white, so that it will sweep with grandeur the threshold of heaven. I congratulate those who have received these awards; I congratulate you who have not received them. One lesson necessary for all of us to learn in life is to rejoice in the other man's victory. If we can learn to rejoice in the other man's victory, then sometimes we have achieved something greater than even he or she who has received the award for outstanding achievement in the scholastic and athletic field.

I ask God to bless you all—to bless those who have received these awards, and may they appreciate those who have assisted them to achieve.—I see my friend, Hughie Woodford from Australia, down here. He has a brother who is a colonel in the Australian army. He received the award of The Order of the British Empire from the King. They call it the O.B.E. And on the occasion of the investiture his brother said, "Of course, you know what O.B.E. stands for, don't you?" He said, "It stands for 'Other Boys' Efforts.'"

So whenever I see anyone receiving an award, I think of Colonel Woodford who accepted that award because he knew he received it as a result of other people's efforts, those of his battalion, his "outfit" in the war. I know there are many involved in the achievement of those who have received these awards. I hope they will not be forgotten. God grant that we may be faithful and loyal to our ideals, the ideals of this institution. God bless it that it may grow; God bless those who have offered these awards, who appreciate this institution and what it affords young men and women in the way of learning the art of living, the art of achieving, the art of keeping the plume white. God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
