Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

"Be Thou an Example . . ."

An address delivered at Brigham Young University during Leadership Week, June 18, 1951.

GOOD MORNING, my fellow students. It is a great privilege for me to be here this morning and participate in these exercises. I notice that the theme of this leadership week is, "Leadership in an Uncertain World." President Wilkinson's introduction of me and my past would convince you if you haven't already been convinced that things are uncertain in this world. It's true, I did repent earlier than he did from practising law, but nevertheless I can say that the law is a wonderful profession. I never made much money at it, but I think I did a lot of good in practising law.

My legal inclination was more toward the criminal law. When you are honest as a lawyer and you represent criminals, it isn't long until you have lost all your clients. They are in jail. So in the practice of the law I came up against a great many young men who were delinquent, fine young fellows! I thought maybe I was wasting my time. They never did pay me. Many of them offered to pay me at different times, but with stolen property, and I couldn't accept it. I used to get them to plead guilty if they were guilty. If they needed representation, I would represent them, but I would never defend one whom I knew to be guilty. The result was that most of my clients wound up in the penitentiary of the state of Utah.

But I tried to be an influence in the lives of those youngsters. I knew most of them. I knew their parents. I knew the homes they came from, and I knew they needed help. So I tried to help them even though I was starving to death as a young lawyer. When I came home from New Zealand after presiding there on a mission, several of those youngsters who were in the penitentiary because I had them plead guilty when I went to New Zealand had been released. They had filled their terms. When I inquired about them, I was astonished. They were all good citizens. One youngster had fallen in love who had been in the penitentiary several times. He had married in the temple. He is now very active in one of the branches of the Church in one of the missions. Another young fellow who was convicted, I found upon my return home, that he was in the automobile business. I saw one just day before yesterday that I hadn't seen for years who had been a client of mine and in the penitentiary. He was driving a big new Cadillac. I was somewhat astonished when I heard that he came by it legally and honestly as a successful businessman!

When it was published in the paper that I had been called to the Council of the Twelve, the very same day there came to my residence a young fellow who had been in the penitentiary three or four times. He rang the bell, and I went to the door. When I first looked at him, I thought that maybe he was an escapee. It turned out that he wasn't. With tears running down his cheeks he congratulated me on my calling to this position. He bore his testimony to me. The thing that pleased me most was he said, "You let me know when anybody criticizes you, and I will wring his neck." So I would like to give warning to you people here today that if you desire to write me a letter and criticize me for what I say, for your own sakes and protection don't sign it.

This brings to my mind that example after all is the greatest quality of leadership—not only in the Church, but also in the nation. There isn't any greater quality than that—the quality of example! I am proud of the example I set for these young men in court when they were guilty. It has paid off. I thrill at the example which I set before them as a member of the Church so that they would feel to come and shed tears of joy when they felt that I had received some ecclesiastical preferment in the Church. I think some of those fellows would still be in the penitentiary if I hadn't tried to be a good example, so I repeat that I think the greatest quality of leadership in an uncertain or in a certain world is that of example, especially when our lives are actuated by high ideals and righteousness.

There is nowhere in the world or in the Church where examples should be made more evident than in your home and mine. That's where effective leadership in this world, this uncertain world, should be made manifest—in the home. I don't like to be personal, but if it hadn't been for the leadership in my father's home, I doubt very much whether I would have been standing here before you today. Leadership in the home is devotion to one's principles, devotion to one's family, and trying to put one's self in tune, into a spirit and power outside and beyond the home which will bring into the home and into the family God's Spirit.

To have effective leadership in the home we must have prayer in the home. Prayer in our home was the greatest force for the preservation of my father's children as members of the Church. He knew that there was a leadership outside of the home which must be acknowledged and must be sustained and that leadership was more important even than the leadership in the home. In our home we had prayers every morning and every evening—family prayer.

Do you have that leadership in your homes, brothers and sisters? I receive the regular reports from Mr. Hoover of the FBI of the criminal condition in this country, and a great portion of those who are committing serious offenses are youngsters still living in American homes. We are always referring to delinquent youth. Do we consider sufficiently the delinquency of parents? Generally speaking, a delinquent child is the offspring of delinquent parents—not always. In some homes, from some homes there will come a delinquent child where there may be seven or eight other children who are good and obedient, so that paradox happens. There are too many delinquent parents in this country of ours today. There is not enough leadership in the home, and when we lack that leadership in the homes, isn't it wonderful that we can send our children away from the home to the auxiliaries of the Church and to Church schools where they will be under the influence of effective leaders?

As I visit the missions, I wonder sometimes how some of our missionaries happen to be in the mission field when I learn of the homes they come from. I heard one young missionary in his testimony say that his father used to give him a beating for going to Sunday School until he was seventeen years of age—when he was large enough to fight back. I heard another say that he didn't know what love in the home was until he got out into the islands of the sea and experienced the love that obtains in the homes of those wonderful people. I heard a young lady missionary say, and she also had a brother on a mission in Denmark, I heard her say that there wasn't a week passed that she and her brother didn't receive letters from their parents telling them to come home—that they were wasting their time and the money they had saved. When I inquired how it was possible for these young people to be on missions when they had come from homes where there was no encouragement, no Church leadership, I learned that they had been under the influence of MIA teachers, under the influence of Sunday School teachers. Only recently I officiated at a marriage in the Salt Lake Temple, and both parents of the bridegroom had to remain outside that little gate on Main Street while the son was being married.

We say sometimes that we are given too much to do in this Church. We have too many meetings to attend, too much of our time is being occupied in Church activity. Brothers and sisters, if you can be responsible for the marriage of one young man in the temple of God when his own parents can't get a recommend, you are not spending too much time in your position of leadership in the auxiliary and other organizations of this Church. Of course, in our Church we are different. "An angel from on high, the long, long silence broke," and from that time we have been a people who do not aspire to leadership, but who are called, and being called we must have an inward witness within ourselves that our commissions as leaders come from on high; that we are agents of our Father in heaven to accomplish his will and consummate his purpose here among his children.

To lead we must love. One of the greatest weaknesses in the leadership of this Church throughout its stakes of Zion, its wards and mission fields, is the weakness, you might call it in crude terms "backbiting" or criticizing. I suppose we are all more or less guilty of that, but when we acknowledge the fact that God calls us to these positions and we criticize and sometimes reproach, then we are not fighting against men who may have their weaknesses; we are fighting against God and his will. We are all human. None of us has lived his life yet. We know not what the morrow will bring in this uncertain world; even in this Church, we may be called to the highest positions of leadership or sink to the lowest depth of degradation.

As leaders we must be very reluctant to criticize others and more active in criticizing ourselves. We must have the cooperation and active support of those with whom we are associating. In our activities there must be "followship" as well as leadership.

I would like to mention just a word about this Brigham Young University. I didn't go to this institution, but I believe there is more freedom, more freedom to think, more freedom to teach in this university than in any other university I know of. I like the leadership here. This is a wonderful place to have leadership week. For the past several weeks I have been accompanying members of the faculty of this school to stake conferences. I have heard their testimonies—men from the science department, from the department of economics, from the athletic department, and from other departments. I have heard their testimonies, and from their testimonies I know they are great leaders because over and above their vocations to teach science, economics, agriculture, athletics, there is the obejective of regenerating, saving, and exalting human souls. Here we are not deprived of the right and the freedom and liberty to teach to the young people of the Church and others who come here for their scholastic training that God lives, that we are his children. We have that freedom. In other schools they don't have that freedom. We don't have atheists on the faculty of the BYU. I don't know whether President Wilkinson recalls it or not, but when we were at George Washington University, there was a chapter in that school of a national organization known as The American Association for the Advancement of Atheism. There has never been a chapter of that organization in the BYU. When you study science here, you study religion. When you study economics, you study religion. When you study religion, you study the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. That is the kind of leadership we have in our institution of learning under the control of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

What was the theme of their MIA conference? "Choose you this day whom ye will serve, . . . as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Joshua 24:15.) You people here today—a great majority of you I know are parents. Sending your children forth to school, keep that theme in mind: "Choose you this day whom ye will serve." As for your children they will learn to serve God by being under the influence of godly instructors, professors, doctors. I don't say that to belittle other institutions of learning or faculties of our other universities here. We have many fine and devoted Latter-day Saints, men who wouldn't think of creating doubt in the minds of the students about God, about the creation, about our own divinity, about eternal life; but we do know that such an influence can never creep into this institution.

President Wilkinson is very modest. He said yesterday at conference that he didn't find much difficulty in competing with the students of eastern universities. He didn't find any difficulty at all. At our university he was the head of the class. I doubt if any student has ever attained higher scholastic grades than did he. I know his testimony. President Richards yesterday spoke about some of us who like to be members of the Church, but we brag a little bit about not being orthodox, about not wanting to conform. The president of this institution and members of the faculty here are men who conform, who are orthodox. They know that the revealed truth is the ultimate in truth and that they do not have any license to tamper with it.

I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that the priesthood of God is upon the earth and that the bearers of that priesthood have the right and the inspiration, the revelation from the source of all truth in conducting the affairs of his kingdom here upon the earth.

Be leaders in your homes, you who are parents. Be leaders in your organizations in the Church. Be willing to serve wherever you are called. Just a word in conclusion—I would like to say that when it comes to choosing leaders that we use every caution, that we be considerate, that we pray about it, and that when we call the leaders, we sustain them—even those who call them should sustain them after they have been called. Then when it comes to being released, be sure you do not hurt those who are being released. I think we are negligent in that respect in this Church. We are not considerate enough of the feelings of men and women who have given good service when we want to reorganize. Sometimes I have heard that these releases have come when the person released hasn't heard about it until it has been announced in a public meeting. That isn't just. That isn't good leadership. He should be given every consideration, expressions of appreciation for the work he has done. Now if there be need of a leader in your ward, of a leader in your stake, of a leader in the MIA or Sunday School, the Primary, the Relief Society, be thou that leader. Tune yourselves to the spirit of God. Be prayerful. You are doing his work and not your own and be sure above all things, to get joy and happiness out of the work which you do and in this world which is full of depression, of frustration, of anxiety, remember that the gospel is to give us joy. The work in the Church should give us happiness; we should not be depressed. Do the best you know and let God do the worrying. When you are not doing the best you know, then it is for you to worry. God will magnify you beyond your own preparation for leadership as he always has done in this Church, just as the Master could call fishermen and even tax collectors to be his chosen Apostles, and they could be transformed under the power of the Comforter into great preachers of righteousness and leaders of God's children. In this day the weak things of the earth can be called, and they, under the influence of the Power beyond, can become just as great leaders as there ever were in God's ministry here upon the earth.

I leave my testimony with you that the gospel is true. This is the greatest work in all the world. The solutions to the problems which beset humanity this day are in the institution which reaches out for the revelations of God and for the guidance of his children. I leave my blessings and my witness with you in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
