Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Address Delivered at the Dedication of the Tahitian Chapel

THIS IS A great occasion for all of us. This is a momentous time in the Tahitian Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Many years ago we were told by this Church that the people who dwelled upon the islands of the sea were choice people in the sight of God and in their veins coursed the true blood of Israel and they were choice children of Israel. Through all the wars and eras of peace God has preserved the people of the Polynesian Islands. He has never permitted an enemy to tread upon these islands so that our lives would be endangered. These islands of the sea and people who have dwelt thereon for the past hundred years have been under the flag of the three greatest cradles of liberty left in the world—France, Britain, and America. If it were not for these great cradles of liberty, you and I would not be here today worshiping God according to the dictates of our own conscience. We who are missionaries for the Church come from the land of America. It is good for us to come to these islands which dwell under one of the greatest aegises of liberty in the world, under the French government. From the beginning of America's history we have been indebted to France for her spirit of liberty, equality, and brotherhood, and many a person who enters the United States from foreign shores, cannot enter the great harbor of New York without first beholding that great Statue of Liberty which was a gift of the French government to the United States of America.

We must not forget as we worship here today, my brothers and sisters, that were it not for the friendship of your great nation, were it not for the friendship of France, were it not for great generals like LaFayette, the history of the United States might have been different. There hangs today in the Gold Mansion, the old home of George Washington, the key to the Bastille which General LaFayette presented to Washington many years ago. They were soldiers in arms; they were actuated by the greatest impulses of human liberty which have ever been instilled in the heart of man, and as we come to the islands of the sea and as our missionaries go to France, we must pay tribute to the great nation of France which did so much, not only to create American liberty, but also to preserve that liberty through two great wars. In the last war your French people and our American people, your Tahitians of Tahiti, your Maoris of New Zealand, your Samoans from Samoa, your Hawaiians from Hawaii, all fought and died upon a common battlefield to preserve common interests. We must not forget that.

You people who belong to my Church, to the Church of Jesus Christ, let me say unto you that if there ever comes a time when there is religious intolerance in these islands of Tahiti that intolerance must never come from the Mormons. It must never come from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints because we are the beneficiary of the tolerance and the liberty which have been preserved by the great nation which controls these islands. When you come into this house to worship, always remember that you must hold dear to your heart not only the God whom you worship, but the principles of democracy which permit you to worship that God without being molested, without being hindered in any way. That, we must not forget.

I must pay tribute to those explorers and navigators who first coursed the waves and the paths across this mighty ocean to the end that Christianity could come to these people. We were not the first missionaries to come to the islands of the sea. Ours were not the first navigators and explorers from America to come to the islands of the sea. They were from Britain and from France. Ours were not the first ministers of Chrisitianity to come to these islands. On this occasion we must pay tribute to those great and fearless missionaries of our churches who came as forerunners of Christianity and religious freedom to these islands of the sea, so that we who are known as Mormons could follow in their footsteps and bring unto them that which we think is precious and valuable in the lives and development of the character of God's children here upon the earth.

As I stand here, I say that I have the truth. If you are a Catholic, you should have the inward witness in you that you that have the truth. If you are a Protestant, you should have the inward witness in you that you have the truth. You should have the right to stand up and say that what you have is true, and I must not condemn you for the testimony that you have that yours is the truth, and, therefore, we invite investigation by those who are not of us. We think that it is worthy of investigation when people claim that they have the truth. A scientist discovers truth and immediately all scientists try to find out what that truth is and whether or not it be true.

In the religious world, I am sorry to say, it is very different. We do not try to get together and discover through research and study and prayer and faith just where the truth lies. Therefore, there is confusion in the Christian world, and people who are not Christians are now condemning us and laughing at us because we are not the source of peace we should be in the world but a source of confusion. God our Father is not the source, not the author of confusion in the hearts of man. Let all who come within these portals and worship within this house know that it is a fundamental concept of Mormonism that we are all God's children, regardless of race, of color, or previous condition of servitude, that God intends to make us all his children, one nation, one people unto him.

I pay tribute to the missionaries, not only of the other churches who were the forerunners here, but I also pay tribute to these young missionaries who come out from the headquarters of our Church, who go to all parts of the world. There are 5000 of them out in the world today, and every single one of them is paying his or her own expenses, not receiving one penny of compensation, and the bankers of this community, the government of this community, can tell you that every penny these missionaries spend comes from their homes in America. I pay tribute to missionaries who will do that. You cannot question the sincerity of a missionary who will go out into the world and preach an unpopular religion and pay his own expenses while he is doing it. You can't question his sincerity. You can question that which he teaches, but his sincerity, no. What this world needs today—this sorry old world—is the language of sincerity, the gospel of certainty.

So, my brothers and sisters and friends, we are here today in this beautiful chapel. In this Church we do not recognize the aristocracy of wealth. We do not recognize the aristocracy of education. All we recognize as an aristocracy in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the aristocracy of righteousness, of good living; therefore, this building—beautiful as it is, one of the most beautiful in all our Church throughout the islands of the sea—is not a beautiful building unless you make it beautiful by building beautiful characters, by developing righteousness within your souls. You can destroy this building and all of its beauty by failing to live up to the standards which this Church offers to you in morals, in religion, in coming before the sacrament board of God and keeping your covenants in force so that God will recognize you and that he will be willing to have you take upon yourselves the name of his Son and that the Spirit might be with you. Let this only be a symbol of the character you are to develop by obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ as you come into this magniflcent building to worship, and please come in.

There are no paid pews, no pews for the select, no pews for the wealthy, no pews for the educated! He who gets here first gets the choicest seat. I like that kind of religion, I like that, because I am a poor, old, common fellow. I don't have any money. I used to practise law once upon a time, but someone said, "Come, follow me," and I dropped everything I had, and I followed. I went out there to New Zealand and lived among the natives of that land and learned to love them. I want to tell you native people that you will never be great by trying to be great white people. You will only be great by trying to be great natives. You have a delicacy of soul which the white man doesn't possess. I have built up a resistance against a lot of things which would destroy you. You can only survive under the high standards of morals which Christ himself has given unto you, who was the only perfect being ever born of woman.

God bless you all, my brothers and sisters and friends. God bless the government of this country. If there is ever a time in the history of man when governments need the inspiration and help of God, these are the days. We cannot preserve an empire; we cannot preserve a nation without invoking the divine aid of God, our Father, and let us all pray as we live in these uncertain times that as the great leaders of nations sit around the council tables and try to establish international peace among men, they may know they cannot do it without invoking the divine aid of God and the inspiration of his Son who is the only Prince of peace this world has ever known.

God be with you all. I bring you the blessings of the President of this Church, of his Counselors, and of those who stand in high and holy places in Zion. They gave you this building, my brothers and sisters. Not one penny for the building of this chapel has come out of the pockets of the people of Tahiti. It has all come because people in my country have been faithful and obedient to the principles of the gospel which we teach, and we are glad to give it to you because you are worthy. Not because you are wealthy do you get these buildings but because you are righteous, and God will give you buildings and all the blessings you need. It is his duty to give them to you if you are obedient in obeying the gospel of his Son, Jesus Christ.

God be with these mission presidents, these men who preside in these islands and with these elders who travel far and yon on these hazardous trips among these coral isles that they may go in peace and safety, that they may be preserved, that they may be able to return home in honor, having established as they could within the limitations of their talents and under the power of God, his kingdom with a greater firmness and stability than it has ever known in your island.

God bless our friends. God bless those in other churches, men who preach the gospel of Christ as they understand it. God bless the congregations which come before them to worship that they may know that not by the work of the priest can they be saved, but only by their own works, by their own efforts; therefore, I encourage everyone of you, my friends, to be faithful in obeying the gospel as you understand it. There is no place in the philosophy of Christ for an idler. We cannot be religiously idle and ever expect to merit a place in the celestial presence of God our Father. The gospel of Christ is a gospel of effort, of activity, a gospel of work. Without that work, without that activity, without that effort it would mean nothing. We would sit by and deteriorate as human characters claiming to be the sons and daughters of God.

I know that God lives; I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know there is no power under heaven which will save men, save the name of Jesus Christ who was sacrificed on Calvary's Hill that all God's children might be redeemed. I know that the prophet of God who was raised up in this dispensation has been the instrument in the hands of God for bringing back to earth the democracy of the priesthood of God so that every man may hold that priesthood if he is faithful and worthy.

I thank God for my own father and mother who reared me from childhood to know that the greatest thing in life was to keep myself morally clean and spiritually awake. I thank God that I never uttered an unclean word in the presence of my mother, that I never had an unclean thought enter my mind in the presence of my mother. All of those influences have entered my life after I have reached beyond the front gate where my mother ruled as queen of queens. I thank God for a home where a noble father and a righteous mother reared their children.

God bless you all and us all as we go forward in life trying to do that which is our duty to do. May we pray to God for his help and his guidance in all things, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
