Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Dedicatory Prayer of Tahitian Chapel

O GOD, our eternal and heavenly Father, we thy humble children, have presented ourselves before thee this day on this occasion with gratitude in our hearts for the blessings we enjoy. We acknowledge thee as the Author of our existence, as the Creator of all life. We know, O holy Father, that in thy image we were created because when thou placed man in the Garden of Eden thou didst say unto thine associates, "Let us make man in our own image." We are grateful that we have the abiding conviction within us that we are created, O holy Father, in thy image.

We thank thee for this world which thou hast created. We thank thee for the nations of the earth, for thy people who have been placed in the various countries of thy habitation and footstool.

We thank thee, O God, for all blessings which have come to us as thy children. We realize that for many of these blessings we have been unworthy. We pray that now we may dedicate our lives unto thee and be worthy of every blessing that we pray for and pray only for those blessings which we are worthy of.

We thank thee, O Father, for thy Son, Jesus Christ, who was born in the Meridian of Time, who was thy only begotten Son, born of woman. We thank thee that he learned obedience through suffering and that through his suffering he became perfect. We bless thy name, Father, in that we know that thou didst not intend that only one of thy sons be exalted and saved in thy kingdom, but that one should come and live thy divine truth as an example to the rest of us that if we obey those truths, we may also be saved and exalted and celestialized as thy children in thy presence.

We thank thee for thy Church and kingdom established upon the earth. We thank thee for the restoration of the gospel of thy Son through the instrumentality of the great prophet who stood at the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. We thank thee that through him thou hast restored thy Holy Priesthood unto thy children, that men may act for thee, that they may be able to officiate in all the principles of the gospel and in the ruling of thy kingdom with authority.

We thank thee, O Father, for the great men who have stood at the head of this Church, one succeeding another and building solidly upon the foundations of him who was the first prophet. We know that in building solidly as they did they have established thy kingdom forever in the earth, that it will never be taken away or destroyed, and that it might be the possession of the Saints of thee, the Most High, through time and all eternity.

We thank thee for the noble men and women who have suffered punishment, who have suffered martyrdom and all the trials and tribulations of being thy Saints. We thank thee that they have been devoted, that they did not waver. We thank thee for thy Saints who blazed the trail across the trackless plains so that the prophecy of thy appointed Son could be fulfilled, that thy people would become a great and mighty community beyond the Rocky Mountains. We thank thee for our heritage, that some of us are the descendants of those great and noble characters.

Bless the missionaries that they may have the spirit of these people, that they may have the desire to learn the language of these people so that they can teach the gospel to them in their own tongue. We know, Father, that they can do this if they will work and depend upon thee because thou hast promised unto thy priesthood the gift of tongues.

Bless all for whom we should pray this day. If there are any who would like to be here and are absent because of sickness, raise them up from their bed of affliction and may they acknowledge thy hand as the hand which has raised them up. May they have the opportunity in the future to come here and behold this beautiful building with all of its furnishings and its appointments.

We ask thee now, Father, to accept this building and in the authority of the priesthood which we hold, we dedicate it unto thee in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen.
