Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Storytelling among the Polynesians

The Instructor, November, 1952

AT FIVE o'clock one morning while visiting at the mission home in Nukualofa, Tonga, I was awakened by the singing of a large group of natives who had come to serenade me as their honored guest. I arose, dressed as quickly as possible, and went outside to witness this unusual demonstration. Their singing, or chanting, was accompanied by rhythmic actions of their colorfully attired bodies. This choral, action, chanting, continued for more than an hour.

In this manner, peculiar to the natives of Polynesia, they were telling me the story or the history of the Church from the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith to the time of my arrival in Tonga. The highlights of the story as they related it in poetry of words and action were the birth of the prophet, the first vision, the visitation of Moroni, the receiving of the plates, the translation of the Book of Mormon, the sending of the missionaries into the world, the martrydom, the exodus from Nauvoo under the leadership of Brigham Young, the crossing of the plains, the arrival in Salt Lake Valley, the planting of the crops, the invasion of the crickets and their destruction by the sea gulls, the building of the temple, the migration of Saints from many lands to the tops of the mountains, the calling of the first missionaries by the Prophet Joseph to go to the islands of the Pacific, the coming of the missionaries to Tonga, the baptism of the first Tongan members, the visit of the first Church Authority to the islands, President David O. McKay, the visit of President George Albert Smith and President Rufus K. Hardy many years later, and finally my own arrival to their shores through the air.

The entire story was composed in rhyme by the natives to relate to me on this occasion. I had never listened to a story more beautifully told. Storytelling, to point up a moral or to put over a lesson, is an art among the inhabitants of Polynesia.

Until the invasion by the white man the native had no written language so that, as one writer has put it:

"Storytelling was a much-favored pastime among our native folk, as it always is among an unlettered people.

"Children had their own simple stories and fables with which they entertained each other. Youths and young women learned and recited folk tales, myths, and historical traditions, many of the latter being encrusted with myths.

"Their elders listened to such recitals and corrected errors or supplied omissions. Some of these widely known stories told of the origin of man and of many natural objects—the popular fireside version of such; the esoteric version was never heard at such gatherings. A number of the tales were instructive, as illustrating the advantages of industry, courage, and other virtues, or the dread effects of transgressing the laws of tapu."

One such story is that of "The Locust and the Ant" as translated by the Maori linguist Hare Hongi as follows:

"Locust: Haste hither quickly, O my friend, Do not delay, the call attend; Wondrous the ant's creative skill, Harmonious with instructor's will. "Ant: Come hither, and together bore A pit, to shield from rains which pour From wintry skies, with piercing blast; And here collect the seed and grain, Which shall our inner selves sustain, To live till winter's night sweeps past. "Locust: What is my chief, nay, sole delight? To cling me close to brand of tree, To bask in sunshine warm and bright And rustle these my wings with glee."

The moral of this short story, or fable, is obvious: pleasures are transient—permanent comfort can be secured only by prudence and industry.

The memory of the native is phenomenal; a story learned in childhood is never forgotten. The use of the story to teach a lesson in Sunday School or to put over a point in a sermon is the most effective method of instruction in the missions of the Pacific. Rapt attention is always given to the teller of tales in Polynesia.

The Polynesian is unexcelled in this art.
