Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Learn to Live

Address delivered at Brigham Young University June 19, 1953

I HAVE BEEN thinking of a story I heard some time ago about the farmer who had a horse which he always entered in the horse races during fair week. The horse was not a runner; it could hardly keep up with itself. But every year, that farmer's horse was in the race. So one time, his neighbor said to him, "Bill, why are you always entering that horse of yours in the race? You know it cannot win a race." He said, "I know, but I like to see him get all lathered up in good company." I am pleased to be here and be running along in good company.

As I came here this morning, I looked over the table out there and saw the schedule of the many classes which you are attending. I came to the conclusion that we do not learn much in this life, do we? I have almost come to agree with Dizzy Dean: "There are lots of people that ain't eating, that ain't saying ain't."

And so we come here to learn to live, I suppose, and as I look at some of you down there, I think it is a little late. I think it is a little late to start learning to live. No, I will have to take that back. You do believe in eternity, don't you? So it is just about the right time for all of us to start to learn to live.

Now, I know a lot of you will go home very disheartened from your experience here because you will go home with an inferiority complex. It gives me one just to come down here. You'll go home feeling that maybe you have wasted a lot of time in your life—that you have not availed yourself of opportunities to learn and to develop. And you will use that favorite old expression, "If I had only known, if I had only known!" But it is never too late to learn, especially to learn to live.

Early this morning, I married a couple in the Salt Lake Temple—and I try to tell these young couples a few things that will help them to learn to live. Among other things, I tell them that there will always be differences, even though it shall be said that they twain shall be one flesh. Yet, they will always be different. One will always be a man, and the other will always be a woman. Of course that makes us different all our lives—through all eternity. We are emotionally different; we are temperamentally different; we are mentally different; and, of course, we are biologically different. But we have to get along with one another. We have to adjust; we have to absorb marriage; we have to absorb life.

A lot of us do not do that, and we cannot learn to live unless we learn to adjust as husbands and wives, and as fathers and mothers—if we cannot learn to make sacrifices, if we can't learn to make fun of ourselves.

I also tell people that marriage is the most glorious adventure of their lives, but that there is one adventure that is more adventurous than marriage and that is death. Death is the most beautiful adventure of life. And nothing can be more glorious than death to a couple who have been true to each other—true to their covenants because God instituted this business of marriage, and he made it an eternal business. Therefore, every step in it must be more beautiful than the preceding step. And, of course, to live to die—we have to get along with one another—not only love one another; but be friends with each other.

I was pleased when Brother Lund was invited to open this meeting with prayer. He came from a family that knew how to live. I know that, because I lived next door to them. In fact, we lived so close that we could shake hands with each other across the driveway, each of us being in our own home. At least, windows could be broken very easily in their house from within our house. They were great neighbors.

I hope you will pardon me if I tell you a little about the Lund family. Of course, his father was one of the greatest men this Church ever had. Not many people saw his mother. We had to be pretty close neighbors to see much of her. But she was a queenly, wise, and brilliant woman. There were a number of sons in this family. As time went by, they drifted away from home and made their own homes, but they always came back. And I am sure that after President Lund passed away, there was not a day that these sons did not meet at their mother's home and bring their lunch in sacks; and we could hear them from our home singing and laughing. They are some of the best storytellers I have ever listened to.

And there was integrity in that family. I don't remember ever having heard an unkind word, a discourteous word in the Lund home. Of course, what has been the result? They have loved, they have honored, they have respected one another as brothers and one sister. And no one has cherished the memory of their parents any more than this fine family. They were a great influence in my life as good neighbors have been in yours.

Brother William Lund belonged to a group of fellows in the old 17th Ward and were neighbors of mine, who were a few years older than I. They used to get me to sit in the ditch for a nickel. I think he owes me thirty cents right now.

We lived on the south, and they lived on the north, in the old 17th Ward. Now, as one of us passes away and is buried in the cemetery there in Salt Lake City, theirs is the north cemetery lot and ours is the south—side by side in death as we were side by side in life. Life is not worth living, if you do not have good neighbors, is it?

My, can't neighbors disturb you? Why, they are a regular nuisance sometimes. I know that; I have been one of that kind of neighbor, mischievous. But you have to learn to get along with each other before you really live. You have to love before you can live, and you stop living when you stop loving, even though you are still walking around.

These are days in which it is very difficult for many of us to live as we would like, but I think we make our lives complex. I read somewhere recently of a man who always got up in the morning and said to himself, "Now, my happiness of this day depends upon me and not upon the events of the day." I thought that was a wonderful thought. Regardless of what the events of the day were going to be, it was entirely up to him whether he was happy or sad—whether he was lifted up or depressed. We could all be happy if we could start out the day with that idea, with making the events of that day objective to ourselves.

Now, of course, we should all be happy in this Church. There is one thing that disturbs me in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints above all else, and that is to see good and faithful Latter-day Saints who are not happy. That I cannot understand. "Men are that they might have joy," and when we are obedient to the principles of the gospel, we are entitled to happiness and ought not to be depressed, frustrated.

Oh, you say, "Well, so and so next door has a lovely home and the luxuries of life, and I obey the principles of the gospel as well as he does, maybe better." Well, why should he say that, if he is obeying the principles of the gospel?

Too many of us believe that because of our obedience to the principles of the gospel, we should get what we want to have. If we are obedient to the principles of the gospel, then we will get what God wants us to have for our own salvation. Is that true or not? If we obey these principles, shouldn't we get what God wants us to have rather than what we want to have?

I never have had the things that I really wanted, as far as the material things go. But when I have been obedient, I have been happy because I have known that God did not want me to have some of these things I have wanted. And I'm as sure as I am standing here, that if I had had different times in my life, the things that I wanted rather than the things God wanted me to have, I would not be here this morning, talking to you. And so, I have learned to be happy with what God gives me when I am trying to obey the simple principles of the gospel.

Some people obtain great wealth when they obey the principles of the gospel. That is what God wants them to have. They can handle wealth. I do not think I could handle it. When they get up above $100, I do not know what they are talking about. I do not think I could handle it.

And so I have come to a place in my life where I thank God for keeping wealth away from me. I doubt if I could have been humble with wealth. I have been very humble without it. Of course, we must not get the idea that the people who have great wealth are the happy people. No, the happiest people I have ever known were the people who did not have anything, so to speak, but they did know how to live.

I was on a little island one day, way down in the Society Islands—a little island called Mopiha. It was the island where Von Luckner's ship was wrecked during the first war. Count Von Luckner went around the Pacific with his Sea Raider destroying the ships of the allies.

That little island is owned by a man named Pedro Millar, a native. I have never seen more culture in my life, more beauty, more happiness, more contentment than I saw on that little island. I spent three days there as the guest of this fine native. His own home was made up of three buildings: One was a sleeping quarters; one was the living quarters; the other was the kitchen and dining quarters.

The floors were beautiful white coral sand—just as white as the driven snow. There was not a mat upon the floor. The dining room table was two long boards just resting on a cross of trees, or whatever you call them.

He had a servant. That servant was the cook, the butler, the valet. He was everything. He never wore any shoes or socks, so his feet were always clean as they moved around in that white coral sand.

I'll never forget the meals I had there, the evening meal, especially. The first one—my, it was food fit for a king. It was cooked on these little kerosene oil lamps. We had roast chicken. The handy man did the cooking and waited on us at the table. He carved that chicken just as well as I have seen it done in the Rotisserie in Salt Lake City. I will never forget the dressing. It was black, although it was delicious, and it had a slight bouquet of garlic in it. I like that. After the meal was over, I asked him what that dressing was. He said, "Oh, that is just your American mincemeat. I open up a can of it and stick it in the chicken with a little garlic to give the flavor." It was delicious. And then after the meal, we were sitting there relaxing in the living quarters, when along he came with a little tray of tea or coffee, I guess, and we had cocoa, or at least I did. It was nasty, too. They did the best they could.

Beautiful culture way out there on that little coral island! And on their table in the living quarters were the finest magazines of the world—in French and in English. Oh, they were four or five years old, but they were the best. There was no trash in that place, no trashy reading at all. Everything was just wonderful.

Well, they knew how to live, didn't they? Another thing they did (they did not belong to our Church) but every morning all of the help from outside was called into their living hut. We all got on our knees, and morning prayer was offered. At the close of the day, we were on our knees again—the evening prayers were offered. Now, I have never experienced more beauty in a home than I experienced there.

The most wonderful thing about all this was that that man was a very wealthy man. He could have built a mansion out there on that island, but he lived in those beautiful, clean, immaculate huts.

They carry the bath water. And we bathed in those old-fashioned round tubs. There was always plenty of water, and they had a bathing room. It was outside with a thatched wall around it.

The simple life is the good life. And we can have that simple life, all of us, if we will obey the simple principles of the gospel. I am not one to get up and try to grind out these profound principles, these mysteries. I do not understand them. But I try to understand the simple things: faith, repentance.

Repentance is a wonderful principle! Have you ever tried it? Try it once in a while. I wish that our bishops could get so close to the people in our wards, that the people would like to go to them, to repent and confess their faults and failings. That would be a wonderful thing, because forgiveness is there also. They are simple principles.

Then we have the sacrament. That is a simple thing, isn't it? It is so simple that your young boys administer it, they pass it. They hold the priesthood of God. It is so simple that even twelve-year-old boys can hold the priesthood of God and can officiate in that sacred capacity. Now you cannot really live unless you partake of the sacrament because you are not keeping your covenants in force if you are not partaking of the sacrament. You go to the bank and sign a note. When the note is due, you've either got to go back and renew it, or pay. You have to take care of it. If you do not, Attorney Wilkinson will be handing out his cards, and you will be in court headed for trouble.

Well, we sign notes in this Church, don't we? This young couple in the temple this morning signed a note with God, headed into a sacred covenant. The way to keep these covenants in force or renewed is by partaking of the sacrament. Are we all doing that or are some of us staying home and learning how to sing, "Be happy, go Lucky" or "How mild can a cigaret be?"

I know those songs. I am telling you, brothers and sisters—you have to keep these covenants in force and partake of these sacred emblems or these programs we are seeing and hearing will become so inviting to us and to our children that we will not have much power to save ourselves. But if we partake of the sacrament and agree to take upon ourselves the name of Christ and keep the commandments which have been given us—then we are fortified against these other influences. I am sure of that.

We had a young sailor who came into our home in New Zealand during the war. He was a convert to the Church. Before he left San Francisco, he had been ordained a priest. And we asked him about his life on board ship. He was the only member of the Church on this big transport.

He said, "Well, whenever we stop at a port, the fellows all come around and kid me, and say, 'Come on, let's go out and have a good time, get on a binge, get some relaxation.' But I do not go. You know the reason I do not go? You know the reason I can stand up against those invitations and temptation?" He said, "It is because the captain on the ship on Sunday gives me a little room, and I go into that little room all by myself. I have that little serviceman's copy of the Book of Mormon, so I take a little water and a piece of bread. I open up that Book of Mormon to Moroni, and I get down on my knees. I bless the sacrament, and I pass it to myself." And he said, "Then I am safe for another week." He said, "Nobody on earth can tempt me." He was learning how to live, fast, but not learning fast living. Just remember, he was learning to live the simple life.

And so, brothers and sisters, it is good for us to come to B Y U because we know that whatever we are studying here, we are doing so at the feet of the man who knows the simple life, who knows how to live because he knows the gospel, because he obeys the gospel, and if there is a conflict between what he is teaching and the gospel of Jesus Christ—that what he is teaching is either wrong or all the facts are not in yet. He knows that the gospel is true.

So I say, God bless this great institution. It is marvelous to have a school such as this—not only where our children can come and learn, but where we parents can come and learn (for a week anyway) a few of the things that are important in our lives.

Now, if you want to live well, get the spirit of giving. Do not ever forget the spirit of giving in this Church. I am speaking of material things. Get the spirit of giving. If you get that spirit, you will always be happy. And you have to have that spirit because we are building so many chapels in this Church today that you just have to give and give and give—ad infinitum, almost ad nauseam. Give, give, give!

Recently I was riding along with a friend of mine who was a heating engineer, and I said, "Are you getting in on any of this work on the Los Angeles Temple?" He said, "I am sorry you said that." I said, "Why?" He said. "I do not like to be reminded of what I can get out of the Church or what I am getting. I have worked for the Church, but I always like to think what I can give. And the more I can give," he said, "the happier I am." Well, the principles of giving in this Church are very simple.

Fasting—that is a simple principle, isn't it? It is so simple that we are only paying about ten or twelve cents for a meal in this Church. That is just how simple it is. We really do not grasp the simplicity of it. I like it better than any other principle we have in the Church because if I fast and I make my offering—it is not costing me anything. Of course (after the children have gone off to Sunday School) if I sneak out in the kitchen and make myself a sandwich or fry an egg or something, and then I make an offering, it is costing me something. But if we actually fast, we should pay the equivalent as a fast offering (and, after all, that is not our money, it is God's). Well, then it is very simple, isn't it? We are not losing a penny.

Tithing—that is a simple principle, very simple. The reason it is simple is because that too is God's money—it is not ours. I think if we really appreciated that, then we would not have to make so many contributions for building chapels. Because, after all, this is his business. It is his business entirely. And I say if this is his business, let him finance his own business—I do not want to finance it. And he will finance his own business, brothers and sisters, if we give him his money. He cannot do it if you don't, so then we have collections and assessments. But he just doesn't get his money.

And so, brothers and sisters, learning to live is learning to live simply. Life should be beautifully simple. And then it will be simply beautiful. And when you try to make it complex, when you try to unravel all the mysteries, you are liable to graduate from the mental hospital.

I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that God lives as an assurity. And I believe with all my heart, brothers and sisters, that there is not one of us here upon the earth that is not greater than his sins, is not greater than his weaknesses and his faults. And we are all in the business of saving souls. Down inside of each one of us, there is greatness—there are greater qualities than we see on the surface of each of us. It is our business to get down beneath the human canvas and reach into that goodness and bring it out. It can be done.

The best way to do it is to learn to live in God's way rather than in man's way. Learn to obey the simple principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I know that the Prophet Joseph was a prophet of the living God. I know that the priesthood of God is here among men. And I know that God wants to use us who bear that priesthood for the furthering of his kingdom—for the blessing of his children. We have to exercise the priesthood before it can be effective; we can't let it lie dormant. It has to be stirred up by the laying on of hands. God is near us, if we want him to be. We can get close to him. He is always waiting, always waiting. God bless you in your future lives and through eternity.

Husbands, get along with your wives. Keep on living, you husbands; and wives, get along with your husbands. Keep on living, you husbands and wives, by your continuous courtship of each other. Do not forget to tell each other that you love each other. You used to, before you were married. It sounds just as good now as it did then—even better, because it is not being said so often after marriage as before. The nice little things you did before you were married, continue to do them.

And I promise you after counseling you thus, I will go home and court my wife better than I have for the last week. It is good to say these things because I try to make my life consistent with what I say. I make an effort anyway.

God bless you all and be with you. May we, as Latter-day Saints, be the light of righteousness in the world and bring peace to the world—salvation to the children of men. May we be recognized as sons and daughters of God, set apart from the world; and we will be, if we will live this simple gospel which makes life worth living. Without it, I am very dubious as to the value of real living. God bless us all, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
