Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Magnify the Priesthood

Address to Brigham Young Student Body

I HAVE BEEN traveling around a little bit trying to fulfil my calling, magnify it. I have been down to the islands (Fiji and Hawaiian Islands, Samoa). I visited several missions in the United States, and I am still convinced that God is with this Church. Otherwise I would have to agree with Brother Golden Kimball who said that if God were not with this Church, the missionaries would have ruined it long ago.

One of the greatest joys of my life is rubbing shoulders with these young missionaries. I was a young one myself once, just a kid turning seventeen when either by inspiration or by audacity I was called to go out into the world. I went down there where they rub noses. The first dear old sister that rubbed my nose looked at me, and tears came down her cheeks, and she said, "Does your mother know where you are?" I said, "Yes, I think this is the first time in my young life that my mother really knows where I am." You fellows know what I am talking about.

The great inspiration that has come into my life from these missionaries! God magnifies them. He uses them for accomplishment of his purposes. I am reminded of my old mission president who used to look at us young missionaries down in New Zealand. He was a grand old character, seventy-three years of age, with long white beard. He would say, "Well, boys, you don't look very good, but you are the best the Lord has, and he will have to use you." When I see these missionaries in their teens and their early twenties, out carrying this message of salvation and regeneration of human souls, I am convinced beyond any shadow of doubt that God does use these young men and women for his purposes and for the salvation of his children.

Some experiences have been amazing to me. They are always amazing when I see these youngsters reaching the hearts of people who are old enough to be their grandparents.

Over in Japan we had a missionary who came to me in the city of Osaka. He was a convert himself from the East Central States Mission. He said to me, "You know, I shouldn't be out here." I said, "Why?" He said, "Why, I know nothing about scouting. I know nothing about the auxiliary activities of the Church. I am just a convert myself, and I feel so inadequate and inferior associating with my companions and trying to do this work." I said, "You'll be all right. God will magnify you. You will fill a good mission."

In our conference there I had as an interpreter, the professor of English at the Methodist University of Osaka—an intellectual man and a good interpreter. I had been home a few weeks when I received a letter which said, "Elder so and so has converted this professor." It was this young convert from the East Central States Mission. He had converted that professor of English in the Methodist University. You know sometimes people say, "Why do we send these youngsters out into the mission field? Why don't we send more mature men with more experience that are educated?"

This Church was not founded on education—worldly learning. Sometimes I wonder myself why don't they send older ones out. You know I had a missionary companion, and I thought he really should not have gone on a mission. He didn't have any memory. He couldn't remember anything one minute. He went to a home one day in the city of Hamilton, New Zealand, about eleven o'clock in the morning. A lady came to the door. He introduced himself and she said, "Well, I'm in a hurry; I'm busy. My boys will be home from work at noon to have their lunch, and I have my own religion, and I am satisfied." He said, "Did you say you had some sons?" She said, "Yes." He said, "Well, my mother has a son, and I am he. You want your sons to be successful in life, don't you?" She said, "Why, certainly." He said, "My mother wants me to be a success. You don't look like a woman who would want to contribute to my failure." Well, he got in.

Two days later the mission president received a letter from that woman. She said, "This young man came into my home at eleven o'clock in the morning, and he didn't leave until eleven o'clock that night. He had pamphlets spread from one end of our dining room table to the other, and we couldn't understand a thing he was saying. Will you please send someone down here to tell us what this boy was trying to teach us? I have never seen such sincerity in all my life." The woman and her children all joined the Church. There are four or five families of them out there now as a result of this young man who couldn't remember anything. God magnified him on that occasion.

I'll never forget the last sermon he delivered when he left for home. He said, "Brothers and sisters, I want you to be like the man that built his house upon the rock, and the winds blew, and floods came, and the rains descended and beat upon it, and it fell, and great was the fall of it." That was his farewell message to the New Zealand Mission. He was on a mission for two years out there.

God certainly magnifies them, doesn't he? I was down in the Southwest Indian Mission. I went into church one day, and a fine-looking Navajo woman came in, and the missionary said to me, "I want to introduce you to this sister." So he took me up and introduced me to her, and we had a little chat, the best we could. Then after meeting this young missionary came to me and said, "Well, I am glad you met her. A few months ago my companion and I went to the Navajo reservation. We went into a hogan. There lay this woman on her back—on a sheepskin. She had been there for six long years. She had never stood up. When we were about to leave, she said to us, "Isn't there something you people do for people who are sick and afflicted?" I said, "Yes." She said, "Will you please do it for me?" So we got down on our knees; one anointed her with oil; the other one sealed the anointing. After we left, we were only a short distance away, she came running out from the hogan and said, "Come on back and see what you have done for me." She has been walking ever since.

Six long years! Of course, maybe a university professor would say that was a psychological effect, but the young minister, the young missionary would say that is the priesthood of God and the authority which is carried with it to claim from God his power to heal.

Another old Indian down on the reservation was blind. He had been blind for years. He wanted to be baptized, and two missionaries led him down to the pool of water. They helped him get ready for his baptism. They took him down into the water and baptized him and confirmed him a member of the Church and blessed him. A few days later when they went back to visit him, he was out on the range herding sheep with his eyesight restored! Now you don't have to be a college graduate. You don't have to be fifty years of age. You don't have to be older than seventeen to give unto God's children his blessings which he wants them to have if you hold his priesthood. So I have been amazed and I shouldn't be when I have seen and am seeing how God is magnifying his priesthood in the earth.

Now, fellows, we are facing a war. The clouds are getting lower and lower. You can go out into the world in the form of a soldier bearing the priesthood of God. You can be just as good missionaries, just as effective and even more so than if you were only going as missionaries. When I was in Japan, I went down Sunday morning to visit two Sunday Schools. In the first one there were ninety children. A Japanese brother was teaching them. After that Sunday School we went over a short distance to another one with eighty or a hundred children in it. Not one of any of these children nor of their parents was a member of the Church. The same brother went over and taught that Sunday School.

This was the story. After the war the American occupation forces went to Japan; two young servicemen from Utah were in the group. They got in touch with this man and were introduced to him—a very intellectual man, working as an interpreter in the government offices there. He was a man of broad education, and they taught him the gospel. They converted him. They baptized him, and they left. We have no Church there, no organization. When the mission was reopened, the mission president found this man teaching these two Sunday Schools—all on his own. He knew nothing about Church organization or activity in it. He came up to Tokyo to our conference, and he was our interpreter in the conference. I ordained him an elder, and he is now the official translator and interpreter for the Church. You should hear his testimony—converted by two young servicemen who were only over there for a few weeks. He was a man who knew more about life, knew more about philosophy, with a greater education of course than these two young men.

Fellow students, even in the uniform of a serviceman God magnifies his priesthood, and as a result there will be hundreds come into the Church in Japan because of the work the servicemen do.

So that is my message to you. God does magnify us. We have to be magnified or we can accomplish nothing. He will magnify you in your schoolwork. Remember as students here at the "Y" everything you do you should do, if you are members of the Church, as representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Everything members of the faculty do, they should do as representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and when you go out into the world, into business or into the professions, remember you hold the priesthood of God and in your business dealings with your fellow men represent the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Two boys in New Zealand graduated from a high school down there. The principal came to me and he said, "President Cowley, these two boys should go on in their education. Use your influence with them." Then he told me this story about one of them.

"This young man came to me one day. He was living in the dormitory. He was what they called the monitor. It wasn't a native high school, but he was a native. He came to me one day, and he said, 'Mr. Hogan, I want to go home for three days.' I said, 'Why, you can't go home, you have a job here. What do you want to go home for?' He said, 'Well, I am preparing to take my matric,' [as they call it down there, matriculation examination for entrance into a university]. He said, 'I want to go home for three days and fast and pray.'

"I was astonished. I excused myself and went to my office and called up one of your members, one of our native members, and I said, 'Listen to me, do you people have in your Church something you call fasting?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'What do you do it for?' 'When we want a blessing, we fast and pray.' I said, 'Well, I have read about it in the Bible, but I have never heard of anybody doing it.' I went back to the young man and said, 'You go home for three days.' He went home, and he fasted, and he prayed, and he was the top man in passing his matric examination."

So he and his cousin went on to the university—one to study dentistry and one to study medicine. They came home after a few weeks. I was surprised to see them at one of our conferences because the university was on a different island. I said, "What are you doing here?" They said, "We are through." I said, "What do you mean?" They said, "We don't get any encouragement from our people. They tell us we are only Maoris. We can't learn anything; they tell us to go out and cut scrub and make some money; so we are not going back."

There immediately flashed in my mind that boy's fasting and praying for three days so that he could matriculate for a university. I knew they were not to leave, so I said, 'Well, if that's the way you feel about it, I am going to call you on a mission and advance you in the priesthood." After the meeting I went out and put them into a room and ordained each an elder. I set them apart as missionaries in the New Zealand mission. They said, "Where are we going on this mission?" I said, "You are going down to the university. When you are not studying medicine and dentistry, you are to preach the gospel every opportunity you get." They went back. They certainly preached the gospel, and they made a good job out of it because the first year I was invited by the dean of the medical school to come down there and talk to the graduates. It was the first time a Mormon had ever been permitted inside that university. Well, one of them is a doctor now, and the other one is a dentist. Come to think about it, I have never released them from those missions yet.

You know it is wonderful when people will respect the priesthood as those fellows did. I said to them when they finished, "Now when you go to the north of New Zealand where there are more natives than any other place in the islands, you give your lives to those native people. Don't try to be white people. You be successful natives. Be good Maoris. Don't try to be good white men, and you will be successful. Give your lives for your people, for your race." So they are down there where I told them to go—one a dentist, the other a doctor. Both are still very active in the Church, holding Sunday Schools, holding cottage meetings wherever they go. You know another wonderful thing about it is, I know that young doctor when he goes into a home, and there is sickness, and they are members of the Church, the first thing he does is to lay his hands on the heads of the sick and to ask God to give them health and to give him inspiration in attending them that he will do nothing that will cause their condition to deteriorate.

Brothers and sisters, this is the gospel of Jesus Christ. You are the exemplars of it. Be sure that this gospel, simple as it is, is the greatest force in governing your life. You cannot fail, no matter what you do in life, no matter what your vocation, if you will so live that you are representative of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and magnify your priesthood which you men will hold or do hold now. The world needs us today. Remember the days of Sodom and Gomorrah? God said he would save the cities if they could find just a few righteous, and he meant it. I know that God will save his children today if there is a leaven of righteousness left in the earth.

We are not the only good people in the world. I have seen some people who don't belong to this Church who are much better than some I know who do belong, but as a people we must be the leaven of righteousness in this world. Our moral standards are higher. If there was ever a time we needed high moral standards, these are the days. When I read in the newspapers that right in the state department of the United States, 192 sexual perverts were apprehended, I say thank God for the moral standards of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and if this country is ever defeated, it will be defeated by perversion within the country, by moral decay. There is no power outside the confines of this land which can defeat us, if we are strong in our righteousness. That is our armor and our shield.

God grant that we may be loyal to this nation by living as God intends the people upon this land to live in order that its institutions of freedom, of liberty, and of democracy may be preserved. If there be need of an American, be thou that American. If there be need of a Saint, be thou that Saint. God bless us and all of our endeavors in life and preserve unto us the wonderful heritage which we have as descendants of Latter-day Saints and of members of the Church and kingdom of God here upon the earth, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
