Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The Pearl

Address given at Brigham Young University

I WAS OUT last night with your basketball team breaking training by staying up late, and this morning early a bishop got me up; he said he would like me to go up and help him to deliver some baby chicks. We got through delivering our baby chicks over here at Lehi and just made this meeting. I have forgotten the name of the company he represents or I could put in a plug for him here. He is here with me, and if anybody is interested in baby chicks, you know the kind I mean, fellows, I will be pleased to introduce you to him at the door.

I don't see why I should come here to entertain you people when we could be inspired during this whole program by this wonderful chorus and orchestra. As I was listening to the orchestra tune up before meeting, it reminds me of something I heard in Japan in reference to the arrival of Sousa's band. I am old enough to remember Sousa's band—I don't know whether you are or not. Sousa's band went over to Japan on a trip, and after it played a wonderful concert in Tokyo, the audience requested that it play the first number over again, and so it did, and they said, "Oh, no. That's not the one. It was the one before that." That's when they were tuning up their instruments. So I am sure our dear Japanese friends here this morning appreciated that first number.

It is wonderful for me to see these young people here whom I love with all my heart—the missionaries and the natives of the islands. They are such a fine people—so full of love and charity. It almost melts me to look into their faces. I am grateful indeed that we have an institution to which these young people can come and partake of the spirit of the gospel while they are acquiring an education. I don't see why anyone in this Church would go to any other institution of learning, advanced learning, other than the B Y U. I never came here myself as a student, but now I wish I had. I hope that when my son grows up, if he ever gets past elementary school, that I will be able to induce him to come down here to the B Y U.

While I was in Japan—by the way when I mention Japan I understand that some of our returned missionaries here have a Japanese speaking class—I wish a great number of you would take an interest in that class. If there is a mission in the history of this Church that offers greater opportunities than Japan, I have never heard of it. We could use 500 missionaries in Japan right now. The people are coming to us. One reason the Japanese people like us is because we have missionaries here in the United States, and when they found out that we had heathens here in the United States and that they weren't the only heathens they were very glad to come and hear our missionaries.

Another thing which appeals to them is the fact that when they join the Church, we give them something to do. They become part of the priesthood activity of the Church. Any of you who are interested in this particular phase of missionary work it would be wonderful if you could join up with this Japanese class and learn a little about the Japanese language and maybe get the desire in your hearts to go on a mission to that great country.

I thought for a moment or two I would tell you about how they cultivate the pearls, cultured pearls, in Japan. I went down to the pearl farm, Mr. Mikamoto's pearl farm. He is still alive and in his nineties. I went down there and saw how they cultivated oysters and then how they cultured the pearls. It was very interesting and very inspiring. They plant these oysters in the bed of the sea. Then after three years the girls dive for them—young girls. They take the three year oysters out and place them in baskets which are floating on the water, and when the baskets are filled they take them to shore. Then they are taken into a little laboratory and there they have some young girls who operate on these oysters, injure them; who inflict an injury in the oyster and then place in the oyster a piece of foreign matter—a very delicate operation.

This young girl opens the oyster. The first oyster she opens she kills. You have to sacrifice one in order to produce pearls from fifteen others. She kills this oyster, and from it she takes a piece of live skin or tissue, just a tiny piece—very thin, almost transparent. She cuts that into fifteen pieces and then she opens up fifteen other oysters, one at a time, of course, and she has to take a piece of mother of pearl, a little nucleus which is brought from the Mississippi River, by the way. The girl places that little piece of mother of pearl down inside the flesh of these oysters. It has to be placed just in a certain spot. If her little knife happens to move a fraction of an inch farther, the oyster is killed. Then she places that foreign element down into the flesh and then that piece of live tissue over that foreign matter. Then the oysters are put into other baskets, and they are dated and placed down in the bottom of the sea again. After five years they are brought up, and the oysters are opened and where that injury was inflicted, where the irritant had been placed they find a beautiful pearl. It is a very simple process, but it took Mr. Mikamoto eighteen or twenty long years or more of sticking to one thing in order to accomplish it. He said when he began that, that which had not been achieved was a challenge. He said that nothing would prevent him from accomplishing and fulfiling his dream. He had great disappointments, but he had one grand asset and that was a wife who looked in the same direction with him and sustained him in all his endeavors.

When he thought he had first met success, there had come over the bay what they call a red current—a current of the sea that is made red by microbes. The microbes destroyed the oysters, and one of these times when he thought he had actually achieved success, these microbes came and destroyed 875,000 oysters which he had cultivated. He didn't give up. His own people asked him to quit; his own relatives began to scoff and laugh at him. Now he was a narrow-minded man, narrow-minded about an idea. The way we accomplish things in this life is by being narrow-minded about ideas. He was so narrow-minded that he stuck with it. Eventually he discovered this process of inserting the foreign matter and developing a perfect pearl. Then he almost destroyed the pearl market of the world by sending these cultured pearls all over the world. I learned a great lesson in that. You have to irritate an oyster in order to develop a beautiful pearl. That irritant either destroys the pearl or the oyster or produces a pearl. The handicap enables it to accomplish something great, something worth while. If we could learn that as we go along in life, you in your schooling!

Does your professor irritate you? Make a pearl out of him. That goes for the faculty, too. If you irritate the faculty, your professor and you know that you are irritating him, you just say to him, "Now listen, brother, the more I irritate you the more beautiful a pearl you will produce if you will just let it do it." Don't give up.

In this simple process of producing beautiful pearls, I go about doing my work and seeing people who have been injured in the Church and oftentimes we are injured. We can't understand why certain things are done. Sometimes it is hard to forget these injuries and yet those who do take advantage of those injuries, of those handicaps and remain faithful eventually become the pearls of great price. As I go among some of my friends who are not too good from the standards of conduct and morality that we know, I can see in them potential pearls of great price. I don't think a man ever lived who isn't greater than his sin, who isn't greater than his shortcomings. Down inside of us there is that something which, if we bring it in contact with that live tissue, will produce a beautiful character.

Christ was sacrificed in order that we might all be pearls of great price. If we lose that live tissue, the contact with it, then, of course, our case is hopeless. But we are all God's children, and consequently it is very difficult for any one of his children to be entirely divorced from that live tissue which he imparts unto all of his children. Repentance is the beginning of the production of the pearl. Forgiveness aids in the development. If I were to leave a little message here with you this morning, my brothers and sisters, and fellow students, it is to have charity in your hearts for the potential pearls who haven't started yet to take advantage of that foreign element, that influence which they have taken into their souls, into their lives. Let us reach out and put an arm of encouragement around them and develop them into beautiful souls.

I am inspired as I do some of the work which I am called upon to do. I was in Idaho, and I set apart a man in a bishopric. He was in his fifties. I said, "Are you a high priest?" He said, "No." I said, "I will have to ordain you a high priest. What is your priesthood?" He said, "I am a deacon." So I ordained that deacon a high priest and set him apart to be a counselor in a bishopric. He had been a deacon for around forty years. He had been in the adult Aaronic Priesthood for two years, and then his bishop asked him to be his counselor. I had quite a talk with him. I asked him if he felt that he was worthy to be a bishop's counselor. He said, "If you had asked me two years ago, I would have said no; but you asked me now, yes. My bishop has asked me to be his counselor." And I said, "Brother, you will be a good counselor. You will be able to understand that class when even your bishop may not understand. You will see their problems out of their own eyes. You will be able to help them solve their problems." I am sure that right now that good bishop's counselor is making pearls of great price out of men and women who had that live tissue in them, but it had not come in proper contact with the foreign elements.

Young people, you are vigorous. You are surrounded on all sides by temptation. You need one another's help. We all do. I think the greatest people in this Church are the men and women, and there are lots of them, who are good consistent Latter-day Saints who never hold an office of importance in the Church. Some of us have to be called, have to be given responsibility in order to start that process of developing the pearl. It has been mentioned here that I was a lawyer. I have repented from being a lawyer and I am frank in saying that if I hadn't repented from being a lawyer, I might not be the beautiful pearl you are looking at now.

I thank God for the men in this Church who have taken an interest in me. I thank God for the man who stands at the head of this Church. He is one of the grandest exemplars of the love of God that ever lived. His heart is full of charity toward all men.

While I was prosecuting attorney, I had to prosecute a very dear friend of mine—a drunken driver. We were neighbors. We had grown up together. President Smith called me up. He wasn't the President of the Church then, of course. He said, "I see in the paper where so and so is in court." I said, "Yes." He said, "What can I do to help him? If he is guilty, of course, he will have to take the punishment, but I want to help him—guilty or not, he still belongs to us." I said, "Would you like to see him?" He said, "I certainly would." I went to this man, and I said, "Brother George Albert Smith wants you to come up to his office and see him." He said, "Oh, no, I am in enough trouble right now." I said, "Well, you go up. He wants to talk with you. He wants to help you." So he went up, and he came out feeling a lot better.

While I was in New Zealand presiding over the mission, I picked up the Church Section of the News one day and there was that defendant in a new bishopric in one of the wards in Salt Lake—prosecuted for drunken driving and three or four years later in the bishopric of a ward! George Albert Smith knew that down in that young man's soul was some of that live tissue. He knew that when it came in proper contact, the foreign matter within him would respond to it, and he did. He became a pearl of great price.

So, my young brothers and sisters, remember that you are all potentially good—even if you are members of the BYU student body you are potentially good. If you think you have made mistakes, take advantage of them. If you think you are beyond redemption you're not, take advantage of the handicap. Start bringing yourself the foreign matter within you—the influences which shouldn't be there—in contact with the perfect life, and you will respond, and it won't be long before instead of being surrounded by weeds in your garden, there will be beautiful flowers.

I know that this is God's work, brothers and sisters. I know that he loves us. I know that he is willing and anxious to forgive us our shortcomings. He will forgive those whom he will forgive, but as for us we must forgive all man. So as we see those who may be weak, who may be inactive, let us remember that they are potential bishops, potential bishops' counselors—even potential members of the quorum to which I belong. I thank God for the gospel of repentance and forgiveness. I thank God for men who stand at the head of this Church, who would put their arms around not only the wayward, but the wilful and do everything within their power to keep them within the Church and its influence. Without love we cannot accomplish God's work because God is love. It is up to each one of you to seek out those who may need your help and try to start them taking advantage of their weaknesses and the result will always be the same—beautiful pearls. You know the most expensive pearls I saw at Mikamoto's pearl farm were the smallest, the most inexpensive, the large; so sometimes when you feel small, you are of great value—the greatest value because he who is greatest of all must be the servant of all. If we want to be of the greatest value among our fellow men, we must be the most humble. We must be willing to serve—even as this morning I was willing to go with this bishop and help him deliver his baby chicks. That makes me of great value, of great worth, only you have to keep your eyes on some of these bishops. That was a wonderful opportunity for me to do it, and I am glad to come here just to look in the faces of these missionaries, these people I knew in the islands, because I owe so much to them when as a young kid just turning seventeen, their people brought to me the opportunity to exercise the priesthood of God so that I would receive the witness and the manifestation which enables me to stand here right now and testify to you with all my heart that I know that God lives and that man is made in his image. That I cannot deny. I know that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God. To those people I am grateful for that testimony. My greatest blessing while I have been in this Council has been in associating with the missionaries and the people in those missions. If you want to come in contact with men and women of God who radiate his power and his spirit, then come in contact with men and women who are giving twenty-four hours a day to the service of Christ in reminding the children of men that within them there is a nucleus of a pearl of great price.

I am grateful for the language of sincerity, certainty, and conviction which I have heard from these young missionaries as they bear their testimonies. There is nothing comparable to it. May God grant that we all may have his Spirit to remind us who we are—his children made in his image and to remind us that it is his will and his purpose, if we will submit, to raise us and exalt us in his celestial presence because certainly it was not his intention to raise only one Son into a condition of perfection and to attain unto the highest degree of exaltation. It was his purpose to send one Son into the world to show the rest of us by following that same simple plan which he followed that we might dwell with him in the presence of our Father in his celestial realm.

God grant that we may have this urge within all of us to aspire unto that great blessing and boon, not only in this life, but when we have shuffled off this mortal coil and reached the sphere of activity beyond. God bless the faculty of this institution that they may teach you, as they teach you the academic blessings of life, that there is a God, that he lives, that we are his children. God grant that this institution may receive every blessing which it should have—financial, physical equipment, and otherwise. God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
