Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

"Hui Jau"

Editorial in Te Karere, April, 1939

THE Latter-day Saints the world over are conference-minded and are probably the most gregarious church adherents to be found in Christendom. They assemble regularly, not only in Sabbath communion and religious worship; weekday meetings of auxiliary organizations; amusement and recreational activities; but also in Church conferences, both sectional and integral, which are held at duly appointed intervals. These conferences are not synods of a professional hierarchy but general assemblies of the laity at which counsel is given by inspired leaders for enlightenment and edification. The Church members in conference assembled are also required to exercise the sacred perogative of sustaining or rejecting Church Authorities and other ecclesiastical officers. This practice gives every member a voice in the organization and administration of the Church.

In the New Zealand Mission the most important and universally attended conference is the Hui Tau or "Annual Meeting." The term has become a familiar one to both Maori and European throughout the country and is used only in reference to the conferences of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The Hui Tau has convened annually, with two exceptions, since the year 1888. The attendance has increased each successive year until today accommodations have to be provided for more than 2500 people. The Maori attendance predominates, and the native Latter-day Saint measures his calendar year from "Hui Tau to Hui Tau."

At Ngaruawahia the fiftieth annual conference, or Hui Tau, of the New Zealand Mission will be held. This is to be the golden jubilee Hui Tau.

The marae of this conference, environed by the beautiful Waikato with gossamer-like weeping willows overhanging its banks and the magnificent buildings in which the arts and crafts of the Maori have been re-created by the people of Princess Te Puea, will be an inspiring setting for this jubilee gathering of members of a Church which believes implicitly in the sacred and intellectual endowments of the Maori race. Here in Mahinarangi the imposing Maori structure which contains the artistic carvings, relics, and treasures reminiscent of the days of Maori nobility and splendor and its atmosphere redolent of the tapu of the tohunga, the Zion elders will meet in fasting and prayer to dedicate themselves again to the cause of mankind's regeneration.

The four days that follow this missionary priesthood meeting will be crowded with action. Sacred services will be held for both Maori and European; choirs will render hymns and anthems; children and adults will compete in choral singing, gospel chanting, action songs, haka and poi dancing. The Relief Society, Primary, and Mutual Improvement Associations will exhibit their articles of needlework and craftsmanship. Lectures will be given on the Book of Mormon and other gospel subjects, and there will be competitive sports for all. In short, this will be a concerted exemplification of God's revelation that "the body and spirit are the soul of man."
