Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Put Your Hand into the Hand of God

Address at Brigham Young University October 20, 1953

PRESIDENT Wilkinson, members of the faculty, and fellow students: First I want to welcome Brother Hodson from Australia. I've been to Australia, so I love the Australian people. In fact, I've never been to a country yet where I didn't almost immediately love the people of that country. I want to say to him that he has come to one of the greatest places in all the world, and he is now a member of the faculty of the only unique university in all the world. Today I am very proud to be a member of the board of trustees of this university. I'm also a member of the board of trustees of the Utah State Agricultural College. I went to the University of Utah. But I want to tell you students that there is something you will get here, and are getting here, that you cannot get in either of those other universities. And if you will take away with you that something you get here then you will have a more abundant life than you could possibly have, had you gone to any other institution of learning in this country or elsewhere. I'm pleased to be back here and visit with you for a few minutes.

I met a friend of mine on the street the other day, and he told me that he had been to a stake conference two or three weeks ago where I was a visitor. And he said he was telling a brother about the conference. The brother asked, "Who was the visitor?"

And my friend said, "Matthew Cowley."

The brother then asked, "Did he teach you anything?"

To this, my friend replied, "No, but he sure made us feel good."

Well, I guess there isn't anything that we can do greater in this world than going around making people feel good. Of course, it would have been a greater compliment to me had he said, "Yes, he taught us something and also made us feel good." But then I'm not gifted in all lines.

I appreciate President Wilkinson's reference to my father. When I think of my father, I think of the last words of King George's Christmas Broadcast in 1939. I listened to that broadcast in New Zealand. Britain was then in the war. And at the end of his broadcast he quoted (if I can remember) these words:

"I said to the man who stood at the gate of the year, 'Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown.'

"And he replied, 'Go out into the darkness and put your hand into the hand of God. That is better than a light and safer than a known way.'"

My father never hesitated to place his hand in the hand of God. And that indeed was to him better than a light and better than any known way. He taught us to pray. And that was his way, his medium of bearing his testimony to us and of instructing us while he was upon his knees in praying. Each of us took his or her turn, but it seemed that his turn came around oftener, and he was one of the longest prayers I have ever heard. I think more than once when he said, "Amen," I wasn't even in the room. I was pretty fast at crawling on my knees. But in his prayers he always poured out his heart to God and always pleaded with him, not necessarily for himself, but for his children, his family.

There came a time in my life when I decided I would get married. I was then attending school in Washington. I made plans with my sweetheart—she is the one I married—and I rushed her so fast she couldn't even send me a "Dear John" letter. But I was struggling to earn my way in Washington, to get an education, and I didn't have enough money to come and get married in the temple. So we made plans to get married in New York, and then when I finished school, we were to come home and be sealed in the temple. We even had the announcements printed, and then all of a sudden my father heard about it. Now, I know what he did. He wasn't a man of means. He was never successful in a business way, and I guess things looked pretty dark for him as far as I was concerned. So he went out and put his hand into the hand of God. I know he did it on his knees, and in response to that prayer, I received money from him, and he said, "You have to come home and get married right in the first instance." I came home, and we went to the temple. I will never forget that morning. It was the 13th of July. But that morning we met at the temple, my father and my mother, some of our family. We came around from West Temple where we lived, just across the street from Temple Square. My wife and her family came, and we met at that little gate at the east wall of the temple. There we met and went in. I was going in there because of him, because of his faith, his devotion, his integrity, because he had as the greatest obsession of his life, the salvation of his children.

You know, my father never used to say, "Come on boys, let's go to meeting." He would always say, "Let's go and partake of the sacrament." And so we would go and partake of the sacrament, and I learned from him the importance of that sacred rite that in the sacrament meeting, before the sacrament board, we could renew our covenants and keep them in force. We could learn that the young priest in his tender years, as President Joseph Fielding Smith so beautifully explained recently, could place us all under covenant. Yes, the young priest can place everyone under covenant, even up to and including the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church. So I learned to go and partake of the sacrament.

Then I was called on a mission. Oh, my father always saw to it that the boys were called on missions. They didn't used to screen them in those days as they do now. The bishop would just look around and see what was going on, and then he would say, "Oh, oh, there's young Cowley. We'd better get him out in the mission field, and get him there quick." So out we'd go, three of us at the age of seventeen. And I will never forget the prayers of my father the day that I left. I have never heard a more beautiful blessing in all my life. Then his last words to me at the railroad station, "My boy, you will go out on that mission; you will study; you will try to prepare your sermons; and sometimes when you are called upon, you will think you are wonderfully prepared, but when you stand up, your mind will go completely blank." I have had that experience more than once.

I said, "What do you do when your mind goes blank?"

He said, "You stand up there and with all the fervor of your soul, you bear witness that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, and thoughts will flood into your mind and words to your mouth, to round out those thoughts in a facility of expression that will carry conviction to the heart of everyone who listens." And so my mind, being mostly blank during my five years in the mission field, gave me the opportunity to bear testimony to the greatest event in the history of the world since the crucifixion of the Master. Try it sometime, fellows and girls. If you don't have anything else to say, testify that Joseph Smith was the prophet of God, and the whole history of the Church will flood into your mind, the principles of the gospel, faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, tithing—ten percent not five percent—fasting, the honest cost of a meal as a contribution. All these things will flood into your mind, if you will but bear testimony that the prophet was indeed a servant of God and an instrument in his hands. It is wonderful to retain in your minds the lessons you get in your homes.

Now I have only about two or three minutes to give the talk I wanted to give. I wanted to talk a little bit about peace of mind this morning. I think there is a shortage of peace in the world. I think peace of mind is in short supply, even among our own people, but if there is anyone in all this world who should have peace of mind, it is the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Yet we find frustration, disappointment, depression, confusion, existing everywhere, even in the homes of our people. I hear these problems from morning until night while I am in my office. And yet almost the last words of the Master, the Prince of peace, were: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

That was the benediction of the Master when he met at the close of his ministry with his disciples. And what is this peace that he spoke about? "My peace I leave with you." What was it? His philosophy, his plan of life, his design for living, the gospel of regeneration. And why should the people be frustrated who are obedient to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the gospel of peace? There is nothing wrong with the gospel, my brothers and sisters, but sometimes there is something wrong with our attitude about the gospel.

Sometimes I am afraid that some people, even some of our parents, are trying to frighten us into the celestial glory. There is no place in this plan, which is to give us peace, for frightening God's children back into his presence. I think the sweetest words ever uttered were these three, "God is love." And where love obtains, in the world or in the home or in the heart of man, there will be and abide peace. If you are obedient, lift up your hearts and rejoice. Be joyous, be happy. There is no purpose in all of this obedience if there is no provision in that obedience for a peace of mind and a tranquility of soul. Have peace in your hearts; have peace of mind, and then let that influence carry over into the lives of others. Don't try to frighten people with the plan of peace. You know as well as I that what this world lacks today is the influence of the Prince of peace.

God bless us that we may have peace of mind and peace in our hearts. Now you can't have peace of mind and be in want materially. You can't have the spirit of the gospel in your hearts with an empty stomach, and so in the plan of the Master there is provision not only for the salvation of the spirit of man, but also for his physical being. And to me the greatest movement in the history of this Church, to bring a sense of security and a spirit of peace into the hearts of the members of this Church, is what we call the welfare plan. Once we grasp fully the spirit and genius of that plan, then all of us can divest our minds of worry and anxiety, not only pertaining to the spiritual things, but also to the material things of life. We have it. It is called the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. God grant that we may submit ourselves to the influences, to the molding force of this beautiful gospel.

In conclusion, I leave my witness with you. I know that God lives; I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God. In the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
