Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Vocational Opportunities and the Welfare Program

An address given at Brigham Young University during Leadership Week, June 19, 1953

AFTER THESE introductions I've had today I can hardly wait to hear what I'm going to say. I have jotted down a note or two, but if I ever needed inspiration and help of the Lord, this is the time. Brother Moyle wasn't expected home until the 21st, and he was home yesterday, and so I thought, "This assignment's off. Brother Moyle can take care of his own assignment," but he went to California yesterday, too, so here I am.

"Learning to Live Better through Better Use of Vocational Opportunities":

Now I don't know what that means to you, but to me that means that man has the right to work; he has the right to choose a vocation; he has a right to work at the vocation he chooses. Now I'm afraid sometimes that we are losing some of those rights. In the Declaration of Independence we read, "We hold these truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men." In other words, the government of the United States is instituted among us to preserve unto us the right to pursue happiness. Now that doesn't mean that we have a right to have happiness thrust upon us. The government wasn't instituted for that purpose; it was instituted to preserve unto us the right to pursue happiness. How do you pursue anything? You chase it, don't you? You go after it. You seek it. You don't sit down and wait for happiness to come to you because there can be no true happiness if we just sit supinely by and become wards, so to speak, of any agency or any government. Our fundamental right, as declared here, is to pursue happiness, and the government must preserve that right unto us. Genuine happiness, of course, comes only when we go after it. Nothing else is of great value to us when we don't work for it, when we don't struggle for it.

Now vocation has two meanings. A vocation is a "call," or a "summons," (I think we can understand that in this Church. I don't know a church in the world that does so much "calling" and "summonsing" as this church) and it also means an "occupation" and a "profession" or "employment."—Now what are our vocational opportunities in this Church? In the welfare plan we are supposed to work; we are supposed to be helped in choosing our work. We have employment counselors; we have work directors; we have bishops. And the bishop is charged by revelation with seeking out the poor. Now I don't know whether God intended that "poor" means only those who were in need of anything, and it is the duty of the bishop to seek us out when we are in need, whether it be in need of food, in need of a roof over our heads, or in need of employment. Then he is to seek us out, and he can call on other agencies to assist him, and in our great welfare program we have an organization than which I've never heard of one better—theoretically, anyway, and it would be perfect if it had the sustaining influence of the support of all the people of the Church.

I was being interviewed on the radio down in Auckland, New Zealand, on one occasion, and on the same program was a Mr. Ball of Cleveland. He was head of the social security committee of the city of Cleveland. After the program he asked me if I would go along with him to his hotel. As we drove along he started asking me questions about the welfare program of this Church. He said, "You've solved it. You know how to do it. We've tried in Cleveland. We've spent millions, and we haven't succeeded. But you people have." Of course, I answered that question as I always answer questions such as that—that you can't understand our program unless you join us. It is impossible to understand this Church, really understand it, unless you're a member of it; and if you don't have the spirit of it then you don't have the full understanding of the program of the Church.

Now in our Church we have what we call the green card system. Do you people know anything about green cards? Do you know whether or not your bishop has a green card which tells all about you and what you can do and what you can't do, the number of children you have in your family, and so on? Well, you know, I thought I was going to do something, have a little fun with Brother Moyle. I checked up to see if they had a green card on Brother Moyle. Do you know what Brother Moyle's profession is—other than what he is in now? He is a lawyer. He's one of the greatest lawyers in this state, one of the most successful. But I never knew until I checked his green card that he is a carpenter. My, what an opportunity for a better living through his vocation as a carpenter! Then I learned, too, that one day they called him, down in his ward. They were building a welfare building of some kind out there. And they called up Brother Moyle and said, "Brother Moyle, come on over Wednesday afternoon and bring your carpenter tools." He said, "Carpenter tools?" and they said, "Yes." "How did you know I had carpenter's tools?" "It says on your green card that you're a carpenter." Well, he was over there and helped them put the roof on that building.

Is there anything wrong with that? No, of course not. I don't know whether the bishop has a green card on me or not. When I get home, I'm going to check up. I'm going to see whether he's got everything on there that I want him to put on. Believe it or not, I'm a cook. I stopped it lately because I sample everything I cook. That doesn't help my diet. But nothing would please me more than to have my bishop call me up and say, "Brother Cowley, this is an emergency; we have a sister up here with a family of children; the husband's an invalid; and she has to be with him all the time. How about coming up and cooking the dinner for the next three nights?" I don't know how long that invalid would last, but I'd be glad to go up. That would thrill me to death.

Isn't there something you people would love to do that you're not doing? I was out in one of the stakes one day when we were trying to, we weren't trying it, we were doing it! The people were gathering all this clothing to send to Europe. And the Relief Society sisters were assigned certain projects and making certain things, and I went out to this stake, and I talked to the stake Relief Society president, and I said, "How are you getting along?" "Oh," she said, "we've got our assignment; our budget all filled up." I said, "Well, this is a little early; you're supposed to spread it over a year." She said, "Oh, no, this is an emergency budget for the people in Europe." "Oh," I said. She said, "We've got it all and then some." I said "Well, how did you handle all of this?" She said, "I got the names of all the sisters in the stake who are playing bridge and who go to the bridge club meetings and the social functions in the afternoon, and I went around and called on everyone of them. I never said anything about their playing bridge, never even mentioned it. I gave them each an assignment of sewing in this project. And there wasn't one that refused me. Brother Cowely, they've all sewed themselves right into activity in the Relief Society." I think that comes under this heading, "Learning to Live Better through the Better Use of Vocational Opportunities." That was a wonderful vocational opportunity, wasn't it?

Now about the call! What do you do when you're called to do these things? Here is a Relief Society sister. She went out and called these sisters. She never said, "Now here, you shouldn't be wasting your time playing bridge," and so on like that. She went out and called them to do something. They couldn't turn her down. I wonder how many more people there are who are called to get into some vocational activity, who are not now at it, who'll respond to the call. You may know one of the sisters down here in one of the stakes in central Utah. She is on relief, receiving assistance from the stake. The stake president went around to her and said to her, "I want you to work. I want you to earn your living." She was 77 or 78 years old. She said, "What do you mean? I can't work; I'm too old." "Oh, yes, you can, I've got a job for you, and you're the one I want." She said, "What's the job?" He said, "I want you to be my private secretary." She said, "What do I have to do?" He said, "You'll have the time of your life. I bet I can't get you to leave the job once you take it." She said, "What is it?" He said, "I'm going to give you a list of all the meetings that we hold. And the names of all the people who are supposed to be at those meetings. And I'm going to give you their phone numbers. And all you have to do is call every one of them on the phone, remind them about the meeting. Don't take any excuses; be sure that they're there." She said, "I haven't got a telephone." He said, "Well, we furnish the telephone." So he made a plan for her.

She got on the job. She said she never had so much fun in her life. She said, "I'd just call them and tell them, 'You can't turn me down; you can turn the stake president down; but you can't turn me down.'" Here she is earning her own living, and they've had the best attendance down there at those meetings that they've ever had. And she's earning her way. She's pursuing happiness. It isn't being thrust on her.

Now, of course, we have a lot of people not able to work. So we have to give them happiness, the best we can give to them. But some of us don't do that. Some of us even put that responsibility onto others. And so we don't accept the responsibility; we don't accept this vocation of taking care of our kith and kin who are in need of help. Now you know what Christ said to Mary, his mother. Almost his last words, when she was down there with John the Beloved, and he looked down and he saw her, were "Woman, behold thy son." And then he said to John, "Behold thy mother!" Then there are the next words: "And from that hour that disciple took her into his own home." (John 19:26-27.) You see, John knew what the Master wanted. "Behold your son; son, behold your mother." I don't think we're doing much of that in our Church. Mothers are not beholding their sons. They're beholding some agency or government organization which has nothing to do with their sons. And the sons are not beholding their mothers. And so, as a result we break down the integrity of the family.

I was in Canada one day about five years ago. And I went to a home of a bishop for dinner. He wanted me to stay at his home, but he didn't have room. Well, I went to dinner. When the dinner was all set he went into a little room and carried out a little woman: a lovely little soul, with white hair, and he took her over and placed her down gently in a chair at the table. Then he took a serviette and put it around her neck, pushed the chair up close, and then he went back to the room and came out with his arms around an elderly man: a little whitehaired man, and then he took him over and gently placed him at the side of the woman. Then he took a serviette and put it around his neck. And then we all sat down. And then he said, "Brother Cowley, this is the reason we don't have room for you. These are the parents of my wife, and we're trying to get even with them, while they're so helpless, for what they did for my wife when she was a helpless child." And before that man and his wife took a spoonful of food, they fed the lovely parents, who couldn't feed themselves. "Woman, behold thy son; son, behold thy mother." Did you ever hear anything more beautiful than that?

In contrast, I went to a home in Salt Lake City to see a relative of mine. It was a home for aged women. When I called on her, she broke down and wept, pleading with me to call on her children to see if one of them wouldn't take her to his home. She died in that home for aged women. She had been a woman of considerable wealth but had given most of what she had acquired to her children.

Is there any way we can live better as sons than by accepting the vocation, the call, the summons that John did—to bless those who are near to us, to whom we owe so much? Of course, our mothers are very peculiar sometimes. My, they get independent! You may even find the mothers won't let their children help them. I had an aunt like that. She died about two years ago, the last of my grandfather's twenty-five children. She was ninety years old, living alone, helping herself. When I'd go and visit her, she would say. "Don't you talk to me about getting off government relief." I'd say, "No, I won't say a word about it; it won't be long now until that problem will all be solved. I wont say a word about it."

You know if her nephews had contributed 25c a month to her she would have been getting $50 a month. You take twenty-five children down to about the third or fourth generation after her, and you take 25c a month from each one of those, the $50 is soon reached. I used to say to her, "The thing I'm happy about with respect to you is the fact that when you die the state will bury you. My, I'm proud of that, to think that your own blood won't have to bury you; it will be the state." She knew what I was talking about. She'd taken enough out of her relief money and put it aside to pay for her own burial expenses. And so when she died, the state buried her. That is something for me to be proud of, isn't it?

You can't live if you don't love. There's no way to live without loving. Life isn't worth while without it. It's like I said about Brother Lund's family: Every single day those grown boys with wives and children of their own were back at their mother's home, making her life happy, taking her food. "Woman, behold thy son!"

What about the priesthood quorums? I have always maintained that if we had the integrity in the priesthood quorums that we should have, all the problems would be solved because this is the priesthood of God. There isn't anything God can't accomplish through his priesthood. So if we had the integrity in the quorums that we should have, we wouldn't have to worry about our security. My wife wouldn't have to worry about her security when I'm gone.

I'll tell you what I mean. Over in Colorado once, I was at stake conference, and I asked one of the elders quorum presidents how his elders were getting along as a quorum. I said, "Do you do anything to help one another?" "Oh, yes, we don't do bad." I said, "Well, what are you doing?" He said, "Well, I can tell you this, we've got a member of our quorum in the hospital down in Santa Fe, New Mexico. He was a strong, vigorous young man, buying a beautiful farm, a hard worker with a lovely little family. He was going ahead, paying off his bills and his mortgage when all of a sudden he was stricken." Ordinarily that would have been the end of the farm, the end of security of the family. The elders quorum president said to me, "That was our loss as much as it was a loss for his wife and children. So we took over, and we've gone out and operated that farm. It doesn't take much time with all of our tractors and all our equipment. The mortgage is paid off, and the family has a good income from the farm. All the man has to worry about is getting well, down there is that hospital."

Is there anything wrong with that system? No, I don't think so. Quorums are so organized, but I wonder how many men go to their quorum presidents for counsel and advice? I've had men come up to me and talk to me about business. I know nothing about business. I always say, "Have you talked to the president of your quorum?" I wouldn't care if he was a deacon that's what I'd ask him: "Have you talked to the president of your quorum?" They always say no. "Why? You belong to the priesthood of God and you have a president. He's entitled to inspiration. Why not talk to him?" An elder holds the priesthood of God the same as a seventy or a high priest.

I was talking to Brother Moyle about this one day. We were snowed in up in Canada together. (This was before he was a member of the Council of the Twelve.) He said, "You know, I have never entered into a business deal in my life without consulting the president of my priesthood quorum." I said jokingly, "Brother, he's the man I want to meet, who is he?" Brother Moyle, with all his wealth, said, "Well, it doesn't matter who he is." I asked him, "What kind of counsel have you had in business matters? Why, you're the man I'd come to if I wanted business advice; I wouldn't go to the president of your quorum or my quorum either: I'd come to you." And he replied, "Well, that's wrong." I asked him, "Have you ever had any good counsel from your quorum president?' "Yes," he said, "I was going into a business deal once with a friend of mine. The man didn't belong to the Church, but we couldn't miss; we couldn't lose. We knew we could make thousands, and I went to my high priest quorum president and put the whole thing before him. I told him I wanted some advice, and he answered me just as you have. He said, 'Brother Moyle, if I wanted business advice I'd come to you; you have no business coming to me!' 'Oh, yes, I have,' I said, 'You're the president of the quorum of the priesthood of God to which I belong, and I have the right to come to you for counseling.' Then the president said, 'You go higher up and get your counsel.' I did, and finally found myself sitting down opposite President Penrose, Counselor to the President of the Church, and I told him what I'd done. I explained the whole thing to him, and told him who the man was that I was going in with. Brother Penrose looked at me and said, 'Brother Moyle, I'm not a good business counselor.' "I said, 'Well, if that's all you have to say, that releases me. I can go ahead and do as I please!' Then Brother Penrose said, 'Brother Moyle, the man you are going in business with doesn't belong to the circle over which we hold any influence.' I said, 'That's all I want to know,' and dropped the whole thing right there."

Elder Moyle learned that he shouldn't be going to a man for counsel in the priesthood of God, when he was going in business with a man over whom that priesthood held no influence. I know I'm not talking to the right people here. You wouldn't be here. That's always the case when you want to talk things over with people that's when they're away. It's just like the man that came in to see me the other day. He was intoxicated. When somebody comes in the building intoxicated, he's sent to me. I give him a lot of time, too. I try to keep him so long he'll sober up. This man wanted me to do him a big favor. He didn't belong to the Church. I said, "Well, I'll be glad to do it if you're here, but you're not here. What's your name?" He told me. And I said, "Well, you go out and see him, and tell him to come in Monday, sober, so that I can talk to him." Well, he never came back. He told me he wouldn't. I know why he didn't come back—because he isn't sober. He hasn't sobered up. He's an alcoholic. But you can't talk to a man like that, because when you talk to a man under the influence of liquor you're injuring someone who's absent. You see, that's the way with us in the Church. We're usually talking to the ones who are absent, not to the ones who are present.

Well, I can leave you my testimony, brothers and sisters, about the welfare opportunities in this Church. I don't know a great deal about the mechanics of the work, but I've never had a spiritual impression, a spiritual manifestation about the truth of anything stronger than I've had about the truth of the welfare program of this Church. This is God's plan of economy. There isn't any question about it. I think I jotted down a passage of scripture—the Psalm, "I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread." (Psalm 37:25.) There's a lot of truth in that; the psalmist had never seen the righteous forsaken nor his children begging bread. A man's or a woman's righteousness should be the insurance for security. And if this Church doesn't have the power, and the means, the program for saving people materially as well as spiritually, then this Church does not have the power of God unto salvation. Micah, the prophet, said, "They shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it." (Micah 4:4.) That's good security, isn't it? Security for every individual! Now it doesn't mean you're going to be picked up and placed under a fig tree or under a vine. Those vines and fig trees have to get there some way. They have to be planted; they have to be husbanded—cultured; they have to grow and develop under the direction of those who sit under those vines and under those fig trees.

Brothers and sisters, if we in this Church really had the spirit of the genius of this program, we should be happy. Now I said this one day, in Salt Lake City, and someone sarcastically, after meeting said, "Yes, but look at all those Cadillacs behind the Church Office building. What kind of security is that?" I wish they knew about those Cadillacs up behind the Church Office Building. I want to tell you, right now, there are no others in this Church who are more welfare-minded, and who are actually on the welfare plan more, than the Authorities of this Church. It disturbs me no end when people talk to me about these positions and say how wonderful they are. Well, they are all wonderful! It's God's work. But I'm telling you everyone is giving his life for his work. Look at Brother Bowen, who has been on his back now for just one year, partially paralyzed—one of the greatest lawyers this state ever had; a man of great income. One morning President Grant came by his home up on B street and said, "Bert, jump in and ride down to conference with me." And on the way down to conference he said, "You're through practising law." And he gave up his profession. His producing capacity was just wiped right out from the standpoint of material wealth. And he placed on the altar everything he possessed, his health and his vitality included.

President Clark, one of the greatest international lawyers in the United States, a man who aspired to great heights in the diplomatic field of international law, who became Ambassador of the United States to Mexico. Prior to that, he was the personal counselor to Mr. Dwight Morrow, one of the Morgan partners. I don't know whether it's true or not, but I have heard that Mr. Morrow paid him $5,000 a month. He must have done, too, for being his personal counsel while Mr. Morrow was Ambassador because he had to give all of his time to Mr. Morrow. And then when President Clark was right at the peak of his career, what happened? Vocation came along—a call, a summons—and he withdrew himself from everything that he had been doing, which he enjoyed doing, and which he aspired to do—to do what? To be your humble servant, and mine. And Brother Moyle—all of them. I wish they had cars better than Cadillacs to travel around in because they live in those cars; they live in strange homes and sleep in strange beds. I know what they do. And you can't tell me that men like President McKay, President Stephen L Richards and President Clark, and all these men, myself excepted, I'm a little different, never did have anything, so I haven't given much, but when I see those men, and I'm sitting by them in the Council, and I hear their testimonies, and I hear them pray, I'm telling you, brothers and sisters, they are on the welfare plan of the Church. They're living in accordance with God's plan of economy.

And I'll never forget one of them the day after he had received the charge, when he was ordained to the Council, one of the wealthiest ones there, he stood up and he said, "Everything I own, everything I possess, all my securities, all my wealth are on the altar. Take it." So no wonder I get annoyed when somebody says sarcastically, "Look at those Cadillacs!" Oh, when you get out of here go out and look at my car. I've got one of those fancy Studebakers—European design, Chippewah Green—whatever that means. Beautiful! Beautiful! I ride down the street, and I suppose people say, "There goes my tithing!" I wish it were their tithing. I wouldn't hesitate to take a car paid for by the tithing of the people—not on your life! I can't produce any wealth. It's impossible. But they're not telling the truth. You know, I wish they were. There's one thing they can't say: "There goes my fast offering." They know that. And I have a new car every year, brothers and sisters, buy a new car every year, with every kind of gadget on it that you can put on it. And it doesn't cost me a penny because I've a friend that's on the welfare plan. And every year he calls up and says, "I've sold your car, come down and get another one." Never any transfer of money!

I went out the other day to an appliance store in Salt Lake City. I was looking for an upright freezer. I've got to start storing food, so that when this hailstorm comes I'll be prepared. So, as I was looking around, a good brother that owns the place, and the reason I went out there is because I knew he was a good Latter-day Saint! and that every employee in the place was an honest tithepayer! So I went out to patronize him—I was looking around, and he said, "What are you looking for, Brother Cowley?" "I wanted an upright freezer." So he walked around with me, and finally we came to a beautiful one. He opened it up and said, "There's a nice one," I said, "My, that is a beautiful one, isn't it?" He said, "Yes. Say, would it offend you if I gave you this?" I said, "Full or empty?"

Well, the next afternoon it was up to my home. He brought it himself. He didn't send his men to do it; he brought it up himself.—Why, offend me? I should say not. I'm on the welfare plan. You can't offend me. Now if he looked at my green card and said he would like me to come out and cook a meal some time, I'd be glad to do it. Then he would probably send me home with a car full of stuff to put in the freezer.

Well, brothers and sisters, it's the spirit of the thing that we need—the spirit of it, the genius of it. God grant that we may have this, use every opportunity we see for doing something. You're supposed to be happy. If you're not happy, there is something wrong with you or something wrong with your work. Now some of us can acquire a spirit of happiness in our work even if we don't like the work at first; for instance, I never aspired to this kind of work; I wanted to be a member, to be a good Latter-day Saint, but I never wanted a job in this Church. My background hasn't been the kind to get me to go out and work—give my full time to Church work. No, I worked my head off through law school, tried to be a lawyer. That's what I wanted to be. But I had to believe in vocations, calls, summons. I told my wife when we were on our way home from New Zealand, "My, isn't this wonderful! We're released now. We can relax. All we have to do is sit on the back row in the chapel and sustain the bishop and the deacon quorum presidents, and all of them, and just sit back and relax." That's what I wanted to do—and practise law. But I had to respond to a vocation, a summons. Now oftentimes I think: "My, there are other things I would rather be doing than this!" Then I repent of that, because there is great satisfaction in helping your fellow men, or trying to.

Now I tell you how I use this welfare plan to a "Fare ye well." We have an Alcoholic Rehabilitation Center in Salt Lake City, you know, and every few months I go to the welfare committee, and I insist on their sending food over to that Alcoholic Rehabilitation Center, and we feed those "drunks." Do you know why we do it? Because sixty-five percent of them belong to us! They're our people. They may be "drunks," but they're our "drunks." Why, you don't know what good you're doing, brothers and sisters, in this welfare work. You just can't imagine. Now, as a result, I'm the best friend the drunks have in Salt Lake City. They come to me for counsel. But I don't talk to them unless they're sober, because they're not there, and I can't waste my time. But my, we're all God's children. He wants us all to have security—to sit "under our own vines, our own fig trees." He doesn't want to see "the righteous begging for bread, nor their seed." No, righteousness is the best security we have, the best insurance for us, and in this Church, righteous people are entitled to security. They're entitled to be happy. They're entitled to be placed in employment where they can be happy. They're entitled to do the things they're best equipped to do. And when this thing has worked out in a hundred or two hundred years from now; when it's actually worked out to perfection, I'm telling you we shall be the happiest people in all the world. We won't go home at the close of the day weary and worn out from doing something we didn't like to do, but we'll all be doing that which we are equipped to do. And this great plan will bring these things about. I thank God for those who are in need. I thank God for the poor; I thank God for the downtrodden, for the sinners, because it's a challenge. It's a challenge to all of us who are more fortunate, and we should be close to those who are in need.

Now, I apologize for Brother Moyle's absence. No one knows the welfare plan better than he. He was in it right from the beginning. As I said before, about all I know about it, brothers and sisters, is that it's good to be on the receiving end of this program. I know the spirit of it. It started back in Genesis, when Joseph built "Bishop's Storehouses" for Pharaoh—that's where it started—and when Joseph sent for his brethren to come over there when they were in need. And when they came, I guess Pharaoh said, "Give them anything they want," and Joseph said, "No. These men are shepherds." And what did Pharaoh do? He gave them a welfare project. He said, "Give them the land of Goshen," and so they went and worked the land of Goshen. They just didn't sit around and receive help. They didn't become wards of Pharaoh and the Egyptian government; they became self-supporting and self-sustaining because the opportunities were given them to pursue happiness. God grant that that right never be taken from us; that we may always have the urge to pursue it, and not sit supinely by and wait for it, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
