Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

"Come, Follow Me"

Address at McMinnville, Oregon, 1951

IT PLEASES ME to be here tonight, my brothers and sisters and friends, and meet with you in this hour of worship. I trust that while I use your time that I may have the spirit of this occasion and that I may be able to speak to you.

I was thinking while President McMurrin was speaking about the men whom God has called in this Church who place their all upon the altar of service. Indeed, we do not have a professional ministry in the Church. As Christ said to his Apostles, "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you . . . ." (John 15:16.) They didn't come to him and make application to be ministers in religion and to teach his gospel, but he went about calling them.

Down through the centuries following the ministry of Christ here upon the earth somebody started changing the program until finally the ministry became a profession just like the profession of law or of medicine. Men chose the ministry. Men chose Christ rather than Christ choosing the men. So in the restoration of the gospel we have gone back to the old ways because Christ has returned us to his plan and so today he says, "Come, follow me." And as I think of the men with whom I am associated in the Council of the Twelve and the Presidency of the Church how well I see this exemplified.

President McKay, for instance, a man who is an educator and whose desire is to be in the field of education, but the voice came, "Come, follow me" and he dropped everything and gave up his life's ambition to be your humble servant!

President Richards, his first Counselor, a great lawyer and a great financier who loves business, who loves his profession of the law, and right at the peak of his career the call came, "Come, follow me," and he dropped everything that was dear to his heart as far as this world's activities are concerned and became a servant of the Master!

President Clark, the second Counselor, one of the greatest international lawyers this country has known in a generation, a man who reached the very heights of his profession as an international lawyer! He was a very valuable man in the administration of several Presidents of the United States, a man who later became Ambassador to Mexico and right at the peak of his earning capacity, the peak of his career, of his ambition, the voice, "Come, follow me," and he dropped everything, and he followed.

I am thinking of Dr. Widtsoe. How many of you know the life of Dr. Widtsoe? How his mother joined the Church over in Norway, and the widowed mother with the two sons came to the United States and how she worked, taking in sewing and doing other work so that those two boys could get an education. They became great educators. Dr. Widtsoe has given many years of his life going about this Church to faraway places in the ministry for our Lord and Savior.

Dr. Merrill, another educator; you can go on down the line.

I sit next to Brother Henry Moyle, great businessman, great lawyer, one of our big industrialists, I suppose a man of great wealth in the Church.

Next to him, Brother Stapley, one of the biggest industrialists of the state of Arizona, one of its foremost citizens! He and his wife moved in to a magnificent mansion down in Phoenix, Arizona. I don't think they had been in it more than six weeks. They had the home fixed up with everything that they wanted, all the comforts. Just when he was going to enjoy his life and his wealth, the voice came, "Come, follow me," and they walked out of that beautiful home.

Now, brothers and sisters, we do not choose this profession. We are only in this work because we are called and for no other reason. Not one of us has aspired to these positions. We chose other professions.

But I had a call from the President of this Church one day. It was right when I was working on the best case I ever had in my office. It had to do with some oil land in Wyoming. I would have made enough on that one case to live comfortably for a few years if I hadn't made another penny. I was called to the office of the Presidency of the Church, and I was asked if I would like to go back to New Zealand on a mission, what I thought about it. I said, "I am not thinking anything about it. If I am called, I will go. If I am not called, I won't." Within two days I had a phone call which said, "You are called."

I turned that lawsuit over to a friend of mine, and I had been working on it for over a year. I turned it over to a friend of mine, and I never received a penny out of it. He got the big fee that I had hoped to get, and I was out in New Zealand sleeping on floors, sleeping in houses without any floors, working among people that I love with all my heart. When I came back home I wanted to go back into my profession, but somewhere I heard a voice which said, "Come, follow me," and I am trying to follow.

Is there anything like this in the world? You have to have a testimony of the divinity of what you are doing in this Church or else there is something wrong with you if you do it. There is nothing in it financially, I can promise you that, when you do give your life to the Church. I thank God that we do have testimonies. I stand up here and I say, "Brothers and sisters, I know that this is the true Church." I said that once in a little village outside of Honolulu. Sitting down in front of me was an army officer. He was a member of the Church. He had a beautiful wife. She was sitting there. She was not a member of the Church. I said, "I know that this is the true Church. If there is anyone here who doesn't belong to this Church, no matter what church he belongs to, I hope that he doesn't think I am depriving him of the right to stand up and say that he knows he belongs to the right church. I will have all the respect in the world for him if he has that conviction." After that meeting this colonel came up to me and said, "You have just converted my wife. The only thing that has kept her out of the Church is because we are such braggers. We are always saying, 'We know we have the true Church,' and when you told her she could get up and say the same thing about her church right after the meeting, she said to me, 'I can't say that about my church. I will have to join.'"

Now, we don't deprive anybody of the right to express his convictions. The Lord said or Paul said, "One Lord, one faith, one baptism," (Eph. 4:5) not a dozen, not a couple of hundred—one! We can't all be right. We can all be wrong, but we can't all be right; and if one is right, the others can't be right because they are all different.

I was going along on a train one day in New Zealand. A native friend of mine belonged to the Church of England. He sat down by me and said, "Well, we all believe in the same God. We are all going in the same direction. We are all praying to the same God." I said, "Hey, wait a minute, wait a minute. I have read the Church of England's catechism. You tell me what it is."

"Well, we believe that the Father is God, that Jesus Christ is God, that the Holy Ghost is God, that they are not three Gods, but one God without body, parts, or passions."

I said, "You mean to tell me that you believe in the same God that I do? That you and I are praying to the same God? We don't believe in any such God. We don't say that white is black, and black is white, and they are both red. We say that God is the Father, that Jesus Christ is the Son, and that the Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost, not one, but three separate and distinct Beings and that the Father has body, parts, and passions, that the Son has body, parts, and passions. Christ said, 'He that hath seen me hath seen the Father,' (John 14:9) because he was in the express image of his Father. When he came up out of the water from his baptism, he had the benediction from the Father, not from himself. The voice came from heaven saying, 'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.' (Matt. 3:17.) When Stephen was stoned to death, the heavens were opened, and he saw Christ sitting on the right side of his Father. Now try sitting on the right side of yourself. Christ said to Mary, 'Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father.'" (John 20:17.)

We don't all pray to the same God. A lot of people think they do, but they have different ideas about God. This is eternal life that they may know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. Is that one being or two? And they say he doesn't have a body—that he's without body, parts, or passions. God had Moses stand in the hole of the rock. He didn't want him to see his face. He told him to stand there; and as God walked by, Moses saw his back parts. He doesn't have any parts, so we are told, but Moses saw them. Noah walked and talked with him. Right from the beginning we are told that God created man in his image. My, how stupid we are—the declaration of our belief in God! Male and female, created he them. We are created in the image of God, not in the image of just a mere essence. God does have a form, and he can reveal himself to his children as he has revealed himself to his servants, the prophets, down through the centuries.

That's the kind of God we like to believe in. Can you conceive of a being without any form, without any body, without any passions? When you think, you have to think of something, not of nothing. Somebody said once, "Shut your eyes. What do you see? Shut your eyes, and you see nothing. That's your God." Open your eyes, and what do you see? You see beings, forms, matter. That's our God, and that is God!

God wants us to have a testimony of his existence. Christ wants us to have a testimony of his gospel. We as missionaries go about and tell people about baptism. Oh, baptism isn't necessary any more! We are saved by grace, not by works, not by baptism! Yet Christ went to John the Baptist. Here is a man of God who had been schooled in the wilderness for eight years to be the forerunner of Christ, and he was called the baptist, and yet that was all folly, that was all foolishness for him to be the baptist because baptism isn't necessary, we are told. God just wasted those eight years schooling him in the wilderness to be a baptist to baptize people. When Christ went to him, he asked John to baptize him. John said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" (Matt. 3:14.) What did Christ say, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Ibid., 15.) Oh, no, you and I don't need to be baptized to fulfill all righteousness. It was only necessary for the perfect man who had no sins to be baptized to fulfil all righteousness. Wonderful logic, isn't it? Christ had to be baptized at the hands of John the Baptist to fulfil all righteousness as he himself said, but he didn't say, "Thus it becometh me to fulfil all righteousness." He said, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."

John went about baptizing, and he said, "Christ was baptized with the Holy Ghost." Everyone to whom the disciples preached the gospel and who was converted applied for baptism. Of course, we are modern. We can strike anything we want out of the gospel to suit our convenience. That's just what a lot of us do. You can't change the truth and still have a truth. You can't change Christ's plan of salvation and still claim that you have the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Church wasn't born from the Bible. The Church didn't come from the Bible. The Bible came from the Church. The New Testament is a record of the Church. There is no authority in the New Testament in and of itself. It doesn't grant authority to anyone to organize a church. Christ organized the Church. Although many people say he didn't, that there was no organization, but he called twelve and the seventy, and there were priests and evangelists. They were placed in the Church, an organization for the perfecting of the Saints until we all come to a unity of the faith. God is not the author of confusion: "Where there is no vision, the people perish." (Prov. 29:18.) Where there is no revelation, men depart from the truth. We have to have revelation in order to have the truth.

When the Bible is open, it says, "Except a man be born of the water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) When the Bible is closed, you don't have to be baptized. It isn't necessary. When the Bible is open, you have to have the gift of the Holy Ghost. You have to receive the comforter. When the Bible is closed, you don't have to have the Holy Ghost. When the Bible is open, there are certain gifts which follow the believer—the gift of healing, for instance, speaking with new tongues. When the Bible is closed, all those things are done away with. There is too much preaching in this world from a closed Bible and not enough from an open Bible. There is too much philosophy discussed from the pulpit and not enough religion. The congregation is hearing the echo of its own voice from the pulpit. The congregations are hearing what they want to hear rather than what God wants them to hear. The flock is leading the shepherd rather than the shepherd leading the flock. That is what is the trouble with the religious world today.

When you have a testimony of the gospel and when you are called to this profession, there isn't anything on earth that can stop me from standing up here and telling you what I think God wants you to hear, whether you like it or not. So we go about telling people about the religion that they should hear and the doctrine of Jesus Christ: faith, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins. These are temples of God and he who defileth this temple, him will God destroy. (See I Cor. 3:16-17.) Congregations don't like to hear that, do they? I am not afraid to tell people that's what they ought to hear.

I read in the newspaper in Portland the other day about the corruption that exists in one of the communities adjoining Portland. I read about another community which has received so many thousands of dollars from a gadget which belonged to the underworld of this country as revenue to finance their community. Have we sunk so low in this country that we have to use gambling devices to finance our local governments? Who owns all of these things, these gambling devices? Where does the bulk of this money go? It goes to the underworld.

The Church has good principles to raise money, patterned after Christ. Fast offerings don't cost you anything if you fast. If you don't fast, then you are losing a little, but if you fast and you pay what you would have paid for food then it isn't costing you anything. You are not losing anything so you should pay an honest fast offering because every penny of it goes to the people who need it.

God bless you, brothers and sisters. Work together. Be faithful. Be good citizens. If we are going to brag about being the best people in the world, we have got to be the best people. We have such high ideals and when we don't live up to them we can sink really low. You know, everybody compliments us. We are set apart from the rest of the world. We are branded; thank God for the brand!

I know that God lives. I know Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. His prophecies have been fulfilled and are being fulfilled, and they will all be fulfilled. They will not fail. Be diligent in your work. Be obedient. Build up your family integrity. Be loyal to each other in your homes. These are more sacred places than your chapel. That is where you bring children into the world and that is where you need religion, in your family relationship—the integrity of the American home.

God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
