Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Build Unity in the Quorum

An address given at the San Fernando Stake welfare meeting, May 24, 1952

IT IS GOOD to be here tonight, brothers and sisters. In our welfare meeting we discuss briefly the program of the welfare and the duty of the bishop with reference to it and also the duty of the priesthood quorums, or rather it isn't the duty of the priesthood quorums to look after the welfare of the quorum. It is the privilege they have. Let us all keep that in mind. The quorums have the privilege of doing this even though the duty of it rests upon the shoulders of the bishop. So that is the privilege we should take advantage of.

I think what we need more than anything else in this Church today is better integrity in the quorums of the priesthood. If we have the integrity in our quorums that we should have, I think most of the problems of the Church welfare would be taken care of. Sometimes I feel that we do not appreciate that we are members of quorums of the priesthood of God. If we could really appreciate that there isn't any limit to what we could accomplish, not only in this Church, but also in the world, for, after all, it is the priesthood of God, not our priesthood. Not yours, nor is it mine, but it is God's, and he uses it for the confirmation of his purposes. If we could only sense that as we should, we would be accomplishing all that God desires to be accomplished here upon the earth.

Many of us are inadequate, and that makes us humble. In our humility we can always be magnified. I try to let the Lord use me. It takes a lot of effort sometime on my part. I don't think that we exercise our priesthood enough. I have that brought home to me almost every day. Never a day passes when I am home but what people come into my office sorely afflicted or with afflicted children, coming in with faith in the priesthood of God. Medical science has had to lay the burden down. It couldn't carry it any farther, and so they come in fasting and praying and expecting that God will pick it up where the doctor has to lay the load down. I wonder if we are doing everything we can, everything we should do in the exercising of our priesthood in that respect. Who has the power to heal? Not me—not you—but God has it, and he uses you and me to exercise that power for him. We have the right as priesthood bearers to call upon God for healing power. That's your authority. I think of this mad rush we are in in this world, and we don't stop and fast a little bit sometimes for someone who is sick. Of course, in emergencies we don't have time to fast. But, I have seen hundreds of cases where people have been lingering in illness, and there has been time to fast and pray. And the results have not come, and yet they have been blessed time and time again.

I've heard a lot about fasting during the past year. That was the theme of the welfare. The reason we don't have more fast offerings in the Church is because we don't fast enough, not even on fast days. There are no more honest offerings than the fast offerings.

I had an experience down here about fasting.

I have got two friends down here from New Zealand—a couple. They had never had any children, and they finally thought they had adopted one, but one day along came the father and said he wanted his child. Maybe you saw it in the newspaper. It was in the headlines covering quite a period of time. He said, "I never put that child in that home to be adopted, just to be cared for." He had two other children. His wife was a drunkard, and she left him and left the children. "Now she is back with me. She has reformed. We want our children back." This couple had one of them. Well, they had had that child so long it was one of the family, and so they had a long drawn-out litigation.

I was there at conference a couple of months ago. This couple was there. They came up after one of the meetings on Sunday. I said, "How is the case coming out? What is happening?"

They said, "Well, the final hearing is on Tuesday."

I said, "All right. Tomorrow morning I have an engagement for breakfast. After that I will fast all day Monday until Tuesday evening. You join me. We will fast for that child, and then whatever happens is right." So they shed a few tears and we fasted, and I never heard any more about it until general conference. The lawyer was at conference.

I said, "How did the case come out?"

He said, "Well, it was the strangest thing. I called the witness to take the witness stand, and I said, 'You tell the judge now what you are doing for this child, what kind of home you have, what its prospects are for the future, the husband's ability to care for it, his job, the money he is making, and everything.' That's what I intended her to say, but he said, 'Tell the court what you are doing for this child.' Do you know what she said? She said, 'We are fasting and praying.' Do you know what the judge did. He had to declare a recess. He didn't say a word. He went back in his chambers and spent a few minutes, and he came out, and he awarded this child to these two, this couple. They have been married in the temple and had it sealed to them."

Brethren, you are the priesthood of God. That's all there is to it, and you as the leaders in the stake are supposed to appreciate and exercise your authority as representatives of God here upon the earth. What do you do in your priesthood quorum? How do the presidents preside? I belonged to an elder's quorum once. I wasn't an elder. I was a high priest. I went through this priesthood in a hop, skip, and a jump. I went from a deacon to an elder and from an elder to a high priest. I was a high priest when I was twenty-two and I was only living in a branch back in Washington, D. C. I was set apart as superintendent of the Sunday School, and when President Reed Smoot was setting me apart, he ordained me a high priest. I hadn't been voted on or sustained or anything else.

I wrote to President Roberts who was president of the Eastern States Mission about something and in the letter I told him how I was ordained a high priest and asked him what he thought about it. He wrote back and said, "I think you are a high priest." So I went home, and I thought I was too young to be in with those old timers so I went with the elder's quorum. And I am glad I did. My, we had a wonderful president in that quorum.

We had our priesthood meetings Sunday morning at nine o'clock, and our president would stand up before our quorum and he would say, "Now, Brother Cowley, next Tuesday morning at ten o'clock, I want you to be in the juvenile court. Two sons of two members of this quorum are in trouble. You be there next Tuesday morning at that hearing and look after their interests. See what you can do for them." He never said, "Are you going to be doing something Tuesday morning? Do you think you can make it? Do you think you have got time?" No. He stood up as president of a quorum of the priesthood of God, and he wasn't talking about my business or man's business. He was talking to me as a member of the quorum, as a bearer of the priesthood under his direction. I would be there Tuesday morning at ten o'clock. It didn't matter what I had to do.

He would get up another time and say, "Well, we have lost brother so and so who was a good member of this quorum. I've been over to his widow's home. I've looked around the place. It needs some repairs. Brother so and so, you be over there next Wednesday at five p.m. with your wheelbarrows and shovels. Brother so and so, you be over there at five o'clock next Wednesday with your carpenter tools. Brother so and so, you be over there and I will have the lumber over there." He never said, "Do you think your wife will object if you go over there next Wednesday at five o'clock? Were you going to take her to a movie? Will she be annoyed because you are going to be late for dinner? Do you think you can make it?" Oh, no. "You be there," and he wasn't talking as a man for himself. He was talking as the president of a quorum of the priesthood of God.

Now what would the members of your quorum do, brethren, if you stood up and said that to them: "Who does he think he is anyway? Of all the nerve. Why I'll miss my golf game. I wouldn't go do that for anything. That's my time to play golf." I wonder if anyone ever says that in this group?

Well, what we need, brethren, is integrity in the priesthood quorum. Do the members of your quorum come to you, you who preside, and talk their problems over with you? If they have any business problems or any other problems, do they come to you as the head of the quorum and talk to you? I doubt it. They should, and you should instil that confidence within them. They have a right for confidence and advice. That's their privilege to come to you.

Is there anything wrong with that kind of integrity in the priesthood quorum of God? You know the members in your quorums. You know, I have kind of succeeded Brother Moyle in this no-liquor, no-tobacco business. I have been appointed chairman. I hope we change the name of the committee. I don't like the name. You know, we can be successful in that work if we get to know people and get to know the members of your quorum. We talk about the adult members of the Aaronic Priesthood. Why, we stress that so much that it sounds as if they are the only men in the Church. I believe we have got some drinking elders in this Church and cigaret-smoking elders, cigar-smoking seventies. The high priests are too old to do anything out of the way. I believe even some of those fellows put coffee in their postum can.

We have a challenge. There is always someone who can touch the life of a man that isn't doing right. If we can just work these programs out right, we can accomplish most anything. Those are my people, these liquor, tobacco fellows. They are my friends. I go to the Alcoholics Anonymous in Salt Lake and Ogden. My, I am one of their head members, and you know most of them belong to the Church.

We can do a lot of this work, brethren, but we need a lot of help. We are in the business of saving souls. I went to an AA meeting one night in Salt Lake, and I heard the finest testimony on that saying of Lorenzo Snow's, "As man now is, God once was, and as God now is, man may become," that I have ever heard. Now this fellow got up in his working clothes, overalls. He is a mechanic I think and he said, "It is my turn to speak. I am going to give a talk tonight on something I have heard all my life and didn't know what it meant until recently and that is this saying. I never knew what that meant, but I know now. Five years ago I was in the gutter. I was degenerate, demoralized, had been drunk for ages. My wife left me, got the custody of my four children. She got our home, and she was entitled to it all, and I was just turned loose, and I was just down in the gutter. Then you fellows got hold of me, and for five years I haven't had a drink. You know what has happened. I've got my wife back. I've converted her. She is baptized. The children have all been baptized. Last week I was ordained an elder, and the bishop said, 'Now that your wife is in the Church and your children, a year from now you can go to the temple of God, and all be sealed to each other.' Fellows, from the gutter to the temple of God in six years. You are looking at a God. 'As God now is man may become.'"

I went up to Ogden one day. I got a call to go up and attend an open meeting of the Alcoholics Anonymous. We held it in the Ogden tabernacle. The place was packed. It wasn't only members of our Church. Everybody was there. We had a wonderful meeting and a few months later I got a letter from a fellow that was there. He said, "Mr. Cowley, I was in the Ogden tabernacle that night we had that open meeting. I was drunk that day. I haven't had a drink since. I am a Catholic. I have fallen in love with a Mormon girl, and I have made up my mind that the only way I can be worthy of a Mormon girl is to be a Mormon myself. I have given up Catholicism. I am studying the Church and want to come down and have a talk with you sometime. I think you can help me out. I want this girl."

I know a stake president and one of his counselors that were only teachers in the Aaronic Priesthood three years ago. I guess some of the people in that stake will think, "Why on earth did they call him? I am a better man than he is or my dad is a better man than he is. Why on earth did they call him?" I know why they called him. I know why God called him: to save him! Some of you men don't need positions in this Church to be saved, but others of us do. The great people of this Church are the people that don't have any callings in the Church, and yet they are good Latter-day Saints. Did you ever know a bishop that was a good man while he was bishop and then he was released and believe me when he was released he was released—released from everything, not only from being a bishop but from being a good man? We had an application come to our Council to reorganize a ward a few months ago. The man had been bishop for six or seven years. He was a good bishop, and they recommended a successor.

We were just going to vote on it, when Brother Widtsoe spoke up and said, "Wait a minute, brethren. I know that man we are talking about releasing. He needs to be a bishop. I don't like to see him released. I knew him before he was a bishop." Well, he is still a bishop.

My, that's the genius of this Church, isn't it? We talk about delinquent children. Well, we are delinquent parents, a lot of us. I know I am. I have been set apart to be a delinquent father. I have been called to be a delinquent father, away from home all of the time. You know, I dread to think of the kind of delinquent father I would be if I hadn't stuck to this call. Man alive, it would be terrible to think of the kind of delinquency! I hate to think of the kind of delinquent fathers some of you would be if you didn't accept these positions in the Church. That's the best kind of delinquency there is—the kind you and I are. So brethren, remember that every man you have in your quorum is potentially a good man.

I went to a ward down in Utah. They had divided it. They had called a man to be the bishop of the division of the side that had been taken off. We had known these two counselors. I was in a high council meeting. They sustained one counselor, but the other one they hesitated about. Nobody said why he was hesitating. One just said, "Well, I wonder about him. I don't know."

I said, "What's the matter with him?"

The stake president said, "Brother so and so, you tell Brother Cowley what the objection is."

This man spoke up and he said, "Why, this fellow has been an inveterate smoker for years."

I said, "Is that so? What kind of man is he? Would you call him to be a bishop's counselor? Will he keep on smoking?"

"Oh, no, no. He is too honorable for that."

I said, "Well, what are you hesitating for?"

Then one of them said, "He has a daughter on a mission." I said, "Put him in. Why, that girl has been praying every night and morning for something like this to happen to her dad." Well, he is in, and he hasn't broken the Word of Wisdom from that day to this. The daughter is home. She wouldn't believe it when they told her out in the mission field.

We can do more with love than we can with criticism. That is what I loved about President George Albert Smith. I was practising law, and was County Attorney, way back in those days when the Republicans were in office, if you can remember that far back. You know, a good friend of mine was arrested for drunken driving. One of my old neighbors. President Smith called me up; of course he wasn't president then. He said, "Brother Matt, I see in the paper where so and so has been arrested for drunken driving. Of course, he is guilty. He has got to take his medicine. Is there anything I can do for him? He belongs to us."

I said, "Well, he is out on bond. Would you like to see him?"

"Yes, if you can get him to come up here, I would like to have a talk with him." So I went and saw him.

I said, "Brother George Albert Smith wants to see you."

"Oh, no. I am not going up there. I am in enough trouble now. No, sir."

I said, "Go up and have a talk with him. You know him. You have known him all your life. We grew up in his neighborhood." He finally went up. Well, he got out of his difficulty, finally. I went back to New Zealand on my second mission and looked at the Church Section of the Deseret News one day, and lo and behold, here was this drunken driver in the bishopric in one of the wards in Salt Lake. Wonderful, isn't it? You know why? He was in that bishopric because Brother George Albert Smith got him in his office and put his arm around him and had a talk with him. He reminded him of who his parents were and the bringing up he had had, the blood he had in his veins.

On the other hand, I used to get phone calls sometimes from one or two of the brethren when I was County Attorney and they would read those things and say, "You tell the judge to throw the book at him. Put him in jail for the rest of his life. He has no business getting out and doing that." Man, if one of that type would have gotten hold of this fellow he would have been a drunkard still instead of having been in the bishopric.

We are all human, aren't we? I spoke at a funeral recently. It was one of the dearest friends I have ever had, one of the best bishops I have ever known. He never should have been released. When he died, he wasn't a bishop any more.

Brethren, there is a job for everybody in this Church. We are all supposed to help one another.

I have a young fellow that is a friend of mine that cleans the streets in Salt Lake. He is the worst fellow I ever knew. When I was prosecuting attorney if no one else ever showed up to be prosecuted, this fellow would always accommodate me. You know, I see him about every morning. He came into my office one day and he said, "Hey, I want to go to the temple, sometime."

I said, "Hey, what's the idea here. How about tobacco and other things?"

"Well, I'm not going to do those things any more. I am going to be through with that."

"What about your domestic problems?" His wife had divorced him several years before.

"I think I can get my wife back. Her husband died." She married again after she divorced him, had two lovely daughters.

"Will she have you back?"

He said, "I think so."

I met him one day two weeks later and I said, "How are you coming along? How are your domestic affairs?"

He said, "My daughter called the bishop up the other day and said, 'Bishop, I want you to perform a marriage.' 'Who is getting married.' 'My mother.' 'Who is she marrying.' 'My father.'"

Well, they are married again. I said, "Well, how are you doing with the Word of Wisdom?" He said, "Say, I am drinking postum."

I said, "What about tobacco?"

He said, "I am smoking Kools. Anybody who is smoking Kools can break the tobacco habit."

Well, he is doing pretty well. He wants to go to the temple someday. Well, he is headed right in that direction. Now, if he can get from Kools to cedar bark and from cedar bark to nothing he will be all right.

Well, brethren, these are serious problems, aren't they? I don't think there is a family in the United States or person in the United States who isn't affected by a relative or a close friend who is addicted to some of these habits. I think almost every family somewhere has one of these problems. It is up to you and to me to reach out to these men and women.

Now, I don't know, bishop, what you are doing about the girls who are leaving the wards. We have had letters. You know we have a committee, Brother Kimball and Brother Petersen. When the girls go from your ward and are going somewhere else, you are supposed to report to that committee. It isn't being done. Do you know where all the girls are that have left your ward, single girls? Have you followed them up? Do you know where our committee finds some of them in Salt Lake? In jail! That's where they find some of them—girls who have come from good homes, who have been active in their wards.

I was down in the islands during the war. I saw these fellows come down from Guadalcanal and other places to New Zealand, and they had never heard from their bishop. Their own parents didn't even know where they were. We just opened our home and let them make it their home. When we were away on trips we told those fellows to come in anytime and help themselves to anything they found. They did. We would come home from a trip—there'd be nothing in the refrigerator; beds all slept in; clothes on the floor; magazines all over the place, but what a thrill that was, to know those fellows had wanted to come to the mission home. Then we used to publish in our mission paper a list of names. These men were in the field. They are looking fine. They are feeling fine. They were in Church Sundays. Then we would send a copy of it to every one of their parents, and their parents would read that, and they would know right where they were. I am telling you that keeping in touch with those men was vitally important.

We had thirty-six fellows in one outfit out there belonging to the Church. They held Mutual. They held Sunday School. They held sacrament meeting. Man, how thrilled I was once when I picked up the Deseret News. They were all home from the war, and there were their pictures, every single one of them—not a casualty! They had all been to Guadalcanal, Iwo Jima, but those fellows were all preserved.

I had a letter the other day from Tokyo, a letter from one Latter-day Saint boy and enclosed in it was court martial proceedings against another Latter-day Saint boy. He had been court martialed—given five years in prison and a dishonorable discharge—he was from some bishop's ward, from a good Latter-day Saint home, and I am wondering whether he was getting letters from his bishop or his quorum.

I was in Manila, and for two days I stood on the streets in Manila and stopped every American in uniform that I saw and said, "Are there any Mormons in your camp?" While my wife and the others were sightseeing, that's what I was doing. Finally, a tough-looking sergeant came out of a store with his wife and a little child, and he certainly looked mean. I guess his wife had bought something. I finally mustered up enough courage to go up and say, "Where are you located?"

He said, "Clark's Field."

I said, "Are there any Mormons out there?"

He said, "Mormons, the place is lousy with them."

I said, "Is that so?"

"Yes. They don't only hold meeting on Sunday, but they hold a meeting on Tuesday. I can't figure that out. Why do they hold Church on Tuesdays?"

I said, "How many are there out there?"

He said, "Oh, about thirty."

I said, "Do you know any of them?"

He gave me the names of two. I couldn't get them on the telephone, so I wired them, and they came to the ship, and we had lunch. About the first question I asked them was, "Well, how many are there out there?" I think they said there were either twenty-seven or thirty-seven. I said, "Do you ever hear from your bishop?" They said that not one man in that group out there had one letter from his bishop.

Some of you have been in the war, haven't you? Have you ever been out there in those islands or in Europe somewhere sitting down in your barracks wishing you had a letter from somebody? Well, that's the way they are! I know. I have seen them. You are instructed by the Presidency of the Church to keep in touch with these men. It wouldn't only be a response to instructions, but it should be a pleasure to do it. So write a line, now and again. In some places they send out a little newsletter from the ward, telling what's going on, mentioning people, just like the missionaries out in the field. How they love to get their mail from home and to know what is going on. That is the least we can do, brethren. Goodness, these fellows are out giving their lives for us. A lot of them don't come back. Don't ever let any of your servicemen die in the field, and then say that you didn't write them, you didn't keep in touch with them. Well, maybe you are doing it. You have a good stake. You seem to know what is going on and how to handle things here, so I hope that you are doing it.

God bless you brethren in this work. It is the greatest work in the world. If you grasp the spirit and beauties of the Church it lifts you off your feet. I know, brethren, that there is a power in the Church. I know there is the influence of the Holy Ghost with those of us who hold the priesthood. No one can ever say to me that that isn't true. No man on earth has the right to say to me that I don't know that God lives. No man on earth has the right to say to me that I don't know that there is a power of the Holy Ghost which attends men. None can say that to me, because I have had too many experiences. I know it. I know it with all my heart. So, brethren, get the spirit of your offices and your callings. Feel yourselves lifted up and magnified. Don't hesitate to claim from God whatever power you need. It is his work. Remind him of it. You are not supposed to worry about these things. There is only one occasion for worry and that is when you are not doing what you should do. If you are not doing his job the best you know how to do, then worry about it. But if you are doing it the best you know how, don't worry. If you just say to God, "Now listen, Father, this is your business. I am doing the best I know how. Help me, Lord, to do better." His work is supposed to lift you up, give you joy and happiness.

It breaks my heart when I see young missionaries, too many of them lately, coming home from a mission discouraged when they should be coming home with gaiety and happiness and thrills in their hearts for what they have done. Why, I get the biggest kick out of this work of anything I have ever done in all my life. I am concerned about it. It is hard work. I can go to bed at night and let the Lord do the worrying. He must, because I depend upon him such an awful lot. President Smith said to me after I was ordained and went down to his office. He said, "I've got some advice for you." I said, "What is it?" He said, "Well, one thing I don't want you to wear those short bobby socks." I never did wear them. He wanted me to pass the word along to some of the others, I guess. "Another thing. I never want you to write a sermon." I said, "Hey, wait a minute." "Oh, I know some of the brethren write their sermons, and they are beautiful, and their writings are inspired, but I am telling you, just you, I wouldn't tell the others, but I am telling you, Brother Cowley, I never want you to write a sermon." I've tried to remember that and that is the reason I said that God had to do a lot of worrying about me. I stand up and try with all my heart to depend on him. When I was called on to give a talk on my new position as chairman of the no-liquor-tobacco committee, I had thought about it for weeks. I had a wonderful talk in my mind. When I stood up there to give my talk which I thought was a good talk I had prepared, I couldn't give it; if I had it written, I would have had to read it; but I didn't have it written, so I stood up there—I know there is power in the Holy Ghost, I know it because I could feel it with all of my heart. We are supposed to have that, aren't we? Well, let's go around as bearers of the priesthood, knowing that God is using us to accomplish his purposes.

I repeat, build up your quorum integrity, brethren. Know the members of your quorum. Bishops, know the members of your ward. In your welfare work—it may not be in the handbook—but if there is somebody in your ward that doesn't belong to the Church and needs a little help, give him a little help. This may be out of line, I don't know. If it is, I will hear about it on Tuesday when I get home. It is funny how fast word travels. We have the greatest information bureau in this Church I have ever seen. May God bless you in your quorum activity, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
