Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Executive Leadership

An address given at the 45th annual conference of the Primary Association in the Assembly Hall, April 4, 1951

IT IS A GREAT privilege to be here this morning, my sisters—and one or two brothers down there—it is an honor to be asked to participate with you in your conference. You certainly have a full program for two days. I have not got through reading the program yet—I have not had time. But I was thrilled this morning when I picked up the morning paper and saw the pictures of two of the presidency of the Primary with two of my wonderful sisters from Honolulu. It makes me a bit homesick to see these leis around these sisters' necks up here this morning, bringing here a breath of Hawaii.

As the prayer was being offered, and it was prayed that we might have the cooperation of our ward members—of course, that incorporates, inferentially, all of those with whom we are associated in our activities—it reminds me that I think one of the greatest assets for executive leadership, one that is vitally essential, indispensable, is the sustaining influence of those over whom we preside. If we do not have the sustaining influence of those with whom we are working and associating, then of course we cannot be effective leaders. A president cannot be a good presiding officer without the wholehearted support and sustaining influence of the counselors. And the counselors cannot be effective as counselors without the sustaining influence of the president. There must be this full cooperation.

I am reminded of something President Joseph F. Smith said on one occasion when he was before an investigating committee of the United States Senate. It was at the time Senator Reed Smoot was having his difficulty, and they were trying to keep him from taking his seat in the Senate. And so the Government went on a "fishing expedition" with reference to the activities of the Mormon Church in politics and other matters. President Smith was subpoenaed back there as a witness, and as he was on the witness stand before the Senate committee, the chairman of the committee asked him a question. I no doubt suspect that he had a rather cynical air about him when he asked that question. The question was this: "Mr. Smith, are you a prophet of God?" And he did not answer, "Yes." He did not answer, "No." But he immediately replied, "I am so sustained by my people." That was the first thing that came into his mind. And no better answer could have been given; they could not ridicule him: "I am so sustained by my people."

You who are presidents of stake boards, of the Primary work in the stakes, you are in that capacity because first you are called—not because you aspire to these positions. Aspiring to these positions does not make for good leadership in this Church. Accepting the call does make for good leadership if you are sustained by those with whom you work. And so, how vitally important it is to be sustained.

Now, what does this business of sustaining imply? Are you to be all of the same opinion in your deliberations about problems? No, you can have your own opinions. When I was called into the Council of the Twelve, the first instruction I received from President Smith was, "Within our meetings when we are deliberating upon certain matters, if your opinions differ from the opinions of the rest of your brethren, do not fail to express your opinion. Then vote to sustain the action of the entire group." I like that. It does not mean that when I have expressed an opinion that differs from my associates that I have to change that opinion when I vote. It means that I may preserve unto myself that opinion, but I must be in harmony by sustaining the action which is proposed. Sometimes we misconstrue this question of sustaining one another. And some of us do not raise our hands. I have been in high council meetings where a brother or two did not raise their hands when the motion was put because they felt that they were surrendering the opinions which they had expressed, and that they would be hypocrites by raising their hands. Oh, no; they should raise their hands to sustain their presiding officers and the action which was proposed for which the majority agree. That makes for perfect harmony. I have never seen a dissenting vote in the five and one-half years I have been in the Council of the Twelve—not one dissenting vote. And yet, on practically all matters there are differences of opinion; but the vote is always as a single vote. We are one. As President Clark is always reminding us in general conference and in the priesthood meeting especially, the words of the Lord, ". . . if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D.& C. 38:27.) And so, we have to be one, do we not?

Now the head is the head in this Church, and the head must always be sustained in giving the final decision. I recall once when we were about to vote upon a matter in the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency, and all of a sudden President Smith said, "Wait a minute, brethren." And the member of the Council of the Twelve who had made the motion immediately said, "I withdraw my motion," to give the President of the Church, the presiding officer, the opportunity to make his decision before any vote was taken. So that is very important, is it not, sisters, that we sustain one another?

The thing that disturbs me most and disheartens me as I go about the stakes of Zion, is to talk to a president of a stake and have him say that his counselors are not supporting him, that some of his high council are not supporting him. And I asked one stake president on one occasion how he was getting along. And he said, "Oh, very fine, but the high council outvotes me too much."

I said, "Brother, you had better be getting a new council, and you be head, do not let your high council preside over this stake—you preside and have them sustain you." But he had not looked at it that way before. A lot of us are ignorant, you know, when we get into these positions, and that makes it more essential for us to be sustained.

I am an amazing character, you know. I have never been in a bishopric; I have never been on a high council; I have never been in a stake presidency; I have never been in the presidency of an auxiliary organization; I have never been on a general board—I think I was in the presidency of the deacon's quorum. And yet, here I am—only had one child of my own, and now I am called into this position, and I go all over this Church telling the stake presidencies how to do their work, the bishoprics how to do their work, and the parents how to rear their children. Now, brothers and sisters, you have to be sustained in order to be successful in the position which I hold. And unless I am sustained, of course, I could not do this work. That is what I love about this Church; we are called—it is God's work, it is not yours—and you have the right to claim from God greater power than you have in order to do his work. Always remember that!

I am not given much to worry; a lot of people in the Church are, but I do not worry much. I just sit down and think this business over, and I say to myself, "Now, it is up to me to do the best I know how with the training and the background and the testimony I have, and if I am doing the best I know how, I am not going to worry." I am going to let Him do the worrying when I am doing the best that I know how for him. That makes me feel good. I sleep four hours every night on that kind of philosophy; and that is enough sleep for me, I think. And so, sisters, do not feel that you cannot reach out, outside and beyond yourselves for power which you do not possess in order to be successful in your work. We have to have that outside power.

There is one thing I would like to interject here before I forget, and that is, I want to say to the Primary workers, to you who preside over the Primary organization, that I do not think that we have an organization in this Church which does more to prepare the young boy to receive the priesthood of God than the Primary organization. I think the boys that come out of the Primary organization into the priesthood are pretty well equipped to receive the priesthood of our Father in heaven. And I am sure that that has been true in the past few years because I have had Primary children write to me and ask me questions, ask me about my own life, and ask me questions about the other Authorities of the Church. I have attended one or two Primary gatherings, and I have been inspired by the members' knowledge of Church history, the Articles of Faith, and other principles which qualify them to bear the priesthood of God. You are to be commended for that work which you are doing in the Primary organization.

There is another matter I would like to bring to your attention, and to the attention of all of us: We are in positions of leadership, and that is, the way we release people from their positions—not only in this organization, but in all organizations of the Church. We must not hurt people, remember that; therefore, we must be very careful, very diplomatic, and do it after praying when it becomes necessary to release teachers and other officers in your organization. It certainly is not fair for it to be announced in a stake conference or in some other meeting that "so and so is released," when he has not heard about it before. To me that is insulting. We should be just as careful and considerate of the person we are releasing from a position as we are of a person we are calling into a position in the Church.

I picked up the Teacher's Training Handbook for the Primary Association this morning when I got out of bed. My wife, I suppose, has been reading a little of that—at least I guessed it from the notes in the booklet. I picked up this book and as I scanned through it there was one heading, "A Child Needs Love," another one, "A Child Needs Recognition," another one, "A Child Needs Discipline." And I said, "Why limit it to the child?" If there is anyone that needs love and needs to love, it is all of us, for we are in these important positions in the Church, and we need recognition. The person who is being released needs recognition, needs consideration. We must have a keen sense of appreciation for the work which has been done. And we need discipline, all of us. And when we reach our ages, we should discipline ourselves, so that it does not become necessary to be disciplined by others. I am subject to considerable discipline in my position, and I accept it—I have to, I cannot do anything else about it—but it has always come to me from my superiors, and I sustain them with all my heart, and I accept their discipline. These things are just as important to us as they are to the children, are they not?

Now, sisters, we must all have testimonies of the gospel. Please do not accept a position of responsibility in the Primary organization unless you have a testimony of the gospel, unless you are going to be orthodox, unless you are going to be exemplars of the gospel of Jesus Christ, unless you are going to be obedient to the principles. You know, not only children, but I suppose all of us, receive our greatest impressions through our eyes, and not through our ears. The child learns more from its vision than it does from its hearing. Have you ever been disappointed in seeing someone who, as a child, you respected and then you saw him do something out of the way?

I had a teacher once at a Church school who used to have a young girl who was attending school and working at his home for her board and room; he used to put coffee in a postum can—she was not supposed to know about it. He put coffee in the postum can and then he asked her in the morning to make him a cup of postum. Well, he thought he was getting by with it, but everybody in school knew it, every one. He was not a good teacher, was he?

Sisters, you have to be narrow about the gospel. You have to be narrow-minded about all truth; do not be broad-minded about it. You have to be narrow-minded about it. When you get a prescription and take it to the chemist, the druggist, you want him to be narrow-minded about that prescription; you do not want him to take any liberties with it to make any substitutions; you do not want him to put "coffee in the postum can."

When I was county attorney here in Salt Lake County, I prosecuted a druggist for manslaughter because he was too broad-minded about a doctor's prescription. He substituted something, and the patient died within hours; that is what I mean about being narrow-minded about the truth.

Now, that does not include being intolerant or uncharitable. We must be charitable; we must be tolerant; not with ourselves—do not be very tolerant with yourselves when it comes to weaknesses, be rather intolerant with yourselves—but be tolerant and charitable with others. Your lives must be your sermons; your lives must be the best witness of the testimonies which you have in your hearts.

Some of us think that liberty means doing what we want to do. That is not freedom, that is not liberty. Genuine freedom is doing what we "ought" to do rather than what he "want" to do. That gives us the greatest freedom. Search the truth, follow the truth, and the truth will make you free. Whether you want to follow the truth or not, you ought to follow it if you are going to have the freedom which you want.

And I suppose our greatest objective in Primary work would be training the child not only to do what it ought to do rather than what it wants to do, but also training it to want to do what it ought to do. If you can do that, you have accomplished everything expected of you. If you can teach a child to want to do what it ought to do, then your teachers in your wards and stakes are going to be very successful with children, are they not? But, my, what a problem that is, what a task! What a job to teach a child to want to do what it ought to do!

Children ought to go to Primary, but I have had a little boy that did not want to go to Primary until this year. But now he wants to do what he ought to do. Last year he did what we made him do, and then he did not always do it. But this year he is wanting to do what he ought to do; that makes a great difference, does it not? And that is true with all of us, sisters, wanting to do what we ought to do.

Well, my time is limited—for which I am very grateful—but my, what a wonderful opportunity you people have to receive the kingdom of heaven. You are dealing with children. You are saying with the Master, "Suffer little children and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 19:14.) And unless we become as little children, we cannot receive the kingdom of heaven. You are blessed, sisters, in the work in which you are engaged, in the opportunity you have to serve.

And in conclusion, may I suggest that you receive great joy and happiness out of this work. There is too much depression in the world, too much frustration, too much confusion. It is too easy for us to become depressed. We are not supposed to be unhappy in the work of God. "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) The gospel is to lift us up. Our opportunities to serve are to lift us up, and not to give us sleepless nights. Be concerned about your work, of course; take it seriously; magnify your calling; and God will magnify you.

Do not forget to pray. Do not forget to fast occasionally, and you will receive the blessings which you desire.

I know that God lives; I know that Jesus is the Christ; and I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.

And last, I want to tell you sisters that I still meet on the streets of this city two or three women who were my Primary teachers in the old Seventeenth Ward, and they always give me a "lift" when I see them. And I do not forget their lives—even though I may have forgotten much of what they tried to teach me—I do not forget the example they set before me.

Live that which you teach, live that which you expect your teachers to teach. Get close to your teachers, know them intimately, know their problems, get their viewpoints, have understanding hearts. Know your board members, know them personally and intimately, and even where personalities may clash, always remember that in the work of God there must be no clash, but rather harmony, appreciation for one another, and sustaining one another. Do not let your personalities impede the work of God.

May his Spirit be and abide with you in this great service, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
