Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

The First Principles of the Gospel

Address at Bountiful Stake conference, January, 1953

I AM GRATEFUL to be with you this morning, my brothers and sisters, and to listen to these testimonies of these fine missionaries. I love this old building. I have heard it is ninety years old now. There has been a lot of wisdom spoken from this rostrum. A lot of great men of God have stood here and borne their testimonies. I think the first time I ever attended a meeting in this building was at the funeral of my cousin, Carter Sessions, who died in the Northwestern States Mission. I was just a young lad at the time, but I remember that meeting very distinctly. President Melvin Ballard was his mission president. He came here to the funeral, and I remember also President Seymour B. Young speaking at that funeral. I guess when we go into the mission field we offer our lives, and sometimes the offer is accepted. In that instance the offer was accepted.

Our men go into the service and offer their lives. Not always is the offer accepted, but sometimes it is. When that offer is accepted, we are the beneficiaries of that which they have contributed, even in the giving of their lives for that which they believe is to be true.

I appreciate these missionaries. They are coming home by the hundreds. There are not many going out. The missionary situation is rather desperate in the Church. We need missionaries. We need those who are willing to go from six months up. We have been bringing so many people into the Church through our missionary system of recent years that a lot of these people need help; they need encouragement and are being left without missionaries to encourage them. If there are any elderly couples that could go to a mission field and settle down in a branch for a couple of years where they need leadership and help, those couples will be more than welcome, especially if they have a car so they can get around, and if they can find someone to finance them.

In one stake up north we have a number of couples out who are farmers, and it is a stake project. All of those farms are being operated by the farmers in the stake so that the owners of the farms can be in the mission field. Those farms are producing more wealth than they ever did while the owners were back home running the farms themselves. So I suppose those missionaries will want to stay in the mission field from now on.

On one of my visits to New Zealand I went to a conference. We held a large meeting in this community. It wasn't a community where we had many members. We held a large meeting, and the mission president called on a new missionary to get up and speak, and that boy was scared. I knew just how he felt because I had had the same experience years before. He stood up there, and he tried to say something, but he couldn't get it out. Now, some people would have said, "Why on earth did they ever send a man like that out into the mission field?" But do you know what the old native said to me sitting next to me. He whispered in my ear, "Won't he be giving us the devil in six months from now?" Why, he could see that boy. He was thrilled with that lad up there trying to express himself because he could see the end from the beginning. He could see the architect's plan, and he could see the contractor's work, the great designer's influence in building that young man to be a servant of God.

At a conference in Philadelphia there was a finelooking couple who seemed to be different from the ordinary run of people. I asked the mission president who they were. He said: "I will introduce you to them after meeting." So he took me down after meeting and introduced me to them. The husband was the editor of the Wall Street Journal, in Philadelphia the biggest financial journal in the United States. Then the mission president said, "A few months ago two young lady missionaries went to their home. They went to the front door and the wife came to the door. They introduced themselves. She let them in. They sat down and told the story and as they were leaving she said to them, 'You have got to come back. My husband has to meet you. He must meet you.' The two young lady missionaries went back. Well now they hold the fireside chats on Sunday nights in the home of this Philadelphia editor of the Wall Street Journal." How God does attend his missionaries. He has to be with them. They are the most eloquent speakers in all the world, because as William Jennings Bryan said, who was without a peer in this country as an orator: "True eloquence is from the heart to the heart, not from the mouth to the ear." So these are the most eloquent speakers there are in the world, brothers and sisters, because they don't have much up here (pointing to head). It is all down here (pointing to heart), and it has to go from the heart to the heart.

In the early days of the Church you know, the missionaries didn't have tracts. They didn't have all of these pamphlets and books to hand out—the great old missionaries, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and all of these men. What did they take with them? The source material, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, as far as they had it, the Bible, and they told the people of the world what they found within the covers of those books. We have never had any greater minds in this Church than those men who taught from the standard works of the Church.

What we need to learn in the Church today here at home is the fundamental principles of the gospel. The Relief Society is studying the Book of Mormon. I'll bet anything to most of those Relief Society sisters it is a new experience. I would hate to ask you all to raise your hands who have read the Book of Mormon through from cover to cover. I've got one in my home. It is just as good as the day I bought it. It has been years since I read it through, but out in the mission fields they read it.

I was telling the high council this morning that I think the people who have the most profound knowledge of the scriptures in this Church are the islanders, especially down there where they don't know any English or the French language where all they have is their own language. All they have printed in their own language is the Book of Mormon and the Bible, so they know those books. They are wise. They have an understanding of life. They have an understanding of the principles of the gospel. Why, down in Tonga if you get up to deliver a sermon and you want to quote a passage of scripture, all you do is give the citation, the chapter and the verse, then the congregation quotes the passage, and you stand and listen to them. If they don't give enough you say, "Keep going," and they keep going. Then you stop them, and then you go so far again, cite another passage, and up comes the scripture from the congregation. It used to annoy me no end when I was on my first mission down in New Zealand, and I would struggle to learn a passage of scripture in the Maori language by heart, and I would get up in Church and I would use that passage of scripture, but when I got through quoting it, then most of the congregation would keep on mumbling from where I had left off. They wouldn't pay any more attention to me. They would just keep on mumbling the scriptures from where I left off and so I finally got down to the scriptures, and I memorized the whole ready reference, the one they used to publish. It was quite a thick little book. I did it because those people knew it. You could always call a group of them up. "Brother so and so. Bring a group up here and let's hear the scriptures on the restoration of the gospel." He would bring his group up, and they would chant every passage of scripture in the ready reference on the restoration of the gospel. They had no books in their hands. Tell them to give it on the apostasy, and they would do it on the apostasy. On any of the principles of the gospel, they knew it. They had it in their heads. They have a profound knowledge of the scriptures of this Church. So here at home we need that.

There is a missionary now that I knew out in the mission field only three years ago who is now passing the plate in another church. He came home with an honorable release from the mission field. There is another one who refuses to pray in his home or ask the blessing on the food. I wish we could get hold of those fellows. I think I will set Brother Midgley apart to do that, so that they can find out there is something else besides the training of the intellect that they must have to anchor them to the faith in this Church.

It is good to see these youngsters here this morning. I guess you have all been baptized, haven't you? How were you baptized? "Put your head down under the water and brought you back up." It is wonderful, isn't it? Were you all baptized that way? How was Christ baptized? "He was baptized the same way." Who did it? "John the Baptist." What did John do with him? "He 'dunked' him under." He "dunked" him under, that's right. Well that's all right. He put him right under the water, didn't he? Then he came up out of the water. What happened after he came up out of the water? Do you remember? "The dove came down from heaven." That was the sign of the Holy Ghost, wasn't it? Was there any voice that said anything? "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17.) He never said that before he was baptized, did he? No, sir. It was after he was baptized. It was after he was "dunked" under the water and brought back up, then the voice of the Father came from heaven and said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." That's what he says about you because you were baptized under the water and brought up. You may not have heard the voice, but God was saying about you, "This is my boy, in whom I am well pleased."

Then after that what happened? Did you go to fast meeting? Did anyone else do anything after you were baptized? "I was confirmed." That's right. And how did they do that? "They said, 'Receive you the Holy Ghost.'" My, we have got missionaries going out that couldn't answer those questions as well as you can, but the Lord takes them in hand and they soon learn.

That's the right way to do it then. They wouldn't deceive you, would they? Now you know more about baptism and more about the reception of the Holy Ghost. You know more about that than most of the ministers of religion in the world. Lots of them say you don't need to be baptized, and others only dryclean them. Just do a little sprinkling. There is no dunking. We are the dunkers. Well, do you think God says when a man is just sprinkled with a little water, "This is my Son, in whom I am well pleased"? Of course he doesn't. You are right. Why doesn't he? "He didn't get his full body covered with water." So God didn't say to anyone when he hasn't been baptized properly, "This is my beloved son or this is my beloved daughter in whom I am well pleased." You receive the Holy Ghost. We can follow Christ in the paths of righteousness.

Now, you know when Christ was on the earth he didn't give anybody the Holy Ghost. Do you know why? "They didn't need it." They didn't need it. He was here. He was a member of the Godhead. He was among them. It was after he left them that he sent the Holy Ghost to the Apostles. He didn't want those men to go on doing anything without help from heaven. Even though he had been with them those three years, when he left, he didn't want to leave them alone. You know they are human beings. They would start preaching error, doing something wrong. So he said, "You wait at Jerusalem, and I will send you the comforter, the Holy Ghost." So they waited at Jerusalem after Christ had gone back into heaven. Then he sent the Holy Ghost. Then they had help from heaven.

We get the gift of the Holy Ghost. When you were confirmed, the man said, "Receive you the Holy Ghost." Maybe he said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost." He shouldn't have said "ye." Sometimes people say that, and they only have their hands on one head. "Ye" is the plural of "you." So, when they say "ye," they are using the plural when you are only one man. So they should say, "Receive the Holy Ghost," not "Receive ye the Holy Ghost."

Even little boys can understand the gospel, can't they? I can understand the simple principles of the gospel. How much is tithing? "Ten percent of all your earnings." I think you ought to come up here and talk, not I. Ten percent of all your earnings. That means ten percent. Whose money is that ten percent. It is God's, isn't it? That's the Lord's. It isn't yours or mine, but sometimes people keep the Lord's money, don't they? They think it is theirs, and they keep it.

You understand the gospel all right. Now you always give the Lord his money. Don't you keep it. That's his. You know one of the prophets said, "A man robs God if he keeps the Lord's tithing." (See Mal. 3:8.) We don't want to be robbers, do we? So you always give the Lord his money. Don't you keep it. You give it to him. Go right to your bishop and give it to him.

We are building a lot of chapels. A beautiful chapel I was in over there last night.

Well, do you know what happens when they build a chapel? "Take the money out of the tithing." And what else? You have to dig down, don't you? You have a finance committee or whatever you call it. The members of this committee bring a lot of things into the gospel which shouldn't be there. We should be careful about this. We are always assessing people. I don't like that. This is the Lord's work, isn't it? If it is his work, let him finance his own business. He will do it if you will give him his money, but if you don't give him his money, he can't do it. God has provided a way whereby he will finance his own business here upon the earth if we will just give him his tenth.

Yes, we should be the richest people in the world. Do you fast on fast day? You really do? My, that's wonderful. Did your father and mother? Don't answer that. That's a good thing, fast day, isn't it? You know, we have a million people in this Church and if they paid a dollar fast offering a year that would be a million dollars, wouldn't it? If you divide a dollar up by twelve that is less than ten cents—ten cents a meal. Can you buy a meal in Bountiful for ten cents? Can you buy a hamburger for ten cents? You can buy a bowl of soup.

But look at fasting. What a wonderful thing it is to fast. You ask your mother when the food is on the table just what it cost. What does butter cost? What do eggs cost? If you figure it all up I think it will come pretty close to fifty cents a person. That's two meals on fast day. That would be $150,000,000 every fast day. Now you multiply that by twelve and twelve times 150,000,000. My goodness. What the principles of the gospel wouldn't do for this country A billion and a half dollars or so. And it wouldn't cost the people a penny if they fasted. If you don't fast then it costs you money to make a contribution. But if you do fast then it doesn't cost you anything and you are blessing the people who are in need. My, this is a wonderful Church, isn't it?

Fasting does you good; you get humble; get the spirit of it.

Boys grow up. You have got it. You have been baptized. You have been "dunked" under the water completely. You have been brought up out of the water, and God has said about everyone of you, "This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased." Then you received the help from heaven that Christ said he would send to his Apostles—the Holy Ghost. If you live clean, you will have that Holy Ghost going with you through life. Don't ever forget that.

You know when you are tuning a radio you have to tune to the right channel or you don't get anything, do you? You just get static. That's the way we have to be tuned into the right channel or we don't get God. We don't get him, but if we are tuned into the right channel, we get him.

Now, I know that God lives, I know that Jesus is the Christ, I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of the living God and I know that his prophets are here on the earth today. I know that every man who has succeeded Joseph Smith, the prophet, has been a prophet of God because he has built upon the foundation of the prophet, and if you build upon the foundation of a prophet, you are a prophet. I know that God sustains his leaders in the Church just as Christ sustained his Apostles. He always sustained them. He kept them together. He kept them right there where they belonged. Wasn't that wonderful, how he loved those men, had faith in them? So they had their power, and God sustained his priesthood here upon the earth.

You boys have that priesthood. Are you deacons? How many of you are deacons? Do you pass the sacrament, all of you? Do your fathers say to you, "Get out to Church now and pass the sacrament. It is your turn," then they stay home and watch television and listen to the radio? I saw a man do that once. Yes, sir, I saw him. I heard him tell his boy to get over to the ward, and he stayed home and learned how to sing, "Be happy go lucky." You boys grow up. You are all right. Don't let anybody tell you that you are not. You are good people. You are God's children, and he said, "These are my children in whom I am well pleased." I hope he says that about all of us.

God bless us all I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
