Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Humility in Service

Saturday evening address at Bountiful Stake conference priesthood meeting, 1953.

(When Brother Cowley makes references to devils and such in his talk at the beginning, it is because the hall where the meeting was held had been used the night before for a dance and was decorated in a Halloween festive season with witches and goblins and devils all around the hall.)

GOOD EVENING, my brothers and sisters. It is good to sit up here in the pearly gates with President [Levi Edgar] Young and look at the devil and hellfire back there on the other walls. You have got us all wedged in here tonight between heaven and hell. President Young has been giving you much of heaven, so I guess I should give you the other place.

It is good to come here with President Young. I have known him for many years. He is one of our greatest historians. I used to be at the University of Utah when he was professor of history there. I think the thing I remember most vividly is the way he used to relate the tragedy of the Donner party as it proceeded to California. I always enjoyed his lessons. The trouble with the world today is that we don't learn enough. We don't pay enough attention to history. But I am not here to talk history with you because if I am an example of his ability to teach history, he was a very poor teacher.

As he suggested there are probably various types of people here tonight. I suppose some senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood, some without any priesthood, but I want to tell you the senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood and those without any priesthood do not have a corner on all the faults and failings of this Church. We have a lot of elders who are not as good as some of our senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood. We have a lot of senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood who are much better in their living and in their habits than many of us who hold the higher priesthood. But, after all, we are all one people. We are trying to come up together. As long as there is anyone on his way up in this Church, he is helping all the rest of us in the Church whether he is in the Aaronic Priesthood or whether he has or has not any priesthood.

I was at a meeting last night of the Alcoholics Anonymous in the Sugar House Ward chapel. But in that meeting I heard some wonderful testimonies of men who have been throwing their lives away with alcohol. One of them has been a drunkard for the twenty-seven years I knew about. But for about fifteen years now, I think, he hasn't touched a drop. It is wonderful to hear them talk.

When the sister mentioned tonight about family prayer, I remembered that one of the speakers last night talked about the family prayer in their home since he had been returned to sanity by becoming sober. His health had come to him and happiness to his home because he had changed his life, and he said that now when his children pray, they always pray that the blessings which have finally come to their home may also come to other homes such as theirs used to be. It is a wonderful thing to hear an alcoholic bear testimony about the efficacy of prayer and what it does in the home for the parents and for the children.

I had a brother called in the first war. He was in Washington at school when he was called. My father had the idea that he should go to the temple and receive his blessings before he went overseas. Next door to us lived President Anthon H. Lund, Counselor to the President of the Church. My father went over and talked to him and said, "I certainly would like to see my boy come home to receive the blessings of the temple before he goes overseas." President Lund said, "Why not? You know how to do it." My father knew what he meant, and he prayed, and President Lund helped him. In three or four days my father received a wire from my brother that said, "Our captain here has passed away. He is from San Diego. I have been appointed to escort the body to San Diego, and on my return I will pass through Salt Lake City, and I will be there for one day." That one day was spent in the temple.

Don't anyone ever tell me that there isn't any efficacy in prayer. There is a God in heaven, brothers and sisters. Don't ever be too proud to pray. There used to be a day when people seemed to have some reason for not believing in God, for not believing in prayer, but that day is past. The age of miracles is here. Miracles are commonplace.

Prayer is a wonderful thing, brothers and sisters. You want to know that when you get on your knees and pray to God as this family does and if you are in the right channel he hears you.

These tape recording machines we have. The only thing that scares me is I think they have got them over on the other side. Maybe they have television, too. Maybe our hell's going to be when we get over there, somebody is going to turn on a television set, and we are going to see ourselves when we were out behind the barn smoking cedar bark. Maybe he will turn on a few tape recordings, and we will hear ourselves speaking. Wouldn't that be terrible? Hear some of the arguments we have with our wives. I wonder whether they can record it when they are giving us the silent treatment? I have a tape recording machine. Every once in a while I make a few recordings. We get our missionaries together, and we make a few recordings, and we send them out to New Zealand to our people. They hear our voices. We talk to them. They erase those tapes, and they put messages on them and send them back. That's what I like about it—the erasing.

I believe when we repent there is some erasing going on up there so that when we get there we will be judged as we are for what we are and maybe not for what we have been.

The Lord wants to use you. Who else is there to use? The Savior came to the world over there in the Holy Land, and he grew up and entered the ministry. What did he do? Why he just walked along the streets and down here on the shore of the lake and he saw some rough-and-tumble characters. They had their weaknesses. James and John were called the Sons of Thunder or something. They were aspiring brethren. We don't have that kind of people in our Church. We don't have anybody in this Church who wants a big job. But they were aspiring anyway. One wanted to be on his right hand and one on his left in the kingdom and he had to reprimand them. He was reprimanding those men all of the time. When he went into the garden to pray, He said, "Sit ye here, while I shall pray." (Mark 14:32.) There was the Lord himself talking to his Apostles. He came back, and they were all sound asleep. Great disciples, but he still sustained them, these men with their failings. He went back again, and he prayed, and the blood oozed from every pore. He poured out his heart to God, and he came back, and they were all sound asleep. Then he said the most beautiful words I suppose the disciples ever heard from his lips. He said, "Sleep on." My, wouldn't that be wonderful to have him tell you to sleep on? I wouldn't have come to Bountiful in the morning. Sleep on! But he was always faithful and true and devoted to those men, just men like you and me. One of them didn't even believe he was resurrected. Christ was kind and considerate, and he let him touch him, and he let him feel the nail prints and the wound in the side. He was always good, faithful, and considerate to these men of clay who had their faults and their weaknesses.

He went among the sinners. He knew that men were greater than their sins and so he descended below all things that he might rise above all things. That's the spirit we need in the Church today. I think that's the spirit we have. We are all our brother's keepers.

One of our American philosophers said something like this once, I don't know the exact words: "The good man is the man no matter how low he has descended who begins to come up. When he starts coming up, he is a good man. The bad man is the man no matter how high he has ascended starts to come down." So the bad man may be up here on his way down, and the good man may be down here on his way up. If they keep going in those relative directions, they are going to pass each other, and eventually that good man who was up there is going to be down here, and the bad man who was down here is going to be up there. So that's the genius, brothers and sisters of the Church; the genius of the gospel—regenerating human souls.

People who want to do things their own way generally are very critical. Oh, the brethren who are driving the youth out of the Church. Why? Because they say a little drink does them harm—a little highball does them harm. People who want to drink say a little highball won't do you any harm. If any of you think that, you come with me to an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting. I'll show you somebody who thinks a little drink does harm. They have all been drunkards. You never hear one of them say a little highball won't do you any harm. That's what they used to say then they became alcoholics, and they had no control over it.

We have to be narrow-minded about the truth. Don't ever get broad-minded about the truth. The great men of history who have done things for humanity have been narrow-minded about their ideas, about their ideals. Marconi discovered wireless telegraphy. I was riding along one day with Dr. [Joseph] Merrill, and he said, "Brother Cowley, fifty years ago today one of the greatest physicists in this country was teaching his class, and I was in that class. He was teaching us principles which prove that Marconi would never be able to send the wireless message. He convinced us that it couldn't be done. Now we are all doing it," but poor old Marconi, they laughed at him because he was so narrow-minded about that idea and now we don't use wire to communicate with anybody in the world. It would have been terrible if he became broad-minded about that. We probably never would have had wireless telegraphy or radio.

All of these great leaders, great benefactors of humanity, have been narrow-minded and so we in the Church have to be narrow-minded about the truth, especially the revealed truth.

When I was a little boy and would get sick, my mother would go next door and borrow some coffee. She would bring it in, and she would make a little cup of black coffee. Then she would put into the black coffee castor oil. Then she would feed it to me. Ever since that time whenever I smell coffee, I smell castor oil. And whenever I see it, I see that oil on the top. That's what made me narrow-minded about coffee. It has never tempted me.

God bless you in your endeavors to do right, and when you do right, think of me; and when you have your family prayers, think of me. I like to hear people pray for me. I need it. Our whole family needs it. I have been ordained and set apart to be a delinquent father. I am never home anymore. We have a little boy there, and I thank God for the auxiliary organizations of the Church for helping me out. I can't rear him. I am grateful to the ward teacher who calls up every week or every two weeks whatever it is and says, "Duncan, tonight is the night. I will pick you up at seven o'clock." My, I love that man. I love the scout leader Bob. I don't know his last name, but his first name is Bob. I love that fellow. He calls up and gets our boy off to Scout meetings, and I go out and tell everybody else how to rear their children and neglect my own, so I need the prayers of the people. Activity, brethren and sisters, activity in this Church will bring down upon you the blessings of heaven and joy and happiness which you will never find anywhere else. The passage was quoted, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matt. 11:28.)

I talked to a great lawyer up in Idaho the other day. He is a patriarch now. I said, "How are you getting along?" He said, "Fine, but I miss the meetings of the high council. I miss those meetings. I used to get tired after a long day in court or a long day at the office, and I would go home worn-out and weary. I would have a bite to eat, and I would go to a high council meeting or some other meeting, and the burden was just lifted off my shoulders." He said, "I have never had such relaxation or rest in the hard labors of the day as I used to have when I belonged to the high council and went to those meetings."

Now most of us go home tired and miserable and say, "Why do they have so many meetings?" We are always complaining about the meetings. If anyone should complain, I should. Don't worry about these meetings. Go to them. Go to them with the right spirit, and you will have rest. A lot of our members belong to clubs, civic clubs, luncheon clubs. They wear their badges. They pay their dues. They wouldn't miss one of those things for all the rice in China. They wouldn't think of missing them, but when it comes to a Church meeting: "I am too tired. Why do they have so many meetings?" Have you ever heard that said?

Well, I will leave my testimony with you. I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I know, brothers and sisters, through prayer and through fasting the veil between God and men can be very, very thin. I know that I can reach out and if I get the right channel I can get hold of God's power. If I can be used by him for the blessings of his children, I am willing to give my life for the service I am in. Strange as the thought may be, I offer it on this altar of service to do what I can for God, the blessings of his children which in turn brings me great blessings.

God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
