Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Challenge to Youth

Address delivered at San Fernando Stake, May 25, 1952

IT IS A GREAT privilege to be here this morning with you in this sacred hour of worship, and I trust that while I occupy your time I may have an interest in your faith and your prayers. You know, this business is inspirational, a kind of cycle. We could start from the prayers of the congregation to God, and if he hears the prayers, from God to the speaker, then from the speaker out to the congregation. So if I say nothing that is of interest or inspiring to you it is entirely your fault.

I dropped in on your stake conference a little over a year ago when I was en route to Honolulu and I have been sitting here trying to think of what I said then. I've forgotten and I know you have forgotten, too, so it won't make any difference if we say the same things over again, but I appreciate this privilege I have of meeting again with you wonderful people, especially these youngsters who are here this morning. I have been thinking about the youth of the Church, the youth of the nation, while I have been sitting here, and I would like to tell these youngsters who are getting old enough to vote that they have a responsibility resting upon their shoulders. I would like to tell them that they should move this responsibility on the shoulders of us older people. We are the ones who put the guns in your hands. You are not the ones who gave you the guns, but we, the older ones, placed the guns in your hands.

I used to take an interest in politics. You should take an interest in your government. You should be active. You should vote. You should study men and study principles, so that you vote for good men and then that time will come when you won't be handing your children guns and sending them off to war, sometimes without knowing why they are going, without knowing what they are fighting for.

Now this country had its first Declaration of Independence drafted by a young man whom a committee appointed to draw up that declaration, young Thomas Jefferson, youngest of the entire committee. Yet he was selected to draw up the Declaration of Independence.

Fellows, don't leave this business to us old men. Take this responsibility upon yourselves. Go out and find out what this is all about. Find out what makes this country tick, and when you are finding out, go back to the beginning of this great nation. Study the men who founded it. Study the institutions which were originally given to us and upon which this great nation has been built. Study history. Find out what has happened. See whether we are preserving the greatest palladium of human liberty ever written, the Constitution of the United States.

When we had the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln said even though he wanted the slaves free, "If to preserve the sanctity of the Constitution we must have slaves, we shall have slaves. If to preserve the Constitution we must free the slaves, we will free the slaves. If to preserve the Constitution we must have part of the states slave and part of them free, that is just what we will have." What he was interested in more than anything else was the preservation of the Constitution of the United States, and that is why the Civil War was fought.

Now this must be preserved, and you and I as members of this Church must do our utmost in this great program. Because if it hadn't been for that great document, if it hadn't been for the principles of liberty, this Church could not have been organized on this, the American continent. We had to have the liberty. We had to have the freedom guaranteed by that great instrument which was inspired by God so that this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints could come into existence.

It was our prophet who said that the men who drafted it were raised up by God for that very purpose, and they were. In our history you will read that when the Constitutional Convention was called, there were fifty-nine in that convention, and they weren't called together to draft the Constitution of the United States. The people didn't know that was what they were doing in there. They were working behind closed doors. They were working in secrecy. What the people thought they were doing was drafting some kind of program whereby they could control the commerce to free the colonies. But those men behind those closed doors were thinking of other things. They were thinking of building a nation. When in September the doors were open and they came forth from that convention, what did they have? Not a plan of government for the aristocrats, not a plan of government for the moneyed men, but they had for the common people a government providing them with every opportunity they would desire! A government of the people, by the people, and for the people, and in those days our people were taught to manage things and not to manage men! It was never designed that the government of this country would manage people but that it would manage the things which this country produces.

You fellows and girls, read your history. Read the story of this nation and determine for your own satisfaction whether or not we are still managing food, doing things with our hands, and producing for ourselves, or whether we are managing men and managing people.

These things are serious. It is part of the gospel as taught by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now, I'm not telling you which party to join. Whatever party you do join, be active in that party and find out what it is all about and go back to the origin of the party. Find out what its original foundation was. Find out what made it tick in the early days, both the Democratic party and the Republican party. Study from the great leaders of both parties. Study their philosophy of government, then I will have no fear, and none of us will have any fears for the future of this country, for the preservation of the Constitution of the United States.

I want to hand the problem over to the young people and let them study. This is a problem for us all, brothers and sisters. Well, so much for that, but whatever you do, vote! Get out and vote, and know your men. Study the conditions of this country. There is no need to tell you. You read it in every newspaper and every magazine that's printed. This country is full of corruption. If we are going to have Democrats in next time in these departments of government, be sure that they are clean Democrats. Be sure they are honest. If you are going to have Republicans, be sure that they are honest. And be sure of another thing. Be sure you know what they stand for before you vote for them. Be sure you know what their policies are and be sure they stand somewhere, that they do not straddle the fence. Be sure they stand somewhere before they claim any right to your vote. Now, all of this affects us all individually. It affects the American home. What are we going to do if we lose the integrity of the American home, the American family? What's going to happen to us? It is the greatest thing in all the world, this American family.

You know over in Germany before the war even the Americans were saying what a great country Germany was, what a great leader Hitler was. They were out of depression. Everybody was employed but what happened to Germany? The integrity of the German family was destroyed.

Now we can destroy these institutions, brothers and sisters. We can destroy our family life. We can destroy our homes. We can place the responsibility of caring for our aged parents upon the country rather than upon us, the children whom they bore and whom they watched over during our childhood days when we were helpless. We can choose which we will do, and as we shift these responsibilities which belong in the American home to agencies of government, we are establishing a youth movement in this country which will destroy the finest institution America has ever had and the only one which has made it really great, the American home. I thank God for the welfare program of this Church. I thank God that there are people in this country who believe in God's plan of economy over and against man's plan of economy, who believe that it is our responsibility as religionists to look after one another. That's God's plan. It is a privilege for us to sustain one another. What would our Church be if we were to say to you, "All we have to offer is Sunday service. All we have to offer are a few principles, faith, repentance, and baptism"? And if we couldn't say that, there would be no power of God in this Church for the salvation of his children. We must be able to save each other materially as well as spiritually because this is the world in which the gospel is to be tested, not when we leave this mortal sphere, but right here and now. The best way to test it is by blessing one another.

Why, I live adjoining a ward in Salt Lake City, which is above the Capitol Building way up on a hill where there is no fear of any flood waters coming. One night the bishop got a call and said, "We need some bags of sand," and before six o'clock the next morning that one ward way up on the hill delivered to the flood area five hundred full bags of sand and not for eighty-seven cents an hour, but under the plan which God has instituted for the welfare of his people here upon the earth! My, there are a lot of human stories will be told from that great flood in Salt Lake City. People are going to come out of that flood with a greater spiritual influence in their lives than they have ever known. They are going to work side by side. They are going to rehabilitate themselves with the help of their brothers and sisters. That is the kind of government that I like.

We don't appreciate the opportunities we have in this Church, the growth, the development, the riches, the wealth. We could be the wealthiest people in all the world, not as individuals, but as a people. No one could be wealthier and no one would be if we just obeyed. All God wants of us is obedience. Of course, I am talking to the faithful ones here. The ones who are not faithful do not come to conference, but, after all, we have our free agency. Sometimes I wonder if that is a good thing. God would probably get his ten percent from everybody if we didn't have our free agency, but on the other hand it does have great advantages.

My, we want a lot of people to be narrow-minded. When it comes to ourselves we like to be a little more broad-minded. It doesn't do any harm to do a little of this and a little of that. Of course, it does harm. It is the beginning of those things which do break us down spiritually, morally, and will take from us the desire to be faithful in the Church of Jesus Christ.

Now, you young people down here, you have wonderful parents. They are even more wonderful because they want you to be better than they were. Sometimes they want you to be better than they are now. I know a good friend of mine out in New Zealand. He was out behind the shed giving his boy a terrible hiding. I said, "Hey, what are you doing that for?" He said, "I caught him smoking," and the father had a pipe in his mouth while he was beating his kid up. That's progress. They want us to be better than they are, and we should be. You don't know the power you have in yourself, you young people, to save your own people, to save your own parents. Lots of people do. I was down here in one of these towns, down on the beach. I went down to dedicate a chapel, and I was riding along with the bishop and I said, "How on earth did you get to be a bishop?" He said, "Well, I will tell you. I had a young son that was a deacon. Every Sunday morning he would get up and rush off to priesthood meeting, and I would stay home and read his funny paper. I never went to Church. One Sunday morning my boy just sat around and never started to get dressed. He picked up the funny papers. I said to him, 'No meeting this morning? Why aren't you there? Why aren't you going?' 'Well, I decided to stay around with my dad a little more. I am getting too far away from him, so I am going to stay around with him a little more.' I said, 'Boy, you hurry and get ready.' I ran to the bathroom and shaved as fast as I could, and I got dressed up and we went to priesthood meeting together. Now I am the bishop."

I was down in Southern Utah and stayed at a motor camp in Cedar City. The reason I stay at that motor camp is because the owner never charges me anything. This fellow that runs it turned out to be the brother-in-law of a man I had visited during a conference who was not a member but has now become one. He said, "You know, I got a letter here I am going to let you read. It was only meant for me. My brothers and sisters got this same letter. It is from my brother-in-law whom you sealed to my sister in the temple." He let me read that letter and it said, "I am sending this letter to all of my wife's family. I can't tell you the whole story, but I can tell you this much. One day when I was visiting out in the oil fields in Colorado, I learned that the priesthood of God joins heaven and earth, and no one can take that knowledge from me."

Brothers and sisters, now there may be some here who are not in the Church, who are married to some who are in the Church. It's all right. Join the Church. We are a missionary Church, and I wouldn't be a missionary if I didn't tell you to do that but don't join until you know all about it. Pray about it, and you will know in your heart that your love for your wife and for your husband reaches over into eternity. You know that God has never given any man the authority to separate you at death, that your marriage terminates at death. There is only one place in all this world where that love can be joined and not destroyed and not separated, and that is under the priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. God is love. God is eternal. Marriage is the finest symbol of love. Marriage is eternal.

Brothers and sisters, you who do not belong to the Church, but have companions who do, there is no greater love that can be offered to you than what your companion and children can offer to you by taking you into the temple of God and having you sealed to them as the father or the mother and the wife or the husband not only for time, but for all eternity. It is worth looking into.

This is eternal life, brothers and sisters. Life is eternal. We are eternal beings now. We will continue to live after we drop these shells.

I leave my witness with you that I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and know it with all my heart and soul. I know that the priesthood of God has been restored to the earth, and it is not a profession, but a call and something that all of us men can have by being chosen. It isn't something we seek. We do not seek it. It chooses us.

I know one ward where a few years ago the bishop was a janitor of a bank, and the president of the bank was a member of his ward, and if he did the right thing, he surely put the pressure on on Sundays when he had that bank president in his chapel. That's the kingdom of God. We are all members of it, you and I, and there is sometimes more priesthood in the congregation than there is on the stand. It's wonderful, isn't it?

God bless us all, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
