Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

A Call to Missionary Service

An address delivered at San Fernando Stake conference, May 28, 1952.

I AM GRATEFUL for the experiences of this wonderful day, for the spirit which has attended us in our meeting. I have enjoyed very much what has been said here tonight. We can thank God for our young people and for men who are willing to give of their time to take an interest in them. The parents in these days need a lot of help with their children. We should be very grateful indeed for leaders of the Aaronic Priesthood who are boys' men and who take such an interest in their well-being. I think they realize that it is harder for the young people of today to be faithful in this Church than it was for their parents and for their grandparents. I am sure that many of the parents and grandparents tell their children that it used to be more difficult in their time than it is now. It just isn't true. In the old days, you know, all the social activities revolved around the ward house, around the chapel, or around the home; but today we are attracted in many different ways, with social activity in many different directions and generally away from the chapel and away from the home. The social activities we do have in our home aren't of the best. We can bring the old adversary right into living rooms now while sacrament meeting is on and the deacons are at Church passing the sacrament, the parents are home learning how to sing, "Be happy, go lucky. How mild, how mild, etc." We never had the adversary in our homes when we were youngsters.

Now, it has been suggested here that many of our people are out listening to the television shows. I think I shall talk until it is too late for any one of you to make the last show downtown or wherever you go to shows. There are ways of making the people keep the Sabbath day holy. If I see anyone stand up and walk out before I get through, I will know just where he is going. He can be referred to in the group that has not showed up here at all tonight.

The Sabbath day is a holy day, isn't it? We can't stop it from coming around. Sometimes I wish we could, so I could rest, but you just can't stop it from coming around. I don't care who you are. I don't care if you are heathens, you can't stop the Sabbath day from coming around every seven days just as regular as clockwork. It is always here on the seventh day, and when it comes, we are supposed to have a day of rest.

I have heard some people say, "Well, it is a day of rest. I can rest better in the movies than I can in church." Brothers and sisters, that simply isn't true. I have never seen such beautiful resting, relaxation, in all my life as when I sit in the services of this Church. Ordinarily you don't sleep in movies. I have never seen anybody go to sleep in a ball game, but my, in Church! I don't see why people say in this Church, "Oh, I am too tired tonight to go to Church. I am too tired. I am going to stay home and rest."

One thing I like about the natives down in the islands, is that they never say, "Oh, I am too tired to go to Church tonight." Do you know what they say? "Go to Church and have a good sleep," and that is just what they do. It is very unusual. They can hear just as well when they are asleep and snoring as they can when they are wide-awake. It doesn't disturb me when people go to sleep in the congregation now because I think of those people down there. I've seen lots of them sound asleep in Church and after meeting come up and tell me about what I told them. It's wonderful to have that gift. I wish I had it.

Well, there is a lot of value in keeping the Sabbath day holy. You always feel better when you have really given God his day. He deserves it—one day a week! He expects us to think of him and concentrate upon his purposes at least one day a week. But it isn't a holy day generally, generally it is a holiday. There is someplace in the world where they keep the Sabbath day holy.

Brothers and sisters, the Sabbath rolls around; we are supposed to keep the Sabbath day holy. We are supposed to be at our meetings partaking of the sacrament. It is a wonderful privilege to partake of these sacred emblems. My, how close we can be to God if we partake of the sacrament with the right spirit. When the deacons bring the sacrament to us and we partake of it, all we have to say is, "Master, come to us," and he is right there. Just think about him and partake of these emblems and we become more Christlike. That's important. Keep your covenants in force by partaking of these sacred emblems. You can't get them in movies. You can't get them at ball games. You can only get these sacred emblems in places of worship. Many people are not here tonight. They may be here next week. They may be in their sacrament meetings next Sunday. A lot of people are not here because they are afflicted. We should be thinking about them, giving them our faith and prayers. They need it. God wants to bless them, if you and I ask him to. There are others who are in need of help. A lot of our people have boys over in Korea, a lot of boys over in Japan. They are facing terrible difficulty over there, not the guns of the enemy especially, but the temptations which are thrown to them every day. Do you pray for these fellows? Are you thinking about them. Are your bishops writing to them. Are you girls writing to these boys, your brothers, your relatives? Are you keeping in touch with these men? How are we going to be saved unless there is a leaven of righteousness among those fellows?

Your servicemen, your boys, and girls, too, out in the world wearing the uniform of this country will be the leaven of righteousness, and God will look with mercy upon this country. A lot of our servicemen are missionaries. They are active in the Church. While we had these youngsters down in New Zealand during the war, we had our people active in the Church who hadn't been active for years, because those young men in the service would go to their homes and hold cottage meetings. We had no missionaries out there. They came down from the islands wounded. We had hospitals down there. When they were rested up and could get around, they would come to the mission home. One day we had quite a crowd of them there. We wondered why they were hanging around so much, young active fellows in a big city. We wondered why they weren't out to the movies or out sightseeing. Then all of a sudden it dawned on me that they might not have any money. I said to them, "Do you have any money?" They said, "No. We have been here in the hospital. When we were brought down here, we haven't been able to get our pay yet."

I said, "Well, that's too bad." I sent a telegram to every branch in the New Zealand Mission: "Next Sunday let's all fast and send in our offerings for our servicemen who are out here without any money." And the money came rolling in. Then I would say to one of them, "Have you got any money?" "No." "Here is twenty dollars offering from our Saints out here. They fasted last Sunday. This is for you. Don't pay it back. It is yours. This is the widow's mite for you."

They were our boys, not theirs. They were from here. They were great fellows. Every one of them sent back the money and generally a little more. I'll never forget the last one. He was a young man from New York City. He was a mental casualty. He would come and sit in our home and just look off into space. We would try to get him to go out to a movie. My wife would try to get him to go to a dance. We did everything to try and get him out of himself. One day I said to him, 'Have you some money?" He said, "No, but I don't need any." I gave him twenty-five dollars. I said, "Here, take this. It is your money. Our people have donated it. It didn't cost them anything because they fasted." He took it. His was the last to be repaid. I got a letter from him from New York and in the letter was thirty dollars. He said, "Enclosed is thirty dollars. Twenty-five dollars of the fast offerings of those good people and five dollars to put in some account for those people."

Last week I set apart a man in the bishopric from Orem, Utah. I had been down there the week before. He came up and shook hands with me and said, "Do you remember me?" I looked at him and I said, "Yes, oh, yes, but you were more handsome in uniform. You're Shumway." "Yes, I am Phil Shumway. I thank God for your home in New Zealand." He was a flyer. He spent most of his time around the Church going to sacrament meeting, visiting in our home. Then he went back to active duty. Later down came another man from this place, a man named Blake. I said, "Do you know Phil Shumway?" "He is my best pal." "How is he?'

"Well, I almost had a nervous breakdown because of Phil. I belong to the ground crew. I serviced his plane, and he took off, and he never came back on schedule, and then I wondered what on earth I had done, if I had done something wrong in servicing that plane. Some days later we heard from him. Do you know what happened? He got up there, and he was flying over the water and something did happen to the plane, and he had to ditch it in the ocean. He was able to get out and got his rubber raft out. He got in that raft. He saw some land in the distance, and he started pulling his little raft toward the land, but the farther he pulled the farther he got away from it. The current was against him. Then he stripped himself of all his clothing to see if that would help any. He drifted around in that little raft for nine days under the tropical sun. A convoy came along. Somebody in the convoy saw him and thought it was somebody who had fallen overboard from one of the ships."

Well, Phil had been praying. He came from the right kind of home. When he had his liberty, he went to Church. They wired back to some airplane and said, "Man overboard," and gave the location. Someone came out and found him and took him back. I said to him the other day, now in a bishopric, "How are you? You look well." He said, "Well, I am covered with burns all over my body. I don't suppose I will ever get rid of them." From the salt water and the tropical sun, he had just been literally scorched. But he had drifted around there for nine days holding the priesthood of God and praying to God to deliver him. In answer to his prayer a whole convoy of ships came by. They couldn't stop, but they came out and found him. It is good to have men like that in the service.

We had thirty-six boys in one camp down there. All belonged to the Church. They would hold their sacrament meetings and their Mutuals. We were holding a conference. We wrote the commander and asked if those boys could be released for four days to attend our mission conference. He wired right back, and he said, "They will be given liberty. I will arrange for the transportation for them." There was one other boy in the camp that belonged to the Church. He didn't belong to that outfit, but he was in that camp, and he tried to get in on the deal. He went to the commanding officer, and he said, "I want to go along with my Church friends." The commanding officer said, "Your what?" "I want to go with my Church friends."

"Oh, no," the officer said, "these boys are going down to worship. You don't live your religion. You stay back here with the rest of us heathens." He didn't get to go. Those thirty-six came down to our conference. Everyone bore his testimony. They stuck together. You know how many of them were lost in the war? Every one of them is still alive. A couple of them are bishops. Not one of them was wounded. When they arrived home, their picture was in the Deseret News Church Section: Marines holding the priesthood of God! That's the kind of men we want. Those are the kind we want fighting our battles in these days, men who can go along in uniform with the priesthood of God.

Everywhere I have been in my travels, not only abroad in the Pacific area in the Orient, but here in the United States, I see men in our conferences, I have seen them here today—men in uniform, and in my heart I thank God for this type of American servicemen.

I was walking down Queen Street one day during the war and had one of my native boys with me—a man in the air service, the only native boy in the whole outfit on the way to Canada. As we were walking down the street, a woman came rushing up to him and said, "I know you."

He said, "Is that so? I don't believe I have met you before, have I?"

"No, but I know you. When you get over in the war area look out for my son."

He said, "Who is your son?" She told him, and he said, "Oh, I know him. He is in my outfit."

"Yes, and I know all about you. I've heard about you. You look after my boy when you are overseas."

He said, "I will do the best I can."

She said, "Do you know that you are a wonderful young man? It is wonderful to know that in that outfit where my son is, there is one boy who will kneel down at the side of his bunk before he retires and pray to God and who will get up in the morning and before he does anything he will kneel down again and pray to God because you have no private place to go. You do it right in front of all your comrades."

He said, "Yes, and they have never laughed at me yet, and I keep on praying." He went to Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, and finished his training, and he was right at the top of the class—the only native and the only Latter-day Saint in the whole outfit, and they said, "Where did you go to school?"

"Many years ago I went to a little Mormon school down in New Zealand." The second and third man in the graduation were both high school teachers, and this boy was right on top.

You know, we may say it isn't true, but he said that God answered his prayers. All over this world, brothers and sisters, we have these missionaries in uniform. We are going to be short on missionaries other than these men and women. But we shouldn't be short of missionaries in the San Fernando Stake. You have more than 90,000 people around you to whom you can teach the gospel of Jesus Christ. Are you doing it? We are careless and neglectful, aren't we? I know I am.

We had an old man down in the mission home in the Hawaiian Islands who was a cook in the mission home for over forty years—a Chinese. One day the mission president said to him, "Why don't you join the Church?" He said, "All right," and he joined it. Nobody had ever asked him. I don't know whether he is still alive, but he was a year ago. He was cook for the missionaries, lived under the same roof with them, heard their prayers night and morning, and not a soul had ever asked him to join the Church. One day this mission president thought, "Well, there is nothing else to do. Maybe I will ask the cook why he doesn't join." "Why don't you join the Church?" "Nobody ever asked me."

I was talking to a man in Ogden the other day, and he said to me, "You know, I am a swell missionary for this Church. I have been on four missions, been a mission president twice, been president of a temple, and here in Ogden I have lived in the same house for many, many years, and my next-door neighbor has been there as long as I have. He was out cutting his lawn the other day. He called me over to the fence, and I went over, and do you know what he said to me? He said, 'Say, when are you going to start telling me something about Mormonism.'" His next-door neighbor! Have you got neighbors like that?

Why I have been one of the most neglectful fellows in the world, maybe not with non-members, but with members. I used to try to practise law. I officed with a couple of fellows who were still deacons in the Church. I officed with them for several years, and as I look back on it, I don't think I ever mentioned to those men anything about being active in the Church or being advanced in the priesthood. One of them lives in New Jersey now, and I went back there and stayed all night with him. We went down to breakfast, and he said, "Shall I do the honors?" and I said, "Sure, go ahead." He blessed the food and when he was through his daughter said, "Daddy, what was that you did?" One of the best friends I have ever had! I went to high school with him, grew up with him, practised law with him. Well, I have been a little better with him. He is now in charge of the adult Aaronic Priesthood back there, and he is a good man to be in charge of the adult Aaronic Priesthood. He speaks their language. He knows a little more now than how to bless the food. Maybe he knows how to pray.

But look at the opportunities we have. What are we doing, brothers and sisters? This is a missionary Church. My, the missionaries we have out in the field, doing wonderful work! You know we have got a mission in the United States where there is an average of eight converts for every missionary per month, not per year. Eight converts per missionary per month! Do you know what they do? You can do this in your stake missions.

They go up to a home. They ring the bell. The woman comes to the door, and the screen door is always shut. You have to get behind that screen door. You can't do anything, not even if you are selling Fuller brushes. You have got to get the screen door open. The first thing they do is introduce themselves and reach down for the knob of the screen door. Before they get to it, she opens it, and they get inside. Then they tell her who they are. If the woman is home alone, they tell her, "We are missionaries, not taking up collections, not asking for contributions." Practically the first thing they say is, "Do you mind if we have a word of prayer?" Very seldom are they refused, and most of them just automatically kneel down. The missionaries don't ask them to. If they kneel, the missionaries kneel, and then one of the missionaries prays. And when that missionary prays, I tell you his words and his prayer ring true in the hearts of the persons in that home, and they can't question his sincerity. When he gets up from that prayer, he says, "May we sit down at the table?" They sit down at the table and take out a piece of paper. Then he starts asking questions. We had one of them in our missionary committee the other day and had him go through the whole procedure. Then he says, "Do you mind telling me what kind of God you believe in?" And she says, "Well, I believe in a God without body, parts, or passions," so he writes down on a piece of paper, "God without body, parts, or passions." Then he says, "Would you mind telling me where you learned about that kind of God?" "From my minister." "Who is your minister?" She tells him. Then he asks a few more questions, not many. He writes down the answers to those questions. You don't memorize a lot of scriptures, these missionaries. They have the books with them. They know where to find them. Then they open up the books and they say now, "Now, here is the Holy Bible. You believe in this Bible, don't you?"

"Oh, yes, we believe in the Bible."

"This is the Book of Genesis. God said, 'Let us make man in our own image,' and in the image of God made he man, male and female made he them. Do you have body, parts, and passions?"

"Sure."

"Do you believe what God said? That he made man in his image. It is there in the Bible." Then sometimes she says, "Well, maybe my minister didn't tell us that our God hasn't body, parts, or passions."

Then they say, "Would you mind calling him up?"

"No."

She goes to the phone and calls her minister. She says, "This is Mrs. So and So. What kind of God do we believe in?"

He says, "We believe in a God without body, parts, and passions."

"Oh, thank you." She hangs up and comes back. "That's what he teaches us."

Then they give some more references in the Bible, reads them to her, and then he says, "Now who is right, your minister or the Bible?"

"Why, of course, the Bible is right."

"Well, then, what kind of God do you believe in? A true God or false?" So they write down false. Then they say, "Now, what do you think about Jesus Christ."

"Oh, we believe in him."

"Who is he?"

"Oh, he is God."

"Both the same Beings?"

"Oh, yes, God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost."

"Not three Beings, but one Being?"

"Oh, yes." So they open up the book of Acts. They read about Stephen being stoned to death. The heavens were opened and he looked into heaven and saw Christ sitting on the right hand of his Father. He says, "Now, is that one or two?"

"Well, that's two. Sitting on the right hand of his Father. That's two." Then he reads where he was baptized and came up out of the water.

"That was Christ coming up out of the water, and the voice came from heaven saying, 'This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.' Now who is that speaking."

"It must be the Father. He said this was his Son."

"One Being?"

"No, it couldn't be. It's two."

"Oh, where did you learn that?"

"Oh, from my minister."

"Do you want to call him up again?"

"No. I think I know about that. He teaches that all right."

"Well, your idea of Christ and God being two separate Beings or being two in one. Right?"

"Oh, no. It's false." So they write down false. They ask three or four questions like that and put down the references. Then they say, "What time will your husband be home?"

"Well, he gets home around five-thirty."

"Well, he will want to eat dinner, get cleaned up, and relax for a little while. Do you mind if we are back at seven-thirty? We want to talk to him." So they go back at seven-thirty. Eight converts per missionary per month, and they don't stop this side of the Word of Wisdom and this side of tithing! Before they get through and before they accept any of the people into the Church, they go right down the whole line, and they know every responsibility before they are baptized into the Church, from beginning to end. It is a rather simple system, isn't it?

Well, some of us spend half our time trying to memorize scriptures. I don't know that that is necessary.

There is no greater joy than taking this gospel to your neighbor, to somebody. People want to hear religion today. They are in trouble. They don't know what is going to happen next. The world is full of confusion. We are trying to bring peace to the world through the United Nations, and unless you pray to God, how can you have peace, if you don't ask God for it?

People are anxious to hear. They want to hear this message. They want to find people that believe in God. They want to hear from them. Who is going to give them this message? It has to come from us, brothers, because of all people on the face of the earth we are the only ones that really say, "God hath spoken," in this day and age. To them his mouth has been closed for centuries. To us it is still open.

You need missionaries in this stake of Zion. Sustain your mission president here and your missionaries, and you don't have to wait to be called on missions. You don't have to wait for your next-door neighbor to come over and say, "Bill, when are you going to tell me about the Mormons?"

One of our good brothers was traveling on the train recently—one of the Authorities of the Church. There was a group of men on that train who knew who he was. They didn't belong to the Church. Some of them were from New York, some from San Francisco. They said to him, "Say, tell us something about polygamy."

He said, "All right. Now what do you want to know? What kind of polygamy do you want me to talk about? The kind of polygamy you have in San Francisco? The kind of polygamy you have in New York? What kind do you want me to talk about?" They never said another word. He couldn't teach them anything about the polygamy they knew about.

One of my missionaries and I were walking along the street here in Los Angeles a few weeks ago. All of a sudden we heard the word, "Mormon," behind us. So we thought somebody knew us. We looked over our shoulders at two fine-looking gentlemen. We didn't know them, so we walked slowly along eavesdropping, trying to hear what they were saying. This one man was saying, "Say, I was coming out of Florida on the plane, and I had the most unusual experience. There was a Mormon missionary sat by me, a fine-looking, clean-cut young fellow, and did he know his story. He sure poured it on to me. Then do you know what he told me? He told me that he was doing all of that for nothing."

The other man spoke up and said, "Yes, that's what he says. Brother, he is going to get more for what he is doing than you and I can buy with all of our money. I know them, too. They are a great people, industrious."

My, we muffed an opportunity, didn't we? When the light turned green, we ran across the street; and I have regretted ever since that I didn't turn around and say, "We are Mormons, too." We would have had a wonderful gospel conversation there. That was three weeks ago. If we had done our duty, every one of them would be a bishop in the Church some day.

Yes, it is a good thing to preach the gospel. Well, that's the way it goes. It is getting late, isn't it? Another few minutes and you won't be able to make it. Maybe they have them all night down here.

So, brothers and sisters, the world is our field. Every man is the son of God, and every woman a daughter of God. He is our Father. President George Albert Smith used to say, "Let's divide the truth we have with our brothers and sisters. We are all our Father's children." You know, God is with this Church. And we are his missionaries.

When I went over to New Zealand on my first mission I had only been there a day or two when a nice sister came running to me and she said, "Come over, please." I was all alone. I didn't have a companion. I went over to the home and there was a little boy, ten or eleven, I guess. He had fallen from a tree. She said, "Fix him up." I said, "You ought to have a doctor." I had never administered to anybody in my life, never. She said, "The doctor isn't home. He is away from town. We don't need a doctor. You fix him." Well, I got down. He lay on the floor. I anointed him, and I sealed the anointing. You know, I guess God wanted to humble me. The next day he was climbing trees again. Every bone had knit. It was only a few days after that that her husband was stricken with typhoid fever. I was scared to death. The water was bad. I was all alone, just a youngster. She called me into her husband. I got down and anointed and blessed him, and the next morning he came over to my house and visited with me, and he said, "If you are going anywhere now, you can go. I am well." I have never had experiences like that in all my life.

I was just a young boy. I used the priesthood which I hold. Brothers and sisters, here you are mature men and women. There isn't any limit to your accomplishments if you will just dig in. The harvest is ripe. The people are praying for you. My, the manifestations you will have. The testimonies you will receive. You will have a lot of troubles, too.

I tell you, brothers and sisters, if you want to have something come into your lives that will fill you with faith through all eternity, get into this missionary work and get the spirit of it, and joy will come into your heart, and people will hold your names in remembrance to the end of time. I thank God for the missionaries. Every one of us is here tonight because sometime in the past, somewhere a missionary of this Church came to your home or your mother's home or your father's home or your grandparent's or your great-grandparent's. Every one of us here is here because of the missionary system of this Church.

Now, you are wanted here in this stake of Zion as missionaries. Don't hesitate when you are called. Remember these calls come from God. They come from God. I know it with all my heart. I know there is inspiration in this Church. I have been out reorganizing stakes with my brethren, and I have been down on my knees with my companions in the Council of the Twelve, and we have asked God to give us inspiration in selecting a stake president time and time again. And the inspiration has come, come in the most natural way, once in a while in the miraculous way.

God is with us, and he uses us for the accomplishment of his purposes. I leave my witness with you, brothers and sisters, that I know he lives. I know that he did create man in his image. I know that the veil between man and God can be very, very thin, sometimes it isn't there at all. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I know as you know that when we bear the priesthood and lay our hands upon the sick, we can call down from heaven the healing power that God has and receive those blessings. They will come, brothers and sisters, I know that with all my heart.

He who lives, lives unto God and he who dies, dies unto God. (See Rom. 14:8.) Let's honor this priesthood we have. Be loyal and devoted. Sustain one another, husbands and wives, priesthood quorums, parents and children. Let us remember who we are and what we are and the gift of endowment of God himself which has been reposed in all of us who bear his holy name and sustain his priesthood.

God bless us with the spirit of this great work that the kingdom may roll on and on until it fills the earth. Then in God's appointed time through our faithfulness we may enjoy his blessings and his celestial glory and the brotherhood of our Brother, his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, in whose name I pray. Amen.
