Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Live the Lord's Plan

Address at Portland Stake Conference, March 1952

I TRUST that while I occupy your time, I may have your faith and prayers that we may have a good visit together. I hope that you go away from this meeting feeling good. I hope that none of you go away and say, "Well, after what he said, I don't think I am going to make it." I hope that we will go away feeling that there is some hope for us and that through our efforts and our diligence we may merit exaltation in the presence of our Father.

The first thing I must say to you this morning is to bring you the love of one who lived here for some time, and whose heart I think is still here. She is a very close neighbor of mine. That is Sister Louise Lake. We live in the same apartment house. A grander person I have never known. All the saving power in this Church is not in the priesthood. It is just as much or more in those who don't hold the priesthood, meaning, of course, the women, than there is in us who bear it. If the weather had been good, I believe I would have brought my wife and Louise, as we affectionately call her, to Portland. She is president of our Young Women's Mutual in our ward. You would never know she was in a wheel chair the way she gets around and does things. She goes to the temple every Thursday night. She never knows just how she is going to get out of her apartment and into the car. Sometimes she sits in the front of her apartment house and picks up the first boy that comes along and gets him to help her. Nothing disturbs her in her work. When I am depressed I go down and partake of the lovely home life of the Lakes, Louise and her lovely daughter, Jane. I always get a lift down there, in the great faith of that wonderful woman.

I was down there one night last summer and she asked a professional entertainer if he would go up the canyon and entertain their Mutual. He told her it would cost $30. She said that they couldn't afford that and hung up. A little while later she called him up and said, "Say, you don't know me. I am the president of the Young Women's Mutual, and I am in a wheel chair. I am fixing the salad and chili for the outing, and I am going to be up there." He said, "All right, I'll be up there, and it won't cost you a penny." So if you want anything done in the wards just get in a wheel chair.

She has the most remarkable faith. I don't know how she does all the work that she does. Her faith is remarkable. All you have to do is put your hands on her head, and she is well. She thinks she is going to walk again. She has the utmost faith, and her faith will probably make her well. I don't know. I have never told her this, but sometimes I hope she never gets out of that wheel chair. In the wheel chair she is the greatest inspiration that comes to the lives of people down there who are depressed, downhearted, and those having domestic problems. I don't know whether she would have the same influence on them if she were out of the wheel chair, so I am glad to see her in it, but don't tell her I said that because she does feel she is going to get the use of her limbs again.

There comes to my mind another person who used to live up here who is now active in the Church down in Honolulu. He was bishop down there and is now on the high council, a young man with a marvelous testimony of the gospel, who is humble, a young man who had never known what want is. He was born in affluence and great wealth. When he was a youngster, he was over in England. They had a patriarch over there. I think Jay was about thirteen, and Brother Widtsoe had his patriarch give him a blessing. In the blessing he was told that the first time he met the woman who was to be his wife he would know that she was the one. He was invited to dinner one night a number of years after in Brother Bowen's home. While he was there, the doorbell rang. The Bowens went to the door, and a young woman walked in. Jay took a look at her, and she was just in the shadow. He couldn't see her beautiful features, but as soon as he saw her standing there, he said, "That's my wife." He started to make love to her. She didn't like it. He was on his way to a mission in South America, and he pleaded with her to write to him. She said, "If you write to me, I'll probably answer." So he went down there. I don't know whether he prayed for this to happen or not, but he got very sick, and they had to fly him home. When he came home, he saw some more of her. Then when he got his health back following an operation, he was sent here to finish his mission.

Then he went down to Honolulu and married this girl. They have a lovely family.

I was down there on another case with Brother Quealey. He was having a problem. Bishops always do. There was a native woman who was always making a complaint against a couple down there in the ward. She wanted them excommunicated. If they had been guilty of what she charged them with, they should have been excommunicated, but the bishopric had had a hearing, and they weren't convinced. She appealed to the high council. They sustained the bishopric. Then when I would get down there, she would come to me every time. I would ask the bishop to give her another hearing, not because I thought she deserved it but to get her off me.

The bishop said to her one day, "Sister, I want you to write all your charges in black and white and give them to me." He had several sheets of large legal size paper just full of charges against this couple by this woman. I went in to see him and he said, "Well, we have got her again. I've got it all down in black and white. Last night I was home, and I had a little time. I never had much time at home being a bishop, but I had a little time at home last night. I went to my room and spent the time in praying. I told the Lord I was going to call this sister in before the bishopric, and I was going to present her with these charges she had written down and tell her to read them, to read them out loud to us, and if these charges aren't true, heavenly Father, close her mouth."

They had her in. When he read the charges, he had changed his mind. He thought that what she said was true, but he put it in the hands of God. She stood up there before the bishopric, and he handed her the paper she had written. He said, "Please read that to us." She started to read. She read a half page, and she said, "Bishop Qualey, I never wrote this," and she handed it back and started to cry and broke down and apologized for everything she had said against this couple. They were just about to be disfellowshiped because of her charges. But the bishop with all of his faith in God, knowing that he represented him, placed it in the hands of God and told him to close her mouth if the charges were untrue; and her mouth was closed.

He was a missionary in the Northwestern States Mission. Now this mission isn't any different from any other mission. I suppose President Sloan thinks that the Northwestern States Mission is the greatest mission in the world and if he is a typical mission president, I've been one, he thinks the mission never has been as good since he presided up there. That's the way I felt about my mission.

You know we were having the report in our Council one day when President Callis was alive—a great Southern States missionary, a great crusader. My, he was jealous for the Southern States. Somebody had told about the Northwestern States Mission, reporting the great work that was being done up here. He told how many baptisms they had had. Brother Callis spoke up, "How many was that?" The brother repeated it. "Huh," said Brother Callis, "why the drippings from the clothes of the people we baptized in the South after they came out of the water would flood out the whole Northwestern States." So you see, you're not so great, after all.

That's the way we are, we mission presidents. There is no mission like the mission we have presided over, and this is the greatest mission in the world, the Northwest! While I am here, it is! When I was back in the Eastern States with the missionaries, that was the greatest mission in the world. But New Zealand is the greatest mission in the world. If there weren't any inspiration in this Church, I never would have gone to New Zealand. I would have gone to the Hawaiian Islands. I wanted to go there. My brother had just come home from there, and he had me converted to the idea that there was no place in the world like the Hawaiian Islands. You would have thought he had spent most of his time in the tourist bureaus around there with the Chamber of Commerce instead of preaching the gospel the way he talked about the Hawaiian Islands. I wanted to go there, and I was called to go there. One evening, President Anthon Lund, Counselor to President Smith, who was our next-door neighbor, came in to see me.

He said, "Matt, I want to have a talk with you." So we went in a room and sat down. He looked at me and smiled and he said to me, "You know, that Hawaiian Mission isn't too far away. The farther we can get you away from this neighborhood the better it is going to be for all of us, and that isn't far enough. I think we had better get you way down there in New Zealand. That's right down there at the uttermost bounds of the earth, the jumping off place for the South Pole. If we had a mission at that South Pole, that's where you ought to go. Seriously, I was having dinner tonight, and the Spirit told me you should go to New Zealand. I don't know why. That's the way I feel. If it is all right with you, I will tell President Smith in the morning, and you will be changed to New Zealand instead of the Hawaiian Islands."

I went down to New Zealand. In those days the Authorities didn't interview you. Your bishop didn't interview you. Your stake president didn't interview you. One of the Church Authorities didn't interview you. You didn't go into any mission home for a couple of weeks where they could watch you. That's the reason I got to go on a mission. In my time the bishop would just look around the ward and see what was going on and say, "Oh, oh, better get Brother Matt Cowley out in the mission field." Then they would call you. It didn't matter what your age was. I was just turning seventeen when I went on my mission.

Well, I went down to New Zealand. I got down there and it took me five years to fill a two and a half year mission. When I arrived in the mission field, they sent me to the worst place they had. That's what they thought. There was only one good Latter-day Saint in the whole branch they had there, and the others were all like many of our people, only they didn't do it in secret. They came right out in front of you and got drunk and smoked. They didn't hide out. You saw everything that was going on. I used to rub noses with them. That's what makes my nose turned down on the end there. It used to be straight. It's a wonderful custom.

I went up to that little old village. I rubbed their noses. My, I wish they would have had chlorophyl tablets in those days. They didn't have enough water around there to take a bath only when the tide was in. Now all you have to do is carry these things around in your pocket. You don't have to bathe any more. Just take one of those a day or the Ennds or whatever you call them. They are pretty good. Some people that go to Church should take them.

I enjoyed associating with these people. I had wonderful experiences there. But I had a lot of troubles. I was going out on my bike one day with my companion. We had a forty-five mile journey to go. I had never had a companion until I had been there three months. The mission president left me alone. We were going along on our bikes, and it started to rain. You haven't seen rain up here in the northwest. It rains out there. It really rains—200 inches a year in some places! So we couldn't ride. We just had to walk and push our bikes for forty-five miles. We got to this little village at one o'clock in the morning, and the sister got up. I can see her now. She went out to where they do their cooking in an open fire, pulled an old dirty dishtowel off the wall, and wiped the wall, and wiped out two rusty tin cups with it. Then she boiled some hot water and put a little cocoa in it—no sugar. She gave us that nourishment. I was too weak. I couldn't hold it. After walking all day long, I was worn completely out.

Then I started to have boils. All the time I was thinking about that Hawaiian Mission that I was supposed to be on. I had boils for seven months all over me from head to foot. I was doctoring my blood, and I had a skin infection so the medicine wasn't doing me a bit of good. I started treating my skin, and I got rid of the boils, and I thought that my mission would get a good start now.

I started out on another trip. It was a beautiful sunshiny day. (I toured this mission last November and I am here again now. I hope somebody will wire me whenever the sun ever shows up here in this state. I have never seen it here yet. Maybe we will have it this afternoon.) This was a sunshiny day, and the sun beat down, and I walked for twelve miles up a hill pushing this bike and then I got on it and rode down the other side. I rode to a little village and collapsed on the lawn in front of a house. I had sunstroke and was laid up for eight months. My, I was a wonderful missionary. I was lying around just like the missionaries like to do, but I had to, for I was sick. I couldn't do anything else. All the time I was worrying. I was thinking President Lund had made a mistake. I shouldn't be down here in New Zealand. I should be in the Hawaiian Islands.

Well, I started to get my strength back. I thought I was doing fine. I was able to get around with two canes, one in each hand, staggering along the street. I couldn't do any missionary work. Then when everything was just going fine—I had an enormous appetite, but I wasn't putting on any weight. I wish I could do that now. The more I ate the more the weight slipped off me. So I went to the doctors, and two or three of them gave me a good going over and tested me for some time. Then they called me in one day and said, "You have a tapeworm." Don't ever get a tapeworm, my brothers and sisters. They eat everything you eat and a lot of you besides. So I had this tapeworm. I guess the Lord was just waiting for me to get old enough to start a mission.

But I finally got rid of this tapeworm, and then I thought everything was going to be all right. I was getting my strength back. I got a letter from the mission president. He said, "We are having a mission conference." They have one out there every year, you know. President McKay says there are three great religious events in this world. One is the Passion Play in Germany. Another is the general conference in Salt Lake. The third is the annual conference in New Zealand. Well, we had this conference coming up, and the president wrote me and said for me to stay home and recuperate, get my strength back and not to come to conference. I had just finished reading my letter and I got a telegram from him which said, "Come to conference." So I went to conference. When I got there we had our meetings and then one day we had the usual missionary meeting. There were sixty-five of us there then. We were in a big native hall and as soon as the opening exercises were over the grand old mission president put his chair down in the center of the hall and he motioned for me to come and sit in it. I walked over and sat in that chair. I could hardly make it I was so weak. I sat down there and sixty-five of my brethren put their hands on me. If they couldn't get them on me they put them on the shoulders of each other, and the mission president blessed me. His name was William Gardner, a man seventy-three years of age. He was forty-three before he started to live his religion. He was forty-three before he became a member of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Then he was called on a mission to New Zealand. He hadn't been to school, but he was full of common sense and the Spirit of God. He got up every morning at four o'clock and went out to a secluded spot and prayed to the Lord. He lived right with him all the time. He put his hands on my head. It is the shortest blessing I believe I ever received. He said, "In the name of Jesus Christ and by virtue and authority of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, we command you to be made well immediately." That was all. I stood up out of that chair perfectly well. The old strength came right back through me from head to foot just like it was being poured into me, and it was, by the gift and power of God.

Then I was assigned to go to the biggest district they have in the mission. They placed me in charge of it. I knew I was well, and my mission was starting. I got to this place where we had our headquarters way out in the bush. We had a little bit of a hut with no floor in it for our elders' quarters. I went in there and was sitting there visiting with a couple of my companions, and I was called outside. There was a fine native on a horse leading another horse with a saddle on it. He called me over and he said, "This is your horse. I am giving you this horse to use while you are in this district." I said, "That's wonderful. What's its name?" He stopped and thought for a minute, then finally said, "Cowley," and so Cowley was riding Cowley all over the place. You know when I shook hands with him, his horse got the same idea, the one he was on. He lifted up both his hind feet and kicked me right in the abdomen. I went through the air with the greatest of ease. The missionaries ran for me, and the man got off and ran over to me, and they picked me up and wanted to carry me into the hut. I said, "Let me alone. I'm all right. There is nothing wrong with me." I knew there wasn't. My troubles were over. I knew that from the time the mission president told me to be made well. But they insisted on taking me in and stripped me down and they looked at me with a magnifying glass, so to speak. They couldn't even find a bruise. I never had a pain from that kick. It might have affected my head, but it certainly didn't affect my body.

Well, I was riding that horse one day. I am a long time in getting around to what I was going to say. Well, we have got nothing else to do. We might as well sit here. The afternoon show doesn't start until two o'clock. I was riding along on this horse with my companion. We were giving each other the silent treatment. You missionaries down here, have you ever done that? Have you ever just sat and given each other the silent treatment—getting on each other's nerves? That's what my companion and I were doing. He was a wonderful companion. He worked in the mines in park City. He got up and bore his testimony once before all the people out there. He said, "Brothers and sisters, I was drunk for twenty-five years." The mission president told him not to do that any more. The reason he told him not to do it any more was because he said it in all sincerity. But he was a humble man. Something struck him back in the soul when he was in his early forties. He went to his wife and said, "We weren't married right. We've got two children. We have got to go to the temple." He went to the temple with his wife and two children. His wife died within a year, and they called him on a mission. We went out together. I was thrilled last Sunday in Idaho Falls. A beautiful woman came up to me. She was this man's daughter.

Well, we were giving each other the silent treatment, and all of a sudden I had a vision. I could see myself as a young child in Colorado. There a man had his hands on my head. My father was sitting at a table writing, and I felt that is a patriarchal blessing. I had never read it in my life. I didn't know what it was. I wrote home to my mother and I asked her if I had a patriarchal blessing, and she sent it to me. I can see why President Lund said that Hawaii wasn't far enough away. The farther away they could get me, the better. He was right. The first paragraph of that patriarchal blessing said, "In your extreme youth you will go to the uttermost bounds of the earth to preach the gospel. You will become an interpreter among the people." I had been there three years. The war was on at home. I am the war missionary of New Zealand. I went in 1914, and they started the war. I went back in 1938, and they started another one. I was there during the whole period of both of those wars.

After I had been in New Zealand for three years I felt I should go home. My brothers were getting into the army. I wanted to be patriotic, but a cablegram came from the First Presidency. It said, "Keep Brother Cowley out there to translate the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price into the Maori language."

Well, we had this beautiful home built in Preston and I was destined to be born there. I was going up to Wyoming about five years ago and my sister before I left said to me, "Have you ever read your mother's journal?" I said, "No." She handed it to me, and she told me to read it on my way. She didn't know everything that was in it herself. The first thing I looked for was the date I was born. I went back to that date, August 2, 1897. People get curious so I will tell you. Sure enough, it was an important event in my mother's life. It was worth putting down in her diary. I went back prior to that time and she had the story of the building of the house. When the house was completed, they were holding a stake conference there, and Brother Moses Thatcher was the visiting Authority. In her journal she said, "We, my husband and I, asked Brother Thatcher to come in and dedicate our home." So he came in, and she wrote down his dedicatory prayer. When I got back to Salt Lake, I got my father's journal out for that year, and he had written the same prayer down. In that prayer Brother Thatcher said, "Heavenly Father, may a prophet, seer, and revelator be born under this roof." I was the next one born, and then we moved to Salt Lake City. We lived there long enough for me to be born. I am glad I never read that before I was called to this position. I never aspired to this position.

This is the hardest job I ever had in my life; if it were a profession, I wouldn't take this position for $50,000 a year. You couldn't give me enough to get me to take the work I am doing now as a job. But as a calling it is the greatest thing that has ever come into my life. It has made me very humble. I am doing the best I can to measure up to this calling. But I am only doing it because I am called, brethren.

I have never wanted a position in the Church in my life, and I have never refused one that I have been asked to take. I am glad that I can say that. Never have I given an excuse when I have been called on to do something in this Church.

I don't know why I have been telling you the story of my life, but I haven't told it all to you, and I won't. If there is anybody here that's known me very long, I will pay him hush money.

Within this Church there is a power of regeneration. And I want to tell you, brothers and sisters, you can get on your knees in this Church and be very close to God. This is the priesthood of God we hold. You know what that means? That means that God is here through us, who hold his priesthood. That means he is using us for the accomplishment of his purposes here upon the earth. How does God impart of his blessings to the sick? Only through you or to you who bless his children who need blessings. He wants you to be helped through the plan which he has given us in this dispensation, his design for living which he has revealed—you know what that means—revealed right from him. That's what this plan is, a revealed plan. We are just now beginning to get over the dislike we have had for the welfare plan, for instance, but it is the greatest thing that has ever come into the Church in this dispensation I think. It teaches us how to be saved now and here.

We have God's plan of economy. It is wonderful. If we work this thing out right, brothers and sisters, we will be independent of every creature under the celestial glory. He wants us to be because it is his plan. It isn't charity. It's the love of God for those who deserve, and if we deserve these blessings we should be proud to receive them and not be embarrassed, not be chagrined.

I had a big hospital bill once in Salt Lake since I have been in this position. I tried to make a deal with the bishop. I said, "I'll sign over to you the allowance I get from the Church, and you take care of my bill." The bishop wouldn't do it. I wanted to get on the welfare plan. I would have been better off by hundreds of dollars. So I had to struggle along.

I love these welfare projects we have. It is a wonderful project you have up here. Let me tell you something if you haven't read it in the paper. You know Israel has always found great strength in the soil. Where was this strength? Where was the power? Where was the salvation? In the land, in the flocks, in the herds—my, I thank God for every piece of ground we own under this welfare plan in the Church, and I wish we had thousands and thousands of others just like them.

What about our people in Europe—good faithful Latter-day Saints? What if they are evacuated? What if we suddenly have to call them here? Where are you going to put them? They should be on the land where they can be independent. That's what they should be: Poor souls all over the world, good faithful Latter-day Saints! They read in the Doctrine and Covenants where it says, "every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety." (D. & C. 45:68.) Our missionaries are sent abroad and told to tell the people to stay where they are and build up the missions over there. Keep away from Zion. Then we get up in our general conferences, and we tell the young people, "Don't you get married unless you are married in the temple of God." Then our people all over the world read those sermons in The Improvement Era which we make them buy, and they can't get to a temple any more than I can fly to the moon. They haven't the means to get to the temples to get married.

We are a world-wide Church. Over here we get these blessings. Why? Not only because we are worthy, but because we have the financial aid. Out there they don't have the money with which to buy these blessings—and God says we must look after one another, that we must save one another spiritually and temporally. That's the program.

The state of Utah in ten years spent $100,000,000 for what they call social welfare, and they didn't have one project in the $100,000,000 whereby people could earn their living by the sweat of their brows. Was that God's plan? A man must earn his living by the sweat of his brow, his bread, the Lord said. And we spent an equivalent of $10,000,000 in the Church during that same period of time, and we had over two hundred projects whereby the people who were in need could preserve their self-respect and their independence, and self-reliance, and keep alive.

Now, don't accuse me of meddling in politics. Politics was never intended to assume the responsibility of the Church in looking after its own, especially this Church. Why should an elder ever have to go outside of his own home for anything he needs if he is worthy? I don't see why. It's the priesthood of God. Is there anything God can't do through his priesthood, if we will do our part?

I was thrilled down in one stake in central Utah. The stake president got up and said they needed nine men to do some emergency work on the welfare farm the following Tuesday. The next time I saw him, I said, "How did the people show up for that call you made on them?" "Oh, we did all right. Nine men showed up, just the number we needed. Everyone of them was an adult member of the Aaronic Priesthood." Well, maybe it pays to stay down there in the Aaronic Priesthood. Where was the integrity of the priesthood quorums in that stake?

I know this work is true, brothers and sisters. It is God's work. We are all in it. Let's be faithful. Be loyal. Keep together. Build up the integrity in our families and in our priesthood quorums. Take advantage of it. Why we have people who don't belong to the Church who like to go to the First Presidency for advice and counsel on business matters. Now, don't come to them with your business problems like that. Go through the regular channel. Talk things over in your quorum. There is inspiration there, and you will get the benefit of it.

I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ and I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God. I know that we have the greatest force under heaven in the salvation of our Father's children.

God bless us all that we may have strength and endure to the end, to run the race and run it well. Be loyal and faithful and sustain one another in our work in the Church. Magnify our calling. Be humble before the Lord and in our humility God will magnify us as he always does beyond our own experience, our own age, and our own natural ability to do things.

May God be with us this day and throughout this conference, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
