Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Christianity and the Religion of Christ

Millennial Star, February 10, 1938

IT HAS always been my belief that no one's religion is worth much if he cannot give a good reason for his membership in his church or for the hope he has within him as to the efficacy of his obedience to the principles and rites which his church teaches. As we go back over the history of Christianity, we find that Christ has survived for nineteen centuries, including the Dark Ages, but what of the religion of Jesus Christ? It was taken, as a matter of fact, until the invention of the printing press, that the Christian church was the Church of Jesus Christ in its original purity and truthfulness. But with the invention of the printing press the Bible became accessible to the laity, and then it was discovered that even though Christianity has survived the centuries from Christ to that great event, the religion of Jesus Christ had been changed, had been modified, that the organization was not as Christ had organized it, that the religious tenets were not as Christ had taught them.

And so, following the great event—the invention of the printing press—men who read the Bible began to think for themselves, and some there were who were bold enough to express those thoughts, who were bold enough to enlighten those who would listen, to point out the changes that had been made, to discuss the fact that even though some of these men were sincere enough even to give their lives for the testimonies which came to them from a personal reading of the Bible that the religion of Christ was not upon the earth as he had taught it.

Then came the great churches of the reformers, and each church had its own doctrine; each church proselyted for its own membership; each claimed to have the word and the power of God. The thing the reformers did not realize was that the Church of Jesus Christ was not born from the Bible, but that the Bible or the New Testament was born from the Church of Jesus Christ. And so when they established their great churches upon their intelligent reading of the New Testament, their authority did not go beyond that book, which does not give authority, and the result was disagreement and confusion in the Christian world. These churches grew in power on down through the centuries until there appeared that small group who claimed the right to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences.

With that urge for freedom of worship these Puritans sought a place in which they could do that which they desired. The place where they finally established themselves was a new continent, a new world. They brought to that new world a fundamental concept of all true religion, the desire to worship God according to the dictates of one's own conscience.

Eventually many churches of the old world found their establishment upon this continent, until the same confusion, the same intolerance, existed in the new country that existed in the old world. Then came a spiritual event, the greatest in all history except the birth and life of Christ himself upon the earth. A young boy had an idea—great events come by and through people having ideas—and this boy had an idea that religious conflict was never born of the Church of Jesus Christ. He knew something was wrong somewhere; he knew that one might be right and that therefore all the others must be wrong, or else they must all be wrong. And so in the sincerity of his youth and with undaunted faith he went to the only source from which anyone can obtain wisdom pertaining to the gospel of Jesus Christ; he went to God himself. He prayed—his prayer was answered. This boy in the Sacred Grove saw God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son. What was the result: It was blasphemous for this boy to claim that God had appeared to him, that Jesus Christ had appeared to him. That was blasphemy even in the eyes of his own friends. Christianity had survived, but Jesus Christ certainly had not survived.

In the days of this boy prophet, what was the answer to that question of the Savior: "What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he?" The answer was not that he had the likeness of a man; the answer was not that he had the same appearance that he had when he walked and talked with the men of Jerusalem and his disciples in the days of the early Church. The answer to that question in the days of Joseph Smith was that he had neither body, parts, nor passions, although the Christ himself had said to the disciples who beheld him in the form of a man ascending into heaven, "I will return even as ye see me go."

And so there was restored again the knowledge of the being of God and the being of Jesus Christ his Son. This was the beginning of a great dispensation, the greatest of all times, not only from a religious standpoint, but from the standpoint of the progress of civilization. What has happened in the past century and a half to the human family? Steam engines have been invented. The steel propeller has succeeded the sail. Electricity has been harnessed. Automobiles have been invented—wireless telegraphy, the telephone, the radio, the aeroplane, the submarine, and all such wonders, until it has been said by someone that every man and woman in this country has thirty-seven mechanical slaves to give them more leisure and luxury.

Now we have existed as a Church for more than a hundred years. Christianity has survived all of these ages and scientific discoveries: the age of iron, the printing press, the steamship, the submarine, the radio, and television. Christianity has survived all of these, but what of the religion of Jesus Christ? Do you know of any religious ideas that have been altered or changed in the churches of the world through the period of these great inventions? I dare say that in most churches the rituals have been changed; ideas have been changed. I think many of you in our own time recall when the pulpit denounced recreation in many forms; but I dare say that in all of the churches of today you will not find one minister who denounces those things which his own church denounced a generation ago. The gospel of Jesus Christ as it has been revealed to the Latter-day Saints has not changed one iota, not in one detail. This gospel has survived every invention of man since it was restored upon the earth through Joseph Smith; and what thinking man today will now say that it was blasphemy for Joseph Smith to claim that he saw God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son?

The day after Christmas, a Sabbath day, I turned the dial of the radio on a short wave, and I heard the Archbishop of Canterbury speaking from London—I heard his Christmas sermon. I have never seen him. I do not even know what he looks like. But I want to say to you now that I believe that is greater blasphemy before God to say that I did not hear the voice of the Archbishop of Canterbury thousands of miles away than it is to say that Joseph Smith did not see God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son. To say that man has the power to open the heavens and control the elements, to bring them under his command and speak from one continent to another through the power that he himself does not understand, and then to say that God could not and did not appear to this boy prophet as he had done to the prophets of old, to me is blasphemy of the worst kind. When man's power has become almost infinite, how ridiculous it is to say that God's power is finite, that he is confined to some celestial sphere, that he will never again appear to the human family and talk to them as his children. God forbid that you and I limit his power or question the probability and reasonableness of his appearing to the children of men.

I belong to a Church which believes in the power of God as well as in the intelligence of man, that God has the power and that Christ has the power to project themselves through the ether or whatever you want to call it and appear unto the human family and speak as one man speaketh to another.

And so this Church makes its claim that it is the Church of Jesus Christ, and with that claim come great responsibilities. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is an organization established to bring about the regeneration of the human family; to make of all nations one people; to bring all to a oneness of the faith—one Lord, one faith, one baptism.

We do not deny any man the right to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience, but we do urge him as did the reformers of old, to study the scriptures, to compare the words of Christ in his time with the claims of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
