Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Extracts from a Letter to a Young Elder's Mother

Huria, Tamanga, 1915

Dear Mother:

Since I wrote you last, I have had the privilege of looking after this little branch, without a companion and it is a grand experience.

I had scarcely been here three months when I began to get discouraged because I couldn't talk Maori and when Sunday came I had a great desire to speak in Maori to the Saints, so just before afternoon meeting I went off by myself and prayed to the Lord for his help and when I got up in meeting there seemed to be two voices speaking to me—one was telling me to speak English and the Other, to speak Maori—but I resolved to try Maori and sure enough the Lord answered my prayers and I haven't preached to them in English since.

Although I can only speak for a few minutes I still have faith that the Lord will bless me with a greater knowledge each day and I will soon be able to preach a regular sermon.

I never take the honor upon myself, when I receive such blessings.

I always go in secret and give the Lord the honor, the praise, and the glory—I am enjoying the best of health and like my labors more every day—the Maoris treat me like their king, and I am right at home with them.

This life has school beat in a thousand ways—You can't imagine what a grand experience it is to go into the "Vineyard" and put your whole heart and soul to your work and receive inspiration from the "Greatest Mind" in existence. You cannot compare it with any other work; it is so far above them all that it would be foolish to try to find a work that would be as beneficial to the human race.

A person doesn't know what he is living for until he begins to look on the religious side of life and a mission is the greatest thing in the world to turn your thoughts in that direction.

One of the greatest things I thought I would have to put up with is homesickness but, as President Ben E. Rich said, "An elder will never get homesick if he lets the Spirit of the Lord direct his thoughts toward home."

I am always trying to do this and even when I am walking along a dusty road on a forty or fifty mile journey, I never say "This is Dad's fault," but I am glad I can give the honor to the One who called me here.

Although I am laboring without a companion, I do not complain, because it is far greater to rely on the Greatest of All Beings for help than to rely on a senior companion who has only been in the service a few months longer than yourself.

Anybody who thinks he is lucky because he is not called on a mission is a little bit off, because it is one of the greatest blessings that ever comes to any one.
