Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Dedicatory Prayer at the Grave of Abbie Hyde Cowley

August 30 1931, Salt Lake City, Utah

O GOD, our Creator and Father—At the conclusion of the beautiful services of this day we gather together at the side of this grave wherein we now prepare to place the mortal remains of our devoted mother and fellow creator. We submit, our Father, that in her lifetime she was thy friend and thy disciple. Her philosophy, her ideals, her morality, her habits, and her character were of thee and thy kingdom and not of this world.

In her mortal existence she understood the permanent values of life as her life was interpreted and actuated by noble and exalting thoughts. No righteous deed nor gracious act, with which her life was so replete, was ever impelled by a hope for immediate compensation nor a greed for worldly gain. Every act and deed which merited reward she dedicated to the future realization of eternal blessings—blessings which we now rejoice in knowing will be given her in abundance. Although our mother was so long with us in ths life, as time is measured by years, we, her children, are nevertheless aware that she was never one of us. Hers was a higher plane; little lower than the angels. But as she dwelt above and beyond us in her divine sphere of motherhood, she was always and ever the star in the van of all our righteous efforts and achievements.

In this matter-of-fact world, we strive to reach thee, our Father, through service and ceremony in beautiful cathedrals and well-appointed chapels which have been dedicated by priest and elders; but the humble home where this divine woman ruled as creator, savior, and mother was the temple of our God, and her presence in that temple was the Holy of Holies. In that presence no thought unworthy of her approval ever entered our minds; nor did any unclean or sullied word ever wilfully pass our lips. All sinful deeds and evil words which have been made manifest in our lives have been extraneous to her environment and foreign to her influence.

Our mother "lived to die, and now she has died to live," and in her passing she took heaven with her so that we are certain that thou didst open wide the gates of heaven to receive her. This journey which she has taken from mortality to immortality has been but a short one as it can be measured only by the difference in the life as she lived it here among men, and the life she will now be required to live in thy kingdom.

Her own acts were her best dedication of herself to thee and of this grave as the final resting place of her earthly remains; but with my own inadequate words, and by the power of the priesthood, and in the name of Jesus Christ I do also dedicate this parcel of ground to contain under thy care the body of my dear mother.

May the spirit of peace always be in this place. May thy own Spirit radiate in these environs. Protect this grave from the beasts of the field and the birds of the glade which would do it harm, and preserve it from any and all other destructive elements. Be ever mindful of the body that rests here and keep it unmolested for thine own purposes; and in thine own due time compose again these mortal elements and breathe into them the spirit of eternal life.

I dedicate this grave, beside this other grave which has already been dedicated, the grave of my brother Moses, this mother's son, in whose own lifetime, which has but recently closed, her care and counsel were so much needed. And I dedicate this mother and son to thee, my Father, in an eternal companionship of love and devotion. May they live and have their being, side by side, in eternity, as their mortal bodies rest side by side in this place.

In conclusion I remind thee, my Father, that this beautiful soul which has been taken from us was a devoted wife and mother; she was a fellow-creator with thee of human life; and a fellow savior with thy Son Jesus Christ of human souls.

Bless us all, our Father, as our mother would have us blessed, I pray in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen.
