Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Funeral Address for Mrs. Wallace Johnson

July 27, 1953, Salt Lake City, Utah

WALLACE, members of the family, brothers and sisters: As I have been sitting here, I have been thinking what a miraculous occasion this is. For a number of days now, Wallace and I have been planning this funeral. We never had the slightest idea that it would be able to go forward as he wished and as we had planned.

There was a time when Wallace didn't want to give up his companion, and he is only giving her up for a season; but there finally came a time when he knew that it was best for her to be released. When she was fighting for her life, we blessed her that she might be made well. God's will overruled. A few days ago I drove into my garage at home. As I was about to get out of my car, something said, "Go call on Sister Johnson." I backed out of the garage and drove up to the Johnson home and shook hands with Sister Johnson. She recognized me, thanked me for coming, and Wallace took me into another room in the house, and he said, "Brother Cowley, I want you to bless her again. But this time release her. Ask God to take her." We went into the bedroom, and one of the lovely daughters came and sat there at the bedside, and we asked God to take her, to release her. A few hours later Wallace called me. She had been released.

We rejoice in her passing. There is nothing to worry about. Someone said that if we are to go to heaven we must take heaven with us. Truly, she has gone to heaven. She couldn't go anywhere else because she has taken heaven with her. No one would doubt that; no one would question it; she lived a heavenly life.

On Thursday mornings we hold our meetings in the temple except during a few weeks of the summer season. In our temple meetings we pray for the sick, and we have the names of some who have requested that they be remembered. Almost every Thursday morning I would drop around to Wallace's drugstore before I would go to the temple and inquire about her. Then I would go over to the temple. These names would be read, and every Thursday when her name was read, President McKay would say, "She is a sick woman." It is a wonderful thing to pray, to reach out to God and call upon him to bless his children, to bless us all, to keep him close to us. Too many divorce him from their lives, from their activities in life; but as I stand in this sacred presence, I can say here was one who knew God, who talked with him, who invoked his blessings upon her family, upon her friends, and upon those who needed his blessings.

Some years ago a cousin of mine lost his wife. He since has passed away. His name was William A. Hyde. I mention the name because he was also the cousin of some of those who are sitting here among the mourners. A few days after the passing of his wife, he addressed his friends in a meeting at Pocatello. From those remarks I would like to read just a few, not only to read them to Wallace and his family, but also to read them for Wallace to you his friends because I know Wallace has this same philosophy, this same idea about life and about death. He said this:

"I had once thought that it was a natural thing to fear and hate death; but now that I know him better, I think that I may almost come to love him. He was pictured to me as a stern-faced, old man who wielded his scythe, cutting down without pity. Now I know him to be different. I see him as a strong, silent, majestic angel with a face of infinite compassion. He turns away his head while he cuts the cord of life, and then he lingers and with artistic hands molds the mortal face to the radiant image of the waiting spirit, and then together they depart.

"He is not the angel of death, he is the angel of life; for now they pass from under the clouds of earth into the light of eternal day. Death is a great leveler. He makes all men and women alike before him, and in his presence, if nowhere else, we sense a common humanity. Death is a great restorer, for tears wash out the dry courses of our hearts and renew our arid lives. Death is a great cleanser, for when a cruel memory brings back thoughtless acts and inexcusable omissions, he gives us repentance, and our sins are washed away.

"Death is a great revealer, for he brings back the past and unfolds it before us, and we see many little hidden things that we never discerned before, and amidst the trash of our lives we find a jewel now and then. Death is a great preserver and keeps as one would keep a priceless gem all beauty and all excellence and brings them now to show us. From him we learn again the great law which reads, 'Virtue and nobility and truth and sweetness are everlasting. They cannot pass away; so we see that in the end, all is truth and beauty.' One thing that I have learned these days is that our individual tributes become almost universal, not in kind perhaps, but in degree.

"What was said of the departed may be said of many who heard the words, all in someway may be sacrificing for righteousness sake. All in some way may be pursuing the road she traveled. Receive back some that you have given. It is a mantle that the departed cannot use, and it comes to you by right where he who has been a comforter has now been comforted, and he who comforts now may sometime in like manner receive the comfort of a friend. As I think of my companion now, I assuredly know if I never knew before that man is not without the woman in the Lord; we men of the priesthood who have knelt by the altar with these women ought to love them with a love that is more than love, for we may come to the place where they will be out of our lives except through a stronger bond than that of earthly covenants.

"One little message the departed would have left if she could have spoken it. It was the burden of her counsel to me. She said in effect that there are many little things to do every day. Why wait for big things? They may never come. Why write a book? Better write a letter to a missionary. Of the writing of books there is no end, while of individual administrations between man and his fellow men there is scarcely a beginning. In her theory, life was made up of little things, little remembrances, little attentions. She was transformed almost to heaven when I brought her a rosebud. What we do in line of our Church is a true philosophy, for after all is it not love in the ultimate that we are seeking? Is it not the great end that we may have perfect love? What we do in the line of our Church duties day after day is only to bring us to the place where we can love our neighbors as ourselves, for upon this and the first commandment to love the Lord hang all the laws and the prophets. So my people, companions in the service and in the ministry, today while my heart is warm and tender, I say these things lest soon in the turmoil of life the fountain of speech be closed to gentle utterance, and such words be denied me."

I feel that Wallace would speak just such words if he were addressing you here today. My, what a wonderful thing it is to kneel at an altar in the temple of God, clasping the hand of one who is to be your companion not only for time, but also for all eternity, and then to have born unto that sacred and eternal covenant children for eternity. God is eternal. God is love. Love is eternal. Marriage is the sweetest and most sacred expression of love, therefore marriage is eternal, not for as long as you both shall live, but for time and for all eternity.

So I say to this lovely family: You have not lost a mother. You have not lost a wife. She has just gone away for a season. In you she will live if you will permit her. If you will exemplify in your lives her sweet character, her fine ideals, her devotion to the truth, her allegiance to the Church, obedience to the gospel, then even in this life your mother will live on through you and your children and your children's children, down through the ages of time. She can only die if you fail to reflect in your lives the mirror, the loveliness, the sweetness, the sacredness of your beautiful mother and your beautiful wife.

I know that life is eternal. It is so simple to believe in it now. It may have been difficult in times past, but now we know that the whole universe is full of life—life that we cannot see, but it is there. You turn on your radio, and it comes to life. What is the life of your radio? It isn't the tubes. It isn't the wires. It isn't the beautiful piece of furniture. The life of your radio, your television is out here in the universe. Destroy the tubes. Destroy the beautiful cabinet—what happens? You've only destroyed that which is material. You haven't destroyed the power, the life which made that instrument live. You can't destroy that. Man didn't invent these powers. The General Electric didn't. Westinghouse didn't. They have always been there. They have always existed. They are eternal. Life is just as eternal. Yes, our tubes may burn out, these mortal tubes. We lay away these bodies. They degenerate, but the life which animated these bodies, you can't destroy that. If life were not immortal, what would animate the body of a newborn babe? Oh, it is so simple to believe in these things now in this age of miracles.

We have before us the beautiful body of a lovely life, of a lovely soul. That life continues to live. The envelope is here; the contents have gone on to stand on the airport; you see one of those great planes take off. In a matter of seconds it is just a speck against the horizon. Eventually it disappears, but is it gone? Is it destroyed? No, in a matter of minutes or hours it appears against the horizon as just a little spot or a speck, and then it gets larger and larger and larger and finally comes down on the other landing field, the same identical machine, the same mechanism, the same size, and so is life.

Some of us say, "Well, she's gone." That is a common expression, but to others she has come. She has arrived, and there are others there waiting on that other landing field.

Now brothers and sisters, let's not mourn about this lovely woman. She has taken heaven with her. Oh, there will be mourning in her absence, of course. That's natural. It should be, but the only mourning she will be doing will be her mourning because her loved ones are mourning. That's all; apart from that she is happy; she is alive. God grant that we may honor this beautiful soul with beautiful deeds, that we may be worthy to be united with her in the eternities, and we will be if we live as she lived. How beautifully the family has started to live since her passing, as she wanted them to. The father and David went to priesthood meeting yesterday. Why? Because they know that's where she wanted them to be on the Sabbath day. David, beautiful daughters, honor your father and your mother, and your days will be long in the earth, and your lives will be part of your beautiful family when it comes time for you to shuffle off these mortal coils. Live so that you will merit an exaltation in the presence of God.

I leave my witness with you, brothers and sisters, as an expert witness. I believe now I could qualify in any court by all the rules of evidence as an expert witness that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, and that life is eternal.

In behalf of Jean and the family, I leave that testimony with you in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
