Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks ( 1954)

Funeral Address for Caroline Hyde Turner

September 19, 1934, Logan, Utah

"What is this mystery that men call death? Our mother before us lies; in all save breath She seems the same as yesterday. Her face so like to life, so calm, bears not A trace of that great change which all of us so dread. I gaze on her and say—'She is not dead but sleeps, And soon she will arise and take me by the hand as She did yesterday. And she will have some gentle word to say, Some kindly deed to do. For loving thought was warp and woof of which her life was wrought. She is not dead, souls like this forever live, In boundless measure of the love they give.'"

SOULS LIKE A righteous mother's never die: they forever live; through eternity their lives are perpetuated in the lives of those who ever came into the environment of their influence. There has only been one adequate tribute ever paid to womanhood and to motherhood, that was when He selected a mortal woman to be the mother of his Son, Jesus Christ. He did not select a mortal man to be the father, but he did select a mortal woman to be the mother of our Brother and Savior. This woman is no more mortal than the mother of Christ. The mother of Christ made no greater sacrifice to bring into this world the greatest character that ever lived than the sacrifice this woman has made on many occasions to bring into this life the brothers and sisters of Jesus Christ. We cannot honor a righteous woman with words, we cannot honor any great character with words; there is only one way, one only, in which we can honor great characters, and that is by deeds.

I have never been in a home in my life which has given out more inspiration, more beauty, more gentility than the home of this mother here. If there is any outstanding characteristic of the Hyde family it is gentility and genuineness, a sweetness of character. I have never been in the home of one of the children of William Hyde, where you heard a sharp voice or word; and after all, what is gentility that can not stand fire. I think it was Karren who said, "Patience is painful, but its fruits are sweet." The home of this mother was, and ever will be a sacred shrine to her children, and to me and my mother's children, and all of the children of our common inheritance; the home of this woman cannot be but one of the most sacred shrines. Where a righteous woman rules and reigns is more than the most beautiful chapel, the most gorgeous cathedral which was ever erected for the worship of God. There is none of us can say that we committed an unrighteous or unworthy deed wilfully in the presence of this woman or uttered an unclean word in the presence of this good woman. A queenly life was hers; and we can often go back to that shrine, typical of the perfect character of her Master and her Savior.

It has been mentioned that it was her greatest desire that her children honor the priesthood of God: and that is only secondly as far as effort goes; if we honor our mother, honoring the priesthood will be a simple matter, and will follow as a matter of course.

We can say nothing that is adequate of the life of this mother, nothing good that she is not worthy of. We know now that as she has lived her fourscore of years, she has planted the seed into eternal soil, and that her soul lives on and will become a queen in the eternal realms. She is there with her husband and children, and her father and mother. Her character is not out of place, because her character, under the proper surroundings, should be just as beautiful as a flower. The surroundings which will make your character and mine beautiful, are the surroundings which this woman will have, religion and simplicity.

I know that no matter where her children might be, that every night before she went to rest, she was on her bended knee, offering her prayers to God, not to save herself, but to save her children. I am sure everyone of her children would be mentioned in that prayer. And when we want her back for confession, let us call on her, and she will come, and our questions will be answered, as only a mother can answer them, and if we keep in touch with her, when our times come, it will only be but a short step from this life into immortality, into her eternal presence.

God bless us with the spirit of effort, within this world of effort, temptation, and sin, trouble and trial, that we may at least put forth an effort, and from that effort only development can come. Someone has said that if a conscientious effort is made with ourselves, repentance must follow, and remission of sins can only be given by someone possessed of the attributes we ascribe to Jesus Christ. We thank God for the noble conscientiousness we have inherited from our fathers and mothers; and may they control our lives, and may we be honest with ourselves, and may we repent and be saved and rejuvenated by the memory and teachings of our parents.

Cowley, Matthias F.
