Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

Part I

THE CHARACTER OF DEITY

1

The character of Deity

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that "it is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 345.)

"In nothing have men so far departed from revealed truth than in their conceptions of God," wrote B. H. Roberts in 1903 in the preface to his book Mormon Doctrine of Deity. The concepts that professing Christians then held concerning God were about the same as they had been in 1831. At that time, the Lord told Joseph Smith that calamity should come upon the inhabitants of the earth because they did not seek and follow Him. His words were: "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God." (D&C 1:16.)

In his Mormon Doctrine of Deity, Elder Roberts made a gallant defense of gospel teachings concerning Deity as they are revealed in the scriptures. Such doctrines were then being viciously attacked by certain sectarian ministers.

It was not then necessary to argue for the existence of God, for, while in their creeds and actions sectarians were denying him, they still claimed to believe in him. In fact, the ministers involved in the controversy professed to believe in the God of the Bible. They actually cited scripture in support of their arguments. What Elder Roberts had to do, and what he did very effectively, was to scripturally and philosophically assert and support our beliefs concerning God. Some of these beliefs:

First . . . that God is a being with a body in form like man's; that he possesses body, parts and passions; that in a word, God is an exalted, perfected man.

Second, [that there is] a plurality of Gods.

Third, [our belief] that somewhere and some time in the ages to come, through development, through enlargement, through purification until perfection is attained, man at last, may become like God—a God. (Mormon Doctrine of Deity, p. 11.)

Elder Roberts went into great detail to establish, from the scriptures, the verity of the Prophet Joseph's declaration that "the Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." (D&C 130:22.)

He discussed at length the oneness of the Godhead, showing its unity—notwithstanding the fact that it is composed of three separate and distinct persons. In like detail, he dealt with the doctrines of "the plurality of Gods" and "the future possibilities for man."

These fundamental, revealed doctrines are not so frequently discussed now as they were in the days of B.H. Roberts. Today's defamers of God have shifted their attack. During this twentieth century they have popularized the satanic doctrine that there is no God. God is dead, they claim.

The Lord's statement that the cause of the world's distress is failure to seek him "to establish his righteousness" is verily true, notwithstanding the fact that it is generally rejected on the ground that it is an oversimplification. When men reject God, they set themselves adrift on the sea of life without guiding star, compass, or rudder; they have no concept of their origin or of their destiny; they are without a standard by which to distinguish good from evil; they recognize neither the Spirit of Christ, which would enlighten them through the world, nor the power of the devil, which is dragging them down.

Three of the major devices that have led men to reject the truth concerning God have been and still are (1) apostate Christianity, (2) the theory of biological evolution, and (3) communism.

Apostate Christianity, the Lord said, has "strayed from mine ordinances, and . . . broken mine everlasting covenant." (D&C 1:15.) It teaches "for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but . . . [denies] the power thereof." (Joseph Smith 2:19.) For this reason, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith not to join any of its churches, "for they were all wrong."

The theory of biological evolution has, by denying the fall of Adam, made a mockery of the atonement of Christ. Acceptance of this theory has led countless people to deny God.

Of communism, the President of the Church, as recently as 1966, said:

The position of this Church on the subject of Communism has never changed. We consider it the greatest satanical threat to peace, prosperity, and the spread of God's work among men that exists on the face of the earth. . . .

The entire concept and philosophy of Communism is diametrically opposed to everything for which the Church stands—belief in Deity, belief in the dignity and eternal nature of man, and the application of the gospel to efforts for peace in the world. Communism is militantly atheistic and is committed to the destruction of faith wherever it may be found.

The Russian Commissar of Education wrote: "We must hate Christians and Christianity. Even the best of them must be considered our worst enemies. Christian love is an obstacle to the development of the revolution. Down with love for one's neighbor. What we want is hate. Only then shall we conquer the universe."

On the other hand, the gospel teaches the existence of God as our Eternal and Heavenly Father and declares: ". . . him only shalt thou serve." (Matt. 4:10.)

Communism debases the individual and makes him the enslaved tool of the state, to which he must look for sustenance and religion. Communism destroys man's God-given free agency. . . . (David O. McKay, Conference Report, April 9, 1966, pp. 109-10. Italics in original.)

Although the evil in these widely accepted disciplines is sometimes cunningly veiled, it is nevertheless powerful and has conditioned many to reject God.

These devices are not, however, the only anti-God forces in the world. The devil "goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the souls of men." (D&C 10:27.)

Among his most effective sophistries, one that always accompanies his denial of God is his mendacious declaration: "I am no devil, for there is none." (2 Nephi 28:22.)

The awful reality of Satan is affirmed; a warning against him and an example of how he works are given by the Lord in the tenth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. This is the revelation in which Joseph Smith was instructed not to retranslate that part of the Book of Mormon record covered by the 116-page manuscript lost by Martin Harris.

Pray always, [the Lord said to the Prophet,] that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work.

And because you have delivered the writings into his [Martin Harris's] hands, behold, wicked men have taken them from you.

And, behold, Satan hath put it into their hearts to alter the words which you have caused to be written, . . .

And, on this wise, the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan, that he may destroy this work.

Verily, I say unto you, that I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his evil design in this thing.

For behold, he has put it into their hearts to get thee to tempt the Lord thy God, in asking to translate it over again.

And then, behold, they say and think in their hearts—We will see if God has given him power to translate; if so, he will also give him power again;

And if God giveth him power again, . . . [to bring] forth the same words, behold, we have the same with us, and we have altered them;

Therefore they will not agree, and we will say that he has lied in his words, and that he has no gift, and that he has no power;

Therefore, we will destroy him, and also the work. . . .

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that Satan has great hold upon their hearts; . . .

Satan stirreth them up, that he may lead their souls to destruction.

And thus he has laid a cunning plan, thinking to destroy the work of God; . . .

And thus he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their souls down to hell; . . .

And thus he goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the souls of men. (D&C 10:5, 8, 10, 12, 14-20, 22-23, 26-27.)

In this statement the Lord, by name and pronoun, refers to the devil more than twenty times. Satan is as real as God.

To persuade men that there is no God is to persuade them that there is no devil. This leaves them wholly within his power. The antidote to the blasphemy that God is dead, and that there is no devil, is familiarity with and a witness to the truth of the revelations God has given of himself.

Let us review some of them, beginning with the great council in heaven, the earliest specific event of which the scriptures speak. God the Father, Jesus, and Satan, all took part in that council. Abraham has given us this account:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; . . .

And God . . . stood among those that were spirits. . . .

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him. (Abraham 3:22-28.)

Abraham continues with his account of the Gods creating the earth as planned:

And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. . . .

And the Gods said: Let us make an help meet for the man, for it is not good that the man should be alone, therefore we will form an help meet for him. (Abraham 5:7, 14.)

This the Gods did. They placed the man and the woman—Adam and Eve—in the Garden. (See Abraham 3-5.)

That God the Father, God the Son, and man are alike in form is affirmed in the following verses:

And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; . . .

And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them. (Moses 2:26-27.)

The clearest revelation concerning the form and character of a spirit body is recorded in the book of Ether. Here we learn that because of his great faith, the Lord showed himself unto the brother of Jared more than two thousand years before He was born to Mary, and said:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . .

. . . Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image.

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:14-16.)

I greatly treasure this revelation. It gives me a mental picture of the human spirit as well as of the spirit of Jesus. When I think of my departed loved ones—father, mother, my two children who have gone on before—I think of them in terms of this revelation.

I also think of the third member of the Godhead—the Holy Ghost—as being in the likeness of the premortal spirit of Jesus, as he here revealed himself to the brother of Jared. Such view is, I believe, in harmony with the Prophet's statement that "the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." (D&C 130:22.) It is also in harmony with this statement of Nephi, about the angel who showed him the great vision recorded in 1 Nephi, chapters 11 to 14:

And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me: Look! And I looked and beheld a tree; and it was like unto the tree which my father had seen; . . .

And it came to pass after I had seen the tree, I said unto the Spirit: I behold thou hast shown unto me the tree which is precious above all.

And he said unto me: What desirest thou?

And I said unto him: To know the interpretation thereof—for I spake unto him as a man speaketh; for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and he spake unto me as a man speaketh with another. (1 Nephi 11:8-11.)

Elder James E. Talmage cites this scripture in support of his statement that the Holy Ghost is a "distinct personality." (Articles of Faith, p. 159.)

Jesus, in his ministry among men in the flesh, was a complete revelation of God. Paul speaks of Christ as "being the brightness of [God's] glory, and the express image of his person." (Hebrews 1:1-3.) At the baptism of Jesus, the Trinity of the Godhead was manifest "all at one time, as three distinct personages." "The Father speaking from Heaven in witness of the Son, the Holy Ghost descending in bodily shape like a dove." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Our Lord of the Gospels, Deseret Book, 1974, p. 37.)

Of this event, Luke says:

Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,

And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased. (Luke 3:21-22.)

This statement need not be interpreted to mean that the Holy Ghost took the form of a dove. It lends itself to the interpretation that as a dove descends, the Holy Ghost, in bodily shape, descended.

We come now to a consideration of the revelation of God in our day. On a Sunday night, while waiting for me to return from a conference, my wife read the Book of Mormon, including the following from chapter 15 of Mosiah:

And now Abinadi said unto them: I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.

And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son—

The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son—

And they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth.

And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation, but suffereth himself to be mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by his people. (Mosiah 15:1-5.)

When I got home very late, she said to me, "I thought the Book of Mormon was to simplify the gospel, to teach it in plain and simple language easy to understand. This scripture confuses me. From it I can't distinguish the Father from the Son." My answer was (so she says), "Well, Mother, if you had a dozen pictures hanging on the wall, each of them of the same subject and all were blurred except one, which would you rely upon?" Then, being weary, I went to sleep. As she lay awake thinking about my statement, she came to the conclusion that my reference was to the Prophet's first vision. Her conclusion was correct.

Of his vision the Prophet says: ". . . I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith 2:17.)

This statement, together with the Prophet's declaration that "the Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22), clarifies and confirms, for us of this last dispensation, all that has before been revealed and preserved for us about God. It is the ultimate truth concerning the form and character of God.

Upon our acceptance and testimony to the truth of this vision and statement hangs our individual salvation.

No man or woman, said President Clark, is a true member of the Church who does not fully accept the First Vision, just as no man is a Christian who does not accept, first, the Fall of Adam, and second, the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Any titular Church member who does not accept the First Vision but who continues to pose as a Church member, lacks not only moral courage but intellectual integrity and honor if he does not avow himself an apostate and discontinue going about the Church, and among the youth particularly, as a Churchman, teaching not only lack-faith but faith-destroying doctrines. He is a true wolf in sheep's clothing.

Since, as the Prophet said, "it is the first principle of the gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we can converse with him as one converses with another," it is not surprising that the first statement in the Bible, which deals with the Adamic dispensation, is "In the beginning God. . . ." Nor is it surprising that when, to use the words of President Roberts, "it pleased the Lord in these last days to open again direct communication with men . . . the very first revelation given was one that revealed himself and his Son, Jesus Christ, A revelation which not only made known the being of God, but the kind of being he is. [The Father and the Son] were seen to be two distinct personages. They were like men in form; but infinitely more glorious in appearance, because perfect and divine."

In his great intercessory prayer, the Savior said: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) Such knowledge is essential to exaltation. It is more than a mental concept. It comes only through personal two-way communication with the Lord. It can be appreciated only by those who have experienced it.

I bear you my witness that I do know with certainty, by the witness of the Holy Ghost, that the Prophet's teachings concerning the form and character of God are true; and that in the same way and by my own experience, I know with certainty that we may converse with him as one man converses with another.
