Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

Part II

LEARNING FOR THE ETERNITIES

8

Learning for the eternities

We live in a society in which every righteous principle is being challenged, if not recklessly abandoned, and in which every degrading, immoral, and soul-destroying impulse is being wantonly gratified. Unless we can be persuaded to learn about and for the eternities, we shall not only be unprepared for eternity, but we shall also bring destruction upon ourselves here and now.

Among Webster's definitions of "eternity" are: "(a) the endless time after death; hence, (b) future life; immortality."

The gospel view of eternity includes not only "endless time after death," but also endless time before birth. Furthermore, it considers morality, the short period of time between birth and death, as part of eternity.

Great emphasis is presently being put upon learning. Education is proclaimed by many to be the only hope for the preservation of society. There is much virtue in this claim, providing the education is of the right kind. The Lord himself has said, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (D&C 131:6.)

The learning of the world today, however great, praiseworthy, and valuable it is, especially in the fields of physical and biological sciences, is not the learning connoted in the statement that one cannot be "saved in ignorance." That the learning implied in this statement is learning for eternity is implicit in the following statement made by the Prophet a month earlier: "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.)

Learning enjoined by the Lord has ever been concerned with eternity. For example:

. . . teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom. (D&C 88:118.)

. . . I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms. (D&C 88:77-79.)

This familiar scripture is often cited to illustrate the wide scope of learning in which the Lord desires us to be interested. The succeeding paragraphs, which explain the purpose for the learning thus enjoined, are not so familiar. They are just as important, however. In them, the Lord explains that the purpose of the required learning is to perfect his hearers for their ministry among the gentiles and to prepare the saints to escape "the desolation of abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the world to come." (D&C 88:85.) What he said was, we are to teach these things—

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people. . . .

Therefore, tarry ye, and labor diligently, that you may be perfected in your ministry to go forth among the Gentiles for the last time, . . . to bind up the law and seal up the testimony, and to prepare the saints for the hour of judgment which is to come;

That their souls may escape the wrath of God, the desolation of abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the world to come. . . . (D&C 88:80-85. Italics added.)

These divine instructions clearly prescribe learning calculated to prepare for eternity. All our learning should be so oriented. Jacob pointed this out when he wrote: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Nephi 9:28-29.)

The inability of the learning of the world to successfully deal with our sick society today is due to the fact that both the learned and the unlearned reckon without knowledge of or belief in the realities of eternity, past and future. So doing, their prospects for success, in spite of their boasted advances in behavioral and social sciences, are no greater than would be those of a playwright writing what he considered to be a one-act play, but which in fact was to be the second act of a three-act play. The first act would have already been presented and would have dealt with matters that he had no knowledge of or belief in; and the guidelines for the third act, which he likewise had no knowledge of or belief in, would have already been irreversibly established.

The Lord explains this generation's predicament in these words: "They have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant; They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall." (D&C 1:16-17.)

The points of view from which the believer and the nonbeliever begin their quest for learning are entirely different. To appreciate this difference, one need only to note their basic concepts of Deity.

The nonbeliever, if he does not categorically reject and deny God, at best refuses to accept God's word as final truth. He therefore has no fixed star by which to chart his course, nor does he have a dependable anchor to keep him from drifting. He recognizes no source of final authority to whom he can appeal in distinguishing between the genuine and the counterfeit, truth and error. Inevitably, he finds himself with those of whom Paul wrote to Timothy, who are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.)

This condition, Paul said, would cause the turmoil rampant in our society today, which he, with prophetic insight, foresaw and predicted:

. . . in the last days, perilous times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,

Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,

Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts.

All this, he concludes, comes about because they are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:1-7.)

In contrast to the plight of the nonbeliever, the believer pursues his learning with a settled conviction that there is an omnipotent, omniscient, personal God who created and presides over the universe; that the relationship between that God and himself is one of Father and son. He accepts without reservation Paul's teaching that "we are [God's] offspring" (Acts 17:28), and he accepts and gets further light on this concept from the statement of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the inhabitants of the world are children of God.

Not only does the believer begin with a knowledge of these basic truths concerning God and his relationship to him. As he pursues his learning, he is also constantly alert to the fact that the Lord has revealed many other fundamental truths that are beyond the reach of man's uninspired searchings, truths that have always existed and events concerning man's and earth's origin, which transpired long since in that eternity of time preceding mortality; truths concerning earth's destiny and man's potentialities in that eternity which stretches endlessly into the future beyond mortality.

Learning of these things which God has revealed is learning for eternity. The knowledge obtained by such learning is the knowledge without which no man can be saved. Over and over again, the Lord has instructed us and pleaded with us to learn what he has revealed. Through Moses, he instructed Israel:

Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it:

That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. (Deuteronomy 6:1-9.)

Bearing on the importance of learning what God has revealed, Jesus said to the unbelieving "Jews":

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.

And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. (John 5:24, 37-39.)

The informed believer, with a knowledge of the truth that God has revealed, tests the teachings presented to him as he seeks learning by the revealed truth. When he is faced with hypotheses, conclusions, theories, or purported facts that counter revealed truths, he is neither confounded nor disturbed. He knows that "truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24), and that in the end truth will prevail. He knows, with Lehi, that all things which God says and does are said and done "in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things," and that God is the only Being who possesses a knowledge of all things, past, present, and future. He therefore remains composed and assured that when all the facts are in, they will be in harmony with what God has revealed. The Lord himself gave this assurance when he spoke these words:

What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same.

For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. . . . (D&C 1:38-39.)

The opening statement of Daniel Webster's reply in the great debate between him and Robert Young Hayne, which began over a resolution concerning public lands and developed into considerations of great fundamental problems of constitutional law, was:

When the mariner has been tossed for many days in thick weather, and on an unknown sea, he naturally avails himself of the first pause in the storm, the earliest glance of the sun, to take his latitude, and ascertain how far the elements have driven him from his true course. Let us imitate this prudence, and, before we float farther on the waves of this debate, refer to the point from which we departed, that we may at least be able to conjecture where we now are.

If we would stay on course in our learning for eternity, we must, as did Webster, imitate the prudent mariner. We must frequently pause, take our bearings, and see how far afield we have been driven by the crosscurrents of man-made philosophies and theories that characterize our times. This we can do by reviewing what the Lord has said about the matters before us. If it concerns man's beginnings, we might start by reading this scripture from the Book of Abraham:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good, and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him. (Abraham 3:22-28.)

If it concerns our course in this life, we have this guide in the Lord's preface to the book containing the modern revelations he has given:

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

And also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets—

Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. (D&C 1:17-18, 37.)

Hearken ye to these words. Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world. Treasure these things up in your hearts, and let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds. (D&C 43:34.)

If the matter concerns man's state beyond the grave, consider this from the Doctrine and Covenants:

Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am. (D&C 93:1.)

And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—

They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

And they shall overcome all things.

Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever.

These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just.

These are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all.

These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood.

These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical. (D&C 76:50-70.)

Such is the consummation we seek in learning for the eternities.
