Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

9

The importance of early training

By the time children are twelve years of age their behavior has been to a degree fixed by their previous training, or lack of it; nevertheless, they can still be molded. Properly motivated and directed, they can continue their climb to the high potential they possess as children of our Heavenly Father.

"Train up a child in the way he should go," said the author of Proverbs, "and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Proverbs 22:6.) He will not depart from it because he will be held to it by the force of habit. As William James, the noted philosopher and psychologist, has wisely observed:

Could the young but realize how soon they will become mere walking bundles of habits, they would give more heed to their conduct while in the plastic state. We are spinning our own fates, good or evil, and never to be undone. Every smallest stroke of virtue or of vice leaves its never so little scar. The drunken Rip Van Winkle, in Jefferson's play, excuses himself every fresh dereliction by saying, "I won't count this time." Well! he may not count it, and a kind Heaven may not count it; but it is being counted nonetheless. Down among his nerve cells and fibers the molecules are counting it, registering and storing it up to be used against him when the next temptation comes. Nothing we ever do is, in strict scientific literalness, wiped out. Of course this has its good side as well as its bad one. As we become permanent drunkards by so many separate drinks, so we become saints in the moral, and authorities and experts in the practical and scientific spheres, by so many separate acts and hours of work.

Josiah Gilbert Holland reminds us that

Heaven is not reached at a single bound:

But we build the ladder by which we rise

From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies,

And we mount to its summit round by round.

You who are charged with guiding the youth of the Church as they begin to build their heaven-bound ladders should ever bear in mind that the first rounds are the most important, because the second and third and all the other rounds on to the top of the ladder can be reached only after the first rounds have been wisely chosen, firmly established, and successfully scaled.

As you labor with these choice souls, held back in the spirit world to come forth in this the dispensation of the fulness of times to help prepare Zion for the second advent of the Savior, keep in mind the Lord's admonition: "O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day." (D&C 4:2.)

He further counseled:

Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

And if it so be that you should labor all your days . . . and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! (D&C 18:10, 15-16.)

No one in the Church is in a more favored position to qualify for this supreme joy than are you who serve this choice generation. As early as possible, help them obtain an appreciation of who they are. Encourage them to think soberly about the message of the Primary song, "I Am a Child of God." A realization of this great truth is one of the first indispensable rounds on their ladder to heaven.

Another indispensable round is a compelling desire to excel in righteousness. The Lord grants unto men according to their desires. "I know," said Alma, "that [God] granteth unto men according to their desire, whether it be unto death or unto life; yea, I know that he allotteth unto men according to their wills, whether they be unto salvation or unto destruction." (Alma 29:4.) ". . . men are free," said Lehi, ". . . free to choose liberty and eternal life . . . or to choose captivity and death. . . ." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

If you will read the first nine verses in the twenty-eighth chapter of 3 Nephi, you will learn how literally the Savior rewarded his Nephite Twelve according to their desires.

Sacred history reveals the fact that in all ages noble men of high achievement have in their youth been motivated by good desires. A dramatic response to a youth's desire is revealed in Nephi's introduction to the record he gives of his great vision, as recorded in 1 Nephi, chapters 11-14. He said:

. . . it came to pass after I had desired to know the things that my father had seen, and believing that the Lord was able to make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceeding high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never had before set my foot.

And the Spirit said unto me: Behold, what desirest thou?

And I said: I desire to behold the things which my father saw.

After some more conversation, the Spirit said, ". . . thou shalt behold the things which thou hast desired." (1 Nephi 11:1-6.)

I do not remember reading of a more intense or effective desire than the one described by Enos, Nephi's nephew, when he wrote:

. . . I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a remission of my sins.

Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart.

And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens.

And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed. (Enos 2-5.)

If we could all bring our souls and the souls of the young for whom we have responsibility to hunger for a remission of our sins, as did Enos, and then pray as he prayed, we would receive like blessings. We must diligently try to inspire our Aaronic Priesthood boys and our young women with righteous desires to be like Enos.

I wish that every one of our youth would be inspired as I was inspired when as a youth I heard the following lines by Josiah Gilbert Holland. As I first heard them I felt as if they were spoken directly to me, and they inspired me with a desire to succeed to be a man, which I have never lost. He said:

God, give us men! A time like this demands

Strong minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands;

Men whom the lust of office does not kill;

Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy;

Men who possess opinions and a will;

Men who have honor; men who will not lie;

Men who can stand before a demagogue

And damn his treacherous flatteries without winking!

Tall men, sun-crowned, who live above the fog,

In public duty and in private thinking;

For while the rabble, with their thumb-worn creeds,

Their large professions and their little deeds,

Mingle in selfish strife—lo! Freedom weeps,

Wrong rules the land and waiting Justice sleeps.

Let us find a way to so inspire our Aaronic Priesthood boys and young women that we shall have no more drop-outs from among them.

Come all you stake presidents, bishops, counselors, high councilors, advisers, and all others charged with guiding the deacons, teachers, priests, Laurels, Mia Maids, and Beehive girls. Let us rally and build such a powerful fence of faith in God and righteous desire at the top of the cliff that we won't need to have so many ambulances down in the valley.
