Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

11

Learn by faith

The Lord described truth as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) In no other period has so much effort been put into the search for "knowledge of things as they are." Neither has there ever before been so much of such knowledge available. We all acknowledge, appreciate, and enjoy the great blessings that this knowledge brings. In the current accelerated search for "knowledge of things as they are, we Latter-day Saints must excel.

But as important as this knowledge is, it is more important that we excel in obtaining knowledge concerning things "as they were and as they are to come." Learning that does not include such knowledge is inadequate to enable men to understand clearly even the knowledge of "things as they are." This comes only through revelation. Only truth—"knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come"—can qualify men to accomplish the full purpose of mortal life.

Concerning truth, Jesus said: "If ye continue in my word . . . ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-32.) Jesus was and is, of course, the source of truth. He has always included revealed knowledge in the learning he has admonished us to seek. The futility of learning that is devoid of revealed knowledge is pointed up in these words of the prophet Jacob in the Book of Mormon:

O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish.

But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God. (2 Nephi 9:28-29.)

Early in this dispensation the Lord told us how to seek truth:

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms.

. . . seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith. (D&C 78-79, 118.)

I believe in study. I believe that men learn much through study. As a matter of fact, it has been my observation that they learn little concerning things as they are, as they were, or as they are to come without study. I also believe, however, and know, that learning by study is greatly accelerated by faith. The sacred records are full of evidence that the prophets learned truth, all three types of knowledge, through faith. They received it in various ways.

Adam, for example, was taught by the spoken word. Enoch says that God

called upon . . . Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him [that is, God said unto Adam]: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. . . .

. . . Teach . . . your children, . . .

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven of water and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

. . . Behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men. . . . (Moses 6:51-52, 58-59, 62.)

This great message is the essence of eternal truth. To possess it and to have a personal witness, born of the Spirit, that it is true, is the most important learning available to men. Adam and every other soul who has since come to an understanding of it has come to that understanding by faith.

By open vision, Enoch learned of things as they were: "The Lord . . . said unto him: Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see. And he did so. And he beheld the spirits that God had created; and he beheld also things which were not visible to the natural eye. . . ." (Moses 6:35-36.)

In chapter three of Ether there is a dramatic account of a divine dispensation of truth to the brother of Jared. Because of his great faith, he was taught both through the spoken word and by vision. You will recall that the Jaredite colony was divinely led to the seashore. There, following divine directions, they built eight barges. Desiring light in them, the brother of Jared took sixteen stones and "went forth into Mount Shelem," where he cried unto the Lord, saying:

I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man; therefore touch these stones . . . with thy finger, and prepare them that they may shine forth in darkness; . . . that we may have light while we shall cross the sea.

And . . . behold, the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger. And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord. . . .

And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this?

And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me.

And . . . behold, the Lord showed himself unto him, and said:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name. . . .

. . . Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image.

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:4, 6, 9-10, 13-16.)

That the brother of Jared, because of his faith, learned the great truths here taught is repeatedly affirmed in this scripture. He himself twice declared his belief, and Jesus four times emphasized the fact that he was being so favored because of his faith.

Abraham's account is an example of his learning by faith:

Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made. . . .

. . . The Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he . . . said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him. (Abraham 3:11, 22-28.)

The experience of Nephi illustrates the fact that learning by faith follows study and contemplation. After recording his father's vision of the tree of life and other teachings, he continued:

And it came to pass [that] I, Nephi, having heard all the words of my father. . . . was desirous also that I might see, and hear, and know of these things. . . . (1 Nephi 10:17.)

. . . And believing that the Lord was able to make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceeding high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never had before set my foot.

And the Spirit said unto me: Behold, what desirest thou?

And I said: I desire to behold the things which my father saw. (1 Nephi 11:1-3.)

And then Nephi had a great vision that took him four chapters to describe only part of.

The prophet Alma, another great Book of Mormon character, had a great capacity to learn by faith concerning things as they are to come. For one thing, he learned what happens to the soul between death and the resurrection. This he explained to his son Corianton as follows:

Behold, . . . my son, . . . I unfold unto you a mystery. . . .

. . . Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

And then it shall come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked . . . shall be cast our into outer darkness. . . .

. . . Thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection. (Alma 40:3, 11-14.)

Nineteen hundred and ninety-one years later, President Joseph F. Smith, who was President of the Church during the early years of this century, obtained through faith further information about this spirit world. He wrote the following:

On the third of October, in the year nineteen hundred and eighteen, I sat in my room pondering over the scriptures;

And reflecting upon the great atoning sacrifice that was made by the Son of God, for the redemption of the world. . . .

While I was thus engaged, my mind reverted to the writings of the apostle Peter. . . .

I opened the Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle of Peter, and as I read I was greatly impressed, more than I had ever been before, with the following passages:

"For Christ also hath suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:

"By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

"Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Peter 3:18-20.)

"For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Peter 4:6.)

As I pondered over these things . . . the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great.

And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality.

I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand.

They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death.

While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful;

And there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on condition of repentance.

But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised;

Neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.

Where these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace.

These the Lord taught, and gave them power to come forth, after his resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father's kingdom, there to be crowned with immortality and eternal life,

And continue thenceforth their labor as had been promised by the Lord, and be partakers of all blessings which were held in reserve for them that love them. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph F. Smith—Vision of the Redemption of the Dead 1-2, 5-12, 15-16, 18-22, 51-52).

In this vision President Smith also told about Christ organizing in the spirit world missionary forces to go out into outer darkness to teach the spirits whom he did not visit.

Alma not only learned gospel principles and doctrines by faith; he also received information on current events. For example, in the year 74 B.C., the Lamanite armies were invading the land of the Nephites. But, says the record, "they durst not come against the Nephites in the borders of Jershon; therefore they departed out of the land of Antionum into the wilderness. . . ." (Alma 43:22.) When this happened Moroni, the Nephite commander in chief,

knowing of the prophecies of Alma, sent certain men unto him, desiring him that he should inquire of the Lord whiter the armies of the Nephites should go to defend themselves against the Lamanites.

And it came to pass that the word of the Lord came unto Alma, and Alma informed the messengers of Moroni, that the armies of the Lamanites were marching round about in the wilderness, that they might come over into the land of Manti, that they might commence an attack upon the weaker part of the people. And those messengers went and delivered the message unto Moroni. (Alma 43:23-24.)

Moroni, acting upon the information, sent his armies into the land of Manti, where they met the Lamanites and defeated them.

The life of the Prophet Joseph Smith is filled with examples of learning by study and by faith. Seeking to determine "which of all the sects was right," he studied the Bible. The words of James—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God . . . in faith" (James 1:5-6)—drove him into the Sacred Grove, where, asking in faith, he came to a knowledge of God and his Beloved Son, Jesus Christ, our Redeemer. He actually had a conference, an interview, with them. In this experience, he learned the central, basic, most important fact of all knowledge—the key to a knowledge of all things. Until men learn what he there learned, they will continue to be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.)

As to knowledge revealed concerning things as they are to come, we have a good example in section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Here we learn of the three degress of glory and the laws that govern in each of them. (See also section 88.)

The knowledge of things as they were, as revealed to Adam, Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Abraham, has all come to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Another striking example of how the Prophet learned through "study and also by faith" is recorded in his diary for October 1, 1835: "This afternoon I labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with Brothers Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and during the research, the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients unfolded to our understanding." (History of the Church 2:286.) Thus he obtained a knowledge of the principles of science through faith.

In section 100 of the Doctrine and Covenants there is a moving example of the Prophet's learning by faith about the circumstances of his family. He and Sidney Rigdon "had been long absent from their families." On October 11, 1833, the Prophet wrote: "The Lord is with us, but have much anxiety about my family." The next day, October 12, he received a revelation in which the Lord said: "Verily, . . . my friends Sidney and Joseph, your families are well; they are in mine hands, and I will do with them as seemeth me good; for in me there is all power." (D&C 100:1.)

Countless illustrations of the Prophet's learning by faith could be cited. The foregoing are sufficient, however, to show that his knowledge was greatly amplified as a result of his faith.

Jesus indicated that had the people among whom he ministered in Jerusalem had greater faith, they would have learned more than they did. To the Nephites, in his great sermon on "one fold and one shepherd," he said, speaking of the Jews among whom he had just recently labored:

[Not] at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should not tell unto them concerning the other tribes of the house of Israel, whom the Father hath led away out of the land.

This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them:

That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And now, because of the stiffneckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them. (3 Nephi 15:15-18.)

There seems to be a clear implication here that more faith on the part of the Jews would have brought them a knowledge of the Nephites.

Now this method of learning by faith is not restricted to the prophets. It is available to all of us. The Lord has assured that he is no respecter of persons. "The Spirit [of Christ] giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father. And the Father teacheth him of the covenant. . . ." (D&C 84:46-48.) This he does in the scriptures, by living witnesses and by the Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost is a revelator. He is the agent through whom knowledge and truth have been revealed to men of faith throughout the ages. The Lord has made the gift of the Holy Ghost available to every one who will qualify to receive it. This gift has been bestowed upon us who are members of the Church, and we have been commanded to receive it. Doing so, we will be taught by the Holy Ghost and our learning will be infinitely increased by faith.

Being so taught does not mean, of course, that we will have the same revelations the prophets received. We do not need to have them. They are already available for our study. What it does mean is that we can obtain the witness of the Spirit that they are true. Our minds can be enlightened until we understand these tremendous truths. That understanding comes slowly, but with concentration it is opened and the things of this life fade into insignificance, in comparison to these great truths. The meaning and importance of getting such a witness is revealed in this statement of the Prophet Joseph:

Search the Scriptures—search the revelations which we publish, and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory, nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God; nor will there be any room for speculation.

A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God without being born of the water and the Spirit. He may receive a glory like unto the moon (i.e., of which the light of the moon is typical), or a star (i.e., of which the light of the stars is typical), but he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and Church of the First-born, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God.

And, fellow sojourners upon earth, it is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to [this] glory, and see for yourselves, and know for yourselves. (History of the Church 1:282-84.)

On another occasion he said:

A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus. (History of the Church 3:381.)

Learning by faith is an obtainable reality. I know it from experience myself. The Prophet spoke truth when he said that "all the minds and spirits that God ever sent into the world are susceptible of enlargement." He also spoke the truth when he said: "If a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:19.)
