Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

16

The voice of the Spirit

The great universal and basic truths with respect to God and men and their relationship to each other have been revealed and have been recorded in the scriptures in every dispensation. The identity of God and the origin of man were revealed by the Father himself: "I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." (Moses 2:27.) "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God," said Jesus to the sorrowing Mary. (John 20:17.) The apostle Paul declared: "[In God] we live, and move, and have our being; . . . for we are also his offspring." (Acts 17:28.)

The destiny of man, which is to rise from the grave in resurrection to live forever, has also been revealed, as has the fact that as a son of God he is endowed with the potential to reach the perfection of his Heavenly Father, provided he successfully passes the test of mortality.

The scriptures further reveal that God, having placed us in mortality to meet this test, did not leave us in ignorance, confusion, and despair to find our way by chance, but that from the very beginning he has made known for our benefit the gospel of Jesus Christ, his divine plan for our salvation and exaltation. These great, basic truths were given by revelation that came "not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Peter 1:21.)

Now I am painfully aware that Christianity does not today evidence a uniform understanding of these doctrines. The scores of churches with their varied creeds and different interpretations seem to lead away from, rather than toward, that glorious consummation foreseen by Paul when all shall "come in the unity of faith." (Ephesians 4:13.) This confusion, tragic as it is, does not, however, disprove the thesis that the doctrines came by revelation and declare the word of God. What it proves is that the conflicting interpretations of these basic revelations are being made in the feeble, flickering light of man's wisdom. This naturally brings confusion, because the things of God cannot be understood through the learning of men. You will recall how Paul pressed this point: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." That is to say, the things of God cannot be comprehended through the natural senses of man.

"But," he continues, "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

"For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Corinthians 2:9-11.)

Now if this doctrine of Paul's be true, and we witness that it is true, there must be personal revelation, that is, revelation to individuals, by which they may understand the basic revelations and receive soul-satisfying confirmation as to their divinity.

That the voice of the Spirit is available to all who will receive it is apparent from the universal call and promise of Jesus. "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden," he said, "and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.) And again: "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6.)

Since God has revealed all things essential for man's guidance through mortality to his glorious destiny, and has provided that by the voice of the Spirit men individually may receive personal revelation to enlighten their understandings and confirm to them the truth of God's revealed word, the all-important question arises: How can we individually attune our ears to that voice, so indispensable to our comprehension and appreciation of these things so vital to our eternal lives?

From the scriptures we draw the answer: first, prayerfully search the scriptures, and second, obey the commandments therein written.

No principle of the gospel is more clearly taught than that God will reward the sincere seeker. It was Jesus himself who gave specific assurance that such reward includes the gift of the Spirit. "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you," he said. "For everyone that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matthew 7:7-8.)

To emphasize this important truth, he asked the following question and then added the conclusion: "If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (Luke 11:11, 13.)

As to searching the scriptures, you will remember that to those who sought his life because he said that God was his Father, Jesus declared, "Ye have neither heard his voice . . . nor seen his shape. And ye have not his word abiding in you; for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not." Then he told them that if they would learn of him, they should "search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." Continuing, he pointed out that a search of the scriptures would reveal that Moses himself, whom they professed to believe, would condemn them for rejecting him. "For," he concluded, "he wrote of me." (John 5.)

Luke commended the Jews of Berea as being "more noble than those in Thessalonica, . . . [because they] searched the scriptures daily," whether the word of God was so. As a result, "many of them believed." (Acts 17:10-12.)

If we will add to our prayerful searching of the scriptures obedience to the commandments revealed therein, we shall assuredly obtain "the voice of the Spirit." Jesus said, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:16-17.) Now there is just one source from which such knowledge can come, and that is from God. And there is just one way in which it can come, and that is by the voice of the Spirit.

To the men of Judea and others dwelling at Jerusalem who, pricked in their hearts by the powerful witness borne of the apostles that Jesus was the Christ, cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" Peter answered: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:37-39.)

In these short verses Peter covered three phases of this important matter. He specified two of the commandments that must be obeyed, i.e., repentance and baptism; he named the chief agent of the voice of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost; and he declared the promise to be universal.

Never has the Lord required one of us to rely solely upon the witness of another. The voice of the Spirit enabling each individual to know for himself is as much a part of God's plan for the salvation of men as is the principle of free agency. He has endowed his children with both free agency and the voice of the Spirit, and he puts upon each of them the responsibility for the proper use of these endowments. The Lord has always urged his children to obtain a knowledge of the truth for themselves.

Through prayerfully searching the scriptures and through obeying God's commands, we may individually be led safely through life by the voice of the Spirit according to the divine and glorious, soul-satisfying promise that "the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit," and "every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father." (D&C 84:46-47.)
