Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

17

To him that asketh in the spirit

In the summer of 1828, nearly two years before the Church was organized, the Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror, yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work." (D&C 10:5.)

The first prerequisite to effective prayer is belief in God, the Eternal Father. There is a world of difference between a prayer understandingly addressed to "Our Father which art in heaven," and a prayer addressed to some unknown God defined in some such language as "cosmic energy," "universal consciousness," or "the first great cause." No man can pray to a theoretical God with any faith or expectation that his petition will be answered. But one can pray to the true and living God with the knowledge that he actually deals with me. When God is believed in as our Heavenly Father, we can, to a degree, understand our relationship to him and that he is the father of our spirits, a loving parent who is interested in his children individually, one whom they can love with all their hearts, might, mind, and strength.

Such a belief is essential to true prayer, because intelligent beings will not pray fervently to a God they do not know. Such praying will be done only by people who believe their prayers can be heard and answered by an understanding, sympathetic parent.

Associated with belief in God the Eternal Father is belief in his Son, Jesus Christ, and an acceptance of his divine mission as the Redeemer of the world. This belief is as basic to true prayer as is belief in God the Eternal Father.

It is because Jesus is our Redeemer, and therefore our advocate with the Father, that we must always pray unto the Father in Jesus' name. While yet in mortality he said to his disciples: ". . . I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by me." (John 14:6.) He promised them that if they prayed in his name, they would receive whatsoever they should ask. (John 14:13-14; 15:16; 16:23-24, 26.) To the Nephite multitude whom he taught after his resurrection, he said: ". . . ye must always pray unto the Father in my name." (3 Nephi 18:19.) And to this generation: "Thou shalt continue in calling upon God in my name." (D&C 24:5.)

On a number of occasions I have heard prayers in religious services that were not offered in his name. Latter-day Saints ought not to be ignorant of these commandments, nor hesitant about obeying them. Our hearts are filled with gratitude beyond expression for what the Savior has done for us. We sing with feeling, "Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me, enough to die for me!" Every time we partake of the sacrament we witness unto the Father that we "are willing to take upon [us] the name of [his] Son." A prayer not offered in his name suggests either insincerity or lack of understanding. When we pray unto the Father in the name of Jesus for specific things, we should feel in the very depths of our souls that we are willing to subject our petitions to the will of our Father in heaven. "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven" (3 Nephi 13:10) is the pattern given by Jesus in the Lord's Prayer, and emphasized in Gethsemane when, in blood, sweat, and agony, he prayed: ". . . not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42).

This principle was learned in our home through a rather impressive experience.

During the early years of our married life, my wife and I intensely desired what we considered to be a particular blessing. We set about through fasting and prayer to obtain it. We considered many of the scriptures that seemed to make a blanket promise that "whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." (Matthew 21:22.) We asked, we believed, we thought we had faith, but though we fasted often and prayed fervently, the years rolled by without bringing us the desired answer to our prayers.

Finally, we concluded that we had not fully understood somehow—that we were concentrating our faith and prayers upon receiving the particular thing that by predetermination we had set our hearts upon. We had to consider the conditions of the promise. We found that Jesus had stated them in full to the Nephites: ". . . whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20.) And to this generation he said: "Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you." (D&C 88:64.)

We had to learn to be as earnest in praying "if it be thy will" as we were when presenting our personal desires and appeals. We have no need to fear that our well-being will not be served by such an approach. It is God's work and glory "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

I think I'm within the mark when I say that the obtaining of eternal life by each individual person is part of the work of God and adds to his glory. His will concerning us and our affairs cannot be other than for our advancement toward immortality and eternal life. Submitting to his will in every instance will be for our own good. And this we must do in faith if we would have peace and happiness in our present state of imperfect living.

The time will come when we shall know the will of God before we ask. Then everything for which we pray will be right. That will be when, as a result of righteous living, we shall so enjoy the companionship of the Spirit that he will dictate to us what we should ask. On this point the Lord said: "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh." (D&C 46:30.)

I didn't understand this scripture until I had had a lot of experiences. When you live so that the Lord can dictate what you pray for, then you will receive whatever you ask for, because you will ask according to his will; "wherefore, it is done even as he asketh." And again: ". . . if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done. But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask. . . ." (D&C 50:29-30.)

Nephi, the son of Helaman, so lived. Unwearyingly he declared the word of God. He sought not his own life but the will of God, and to keep his commandments continually. To him the Lord said: ". . . all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:5.)

In submitting our requests to the will of our Eternal Father and asking in the name of Jesus, when, where, and for what shall we pray? During his earthly mission the Savior said, ". . . men ought always to pray, and not to faint." (Luke 18:1.) In this dispensation, he has said in many revelations, "Pray always." He said this to the Prophet Joseph Smith (D&C 10:5), to Martin Harris (D&C 19:38), to Thomas B. Marsh (D&C 31:12), and to many other individuals. He said it to the Church, and finally he said: "What I say unto one I say unto all; pray always lest that wicked one have power in you, and remove you out of your place." (D&C 93:49.)

As there is no limitation as to when we should pray, so there is no limitation as to where we should pray, or what we should pray about.

. . . in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. (Philippians 4:6.)

. . . cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:18, 20-24, 26-27.)

Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed. (3 Nephi 18:21.)

. . . pray vocally as well as in thy heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private. (D&C 19:28.)

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen. (D&C 65:5-6.)

Here is an example of the power of prayer from the life of President Abraham Lincoln. General Sickles had noticed that before the portentous battle of Gettysburg, upon the result of which perhaps the fate of the nation hung, President Lincoln was apparently free from the oppressive care which frequently weighted him down. After it was all past, the general asked Lincoln how that was. He said:

Well, I will tell you how it was. In the pinch of your campaign up there, when everybody seemed panic-stricken and nobody could tell what was going to happen, oppressed by the gravity of our affairs, I went to my room one day and locked the door and got down on my knees before Almighty God and prayed to him mightily for victory at Gettysburg. I told Him that this war was His, and our cause His cause, but we could not stand another Fredericksburg or Chancellorsville. Then and there I made a solemn vow to Almighty God that if He would stand by our boys at Gettysburg, I would stand by Him, and He did stand by you boys, and I will stand by Him. And after that, I don't know how it was, and I cannot explain it, soon a sweet comfort crept into my soul. The feeling came that God had taken the whole business into His own hands, and that things would go right at Gettysburg, and that is why I had no fears about you. (John Wesley Hill, Abraham Lincoln—Man of God, New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1927, pp. 339-40.)

Lincoln believed in God. He prayed mightily in the strength of great humility. He did not alone ask God to stand by him, but he promised to stand by the Lord. He received his answer in the way that we are so well acquainted with—the sweet comfort that crept into his soul.
