Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

18

The guidance of the Holy Spirit

As Jesus stood with his disciples on the Mount of Olives, they asked him what would be the sign of his second coming. In response to their inquiry, the Savior told them of the wars that would be in the earth at the time of his second coming and would precede it. He told them about earthquakes and other desolations; about the restoration of the gospel and its rejection; about his appearance on the Mount of Olives, the redemption of the heathen, and the binding of Satan. Then he concluded: "And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins. For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived . . . shall abide the day." (D&C 45:56-57.)

Nephi, in his record of his father's vision of the tree of life, quotes Lehi as saying:

. . . I beheld a rod of iron. . . .

And I also beheld a straight and narrow path, which came along by the rod of iron, even to the tree by which I stood; and it also led . . . unto a large and spacious field, as if it had been a world.

And I saw numberless concourses of people, many of whom were pressing forward, that they might obtain the path which led unto the tree by which I stood. . . .

And it came to pass that there arose a mist of darkness; yea, even an exceeding great mist of darkness, insomuch that they who had commenced in the path did lose their way. . . .

. . . many were drowned . . . and many were lost . . . wandering in strange roads. (1 Nephi 8:19-21, 23, 32.)

This vivid 2600-year-old word picture of people wandering in strange roads, groping for the straight and narrow path that leads to the tree of life, is symbolic of the world in which we live. We are now at sea in a mist of darkness for the very same reason as were our counterparts in Lehi's vision—namely, because we refuse, as did they, to take advantage of the available means of escape.

The bewildered people of Lehi's dream did not need to be lost. Extending from the large and spacious field in which they wandered was a straight and narrow path paralleled by an iron rod, leading to the tree of life. The wanderers were in trouble because they would not grasp the iron rod, which was interpreted by Nephi to be the word of God, and follow the path to the tree of life. They refused to receive the truth and take the Holy Spirit for their guide.

The same thing is true of us modern wanderers. There is no necessity for our bewilderment. The same ample means of escape available to the people in Lehi's vision are available to us. The Lord, knowing the calamities that would come upon us, restored the truth—the iron rod of Lehi's vision—and gave us the gift of the Holy Ghost, to keep us in the straight path.

We are today blessed with the word of God in rich abundance. In the Old Testament we find teachings parallel to those that Lehi's people had in the brass plates. In addition, we have the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Pearl of Great Price, and the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. And we have the teachings of the modern prophets, from the Prophet Joseph Smith to our present prophet. The truth in these scriptures would, if followed, lead us into the way of life.

Until the peoples of the earth accept the word of God as taught in these, our standard works, they shall never find their way out of the wilderness. Although worldwide the prospects are not very bright, we Latter-day Saints need not be dismayed. Knowing that the gospel is true and that the promises of the Lord are certain, it is for us to grasp the iron rod firmly and diligently press on to victory. And we must hold to it, for although the amplification by our modern scriptures of truths contained in the Bible greatly adds to our store of the word of God, his word will not save us any more than it saved the wanderers of Lehi's vision unless we make use of it. The fact that we have it is not enough.

I remember a young lady keeping company with a nonmember of the Church. As their courtship developed, she worried because he was a nonmember. Hoping to do something about it, she gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon. But when he asked her if she had read it, she said no. Needless to say, he didn't read it either. They have both gone his way.

Latter-day Saints are instructed by the Lord to bring up their children "in light and truth." (D&C 93:40.) This phrase is most significant. Truth embraces knowledge. The Prophet defined it as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come. . . ." (D&C 93:24.) These are the great truths that the gospel teaches. Light connotes forsaking of evil. Therefore, to bring up children in light and truth we must teach them the word of God and inspire them to forsake evil.

When children reach maturity they usually reflect in their lives what their parents taught them. This is illustrated in the tribute paid to their mothers by the 2,000 young men referred to in the Book of Mormon as the sons of Helaman. At a time when they were faced with overwhelming odds, Helaman asked them if they would go against enemy to battle. Although they were very young, they answered:

. . . behold our God is with us, and he will not suffer us that we should fall; then let us go forth; we would not slay our brethren if they would let us alone; therefore let us go, lest they should overpower the army of Antipus.

Now they never had fought, yet they did not fear death; and they did think more upon the liberty of their fathers than they did upon their lives; yea, they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them.

And they rehearsed . . . the words of their mothers, saying: We do not doubt our mothers knew it. (Alma 56:46-48.)

Without a knowledge of the word of God, these noble mothers never could have built into their sons such an abiding conviction that "if they did not doubt, God would deliver them"; and neither could they have inspired in their sons an unshakable faith that their mothers knew what they were talking about.

It is a mistake to depend solely upon the Church organizations to give children a knowledge of the principles of the gospel. The primary and the final responsibility to bring up their children in light and truth rests with parents. There is no better place to find this knowledge than in the standard works. Read them and do as the Lord says: "Let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds." (D&C 43:34.) Study the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord said of them: "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled. . . ." (D&C 1:37-38.)

Read the Book of Mormon. Become familiar with it. Let the beauty and spirit of its plain and simple gospel teachings rest upon your souls. Draw near to the Lord, as the Prophet said, by abiding by its precepts.

Read the New Testament. Become more familiar with the teachings of Jesus and the apostles.

Begin with your children while they are exclusively under your care, and continue as long as you have any influence upon them to impress upon their minds and precious souls the grandeur of the concepts of the gospel. Help them to understand and appreciate that they are individually, in very deed, the children of God and members of his eternal family; that they came from him; that they have the potential to return to his presence and be like him; that earth life is but a proving ground for higher spheres; that "men are, that they might have joy" (not the pleasures of this world); and that "wickedness never was happiness." (2 Nephi 2:25; Alma 41:10.)

See that these truths are imbedded in your minds. If they are, you will have an anchor that will carry you over the roughest passages in your life.

I remember on one occasion riding with President Stephen L Richards to a conference in Idaho. As we drove along, we were considering means to encourage the people to live the gospel more effectively. He expressed his conviction that people would be more diligent in living the gospel if they could but get true concepts of its principles in their minds and appreciate their implications. I have often thought about this statement, and I believe it is true. I am further persuaded that Latter-day Saint parents can, if they will, help their children to learn and appreciate these principles. This requires parents themselves to become more familiar with the word of God. I counsel you to study and teach your children from the standard works of the Church.

In addition to restoring the truths of the gospel, the Lord has given us the gift of the Holy Ghost to keep us in the straight and narrow path. Learn to recognize and follow the guidance of that Holy Spirit. Without such guidance, even a knowledge of the word of God is unfruitful. You will remember Paul's statement to the Corinthians that "the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6), and how the Lord said, ". . . and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (D&C 42:14).

I can think of no aid to parents in the training of children equal to the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Among his gifts are faith, discernment, knowledge, judgment, and wisdom. The fruits of the Holy Spirit include virtue, diligence, humility, hope, patience, kindness, charity, love, composure, peace, Godliness, and joy.

As we contemplate the virtue of these gifts and fruits, let me, by way of caution, emphasize the fact that there is nothing spectacular, magical, or fanatical about the working of these gifts. Under their influence one behaves perfectly normally. They do not excite. They calm and comfort. Their influence is as natural and refreshing as a gentle breeze. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof," said Jesus to Nicodemus, "but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit." (John 3:8.)

How is one to come by these precious gifts and fruits? The Lord has said, ". . . the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith. . . ." (D&C 42:14.)

Seek the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Seek it by faith and by prayer, by study, and by righteous living. Learn what the scriptures and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith say about it. Develop a desire for it. Live worthy of it and cultivate its companionship. Take it for your guide. If you do so, your rewards will be eternal; for when the Savior comes in his glory and the parable of the ten virgins is fulfilled—

they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived . . . shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation.

For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver. (D&C 45:57-59.)

That we may all, with our children, abide that great day, I humbly pray.
