Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

20

The principle of obedience

We have great hopes for peace in this world and exaltation in the presence of God in the world to come. That is our objective. We hope for something more than the rest of the world hopes for in this respect. We are no better than the rest of the world except to the degree to which we accept the commandments of the Lord and obey them. But we have great hopes that we can gain an exaltation in the presence of our Heavenly Father.

It is my firm conviction, however, that the only saving hope we have in this matter is that hope which is based upon a faith strong enough to impel obedience to the things we know are right. I don't have very much respect for a person who testifies that he has faith in the principle of tithing unless he lives it. Neither do I think his faith will do him any good unless he does pay his tithing. And I almost have contempt for those who say they have faith in the leadership of this church but who do not follow in their living the things that the leaders of the Church teach. I refer, of course, to the men whom we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators.

The principle of obedience to the laws of the gospel is fundamental. It lies at the base. The Prophet Joseph Smith learned it very early in his ministry. He learned it when he went that first morning, after the visits of Moroni, to the Hill Cumorah. He had gone there under the direction of the angel, who had told him that he should have no thought in mind other than to bring to pass the righteousness of God and the accomplishment of his purposes in the earth.

Joseph's family was very poor, and as he walked toward the hill he thought about the intrinsic value of the things the angel had told him were buried there. He wondered if the plates or something else to be found with them could not be used to relieve the poverty of his parents and their family. When he uncovered the box and saw the gold plates, he reached to take them out and received a shock that set him back. He reached again and received a more severe shock. Then the third time, thinking all he needed was physical strength, he reached with all his might to take the plates, and received still another shock, which sapped his strength, and he cried out, "Why can I not obtain this book?" Unexpectedly the angel said, "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord." Then Joseph received a great manifestation, which kept him reminded all the days of his life that he had to obey in order to get the promised blessings. The angel told him that he could not get the plates until he was not only willing to obey the laws of God, but was able to do so.

Our obedience must be self impelled. We should not render obedience because we are forced to do it or because the bishop is looking or because the General Authorities are present. We must render obedience because we love righteousness and have a testimony of the truth in our hearts, and because we want to go back to our Father in heaven and help take all his children with us.

Furthermore, we ought to obey his commandments as they are given. We ought not to twist and turn and bend them to our will; we ought to obey them as they come from the mouths of those who have been called to speak for God. If we do not, our faith is vain.

May I take an example from the Old Testament scripture to illustrate this principle. A very wicked clan of people who lived in the days of Saul were known as the Amalekites. They had been wicked for a long time. Even back in the days of Abraham they had persecuted the people of God, and he had said, through his prophets, on numerous occasions that when they became ripened in iniquity they should be destroyed.

That time came in the days of Saul. Through the prophet Samuel, the Lord told Saul to go and destroy the Amalekites, every one of them, and all their livestock. Saul went with his army and destroyed all the people except their king, Agag, whom he spared in violation of the commandment of the Lord. He likewise destroyed all the ordinary livestock, but when he came to the choice sheep, the cattle, the fatlings, and the lambs, the pressure of the people, who desired to possess them, was so great on Saul that he yielded and took them with him.

The Lord told Samuel what had happened and Samuel went out to meet Saul, who greeted him with the salutation, "Blessed be thou of the Lord; I have performed the commandment of the Lord." And Samuel said, "What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" (1 Samuel 15:14.) Then Saul began to justify himself. He argued that his partial performance was a complete performance, and that he had done what the Lord had asked him to do. Samuel called to his attention that when he was humble, "when thou wast little in thine own sight," Saul was taken by the Lord out of obscurity and raised up and magnified and made king over Israel, and now he had chosen to disobey the commandment of the Lord. Saul offered the best excuse he could find when he said that they had brought back the cattle, sheep, lambs, and fatlings to offer as sacrifices unto the Lord. He thus claimed to be relying on the commandment to offer sacrifices. And then Samuel added:

"Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

"For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king." (1 Samuel 15:22-23.)

That brought something home to Saul. He was being told by the prophet who had anointed him king that he had been rejected because he had not obeyed the Lord. He then showed some regrets. However, he did not exhibit that godly sorrow which worketh repentance, but rather the sorrow of the world which worketh death. He asked Samuel to return with him to the Lord so he could again prevail with the Lord. Samuel said he could not do that, but at Saul's persistent urging he did so, without success, for the Lord did not again accept Saul. Thus Saul lost his kingdom and David was chosen to take his place.

Now there are a number of things in this incident that can be applied in our lives today. First, Saul received his directions through the prophet living in his day. We receive directions from living prophets in our day. Second, Saul used his own judgment as to whether he would perform the commandment given to him, and decided that he would not do it exactly as he was commanded. And third, when he was called to account he prevaricated about it. He said, "I have done it."

There is another interesting thing about this incident. When Samuel confronted Saul with what he had done, Saul said, "Because I feared the people, I obeyed their voice." That reminds me of the statement of the Lord in the third section of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein he told the Prophet Joseph that he should not have yielded to the persuasions of men. This revelation was given after Martin Harris had lost the 116 manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon translation. With Saul, it was the fear of the people, and with the Prophet it was the persuasions of men. The Prophet learned never to yield again.

That is where our temptations come from. The people around us do not believe what the prophets say, and we yield to their arguments.

Recently at a stake conference a man stood up to talk, a humble middle-aged man who had a house full of children to raise with only a limited amount of means with which to do it. He said, "I want to tell you about a letter I received from my mother," and this is about what she had written in that letter: "My son, for many years I have been looking forward to the time when I would reach my present age, in order that I might receive an old age pension so that I would not need to call upon you for support out of your limited income. And now, just as I reach it, the Church says, don't take it. I don't know that I understand all the reasons why the Church says don't take it, but I do know that the Church has always been right. Therefore, please continue to remit each month." And the man said, "I am glad to remit."

I like that. I like that spirit and that action. It reminds me of the obedience evidenced by our great progenitor Adam, the first man. He was commanded by the Lord, after he and Eve had left the Garden of Eden, that he was to build an altar and offer sacrifice, and he did it. He built an altar and offered sacrifices, and after many days an angel of the Lord stood by Adam and said, "Why do you offer this sacrifice?" And Adam said, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." (Moses 5:6.)

What a lesson! Here was a man, a great man who in our understanding stands next to the Redeemer of the world, who built an altar and killed the offering and offered it on the altar without knowing why he did it. How men have changed! Had Adam been a modern man, he would not have offered that sacrifice until someone had presented to him a human argument that to his mind justified sacrificing the animal rather than putting it in his cold storage locker.

But thank goodness Adam was not a modern man. He had faith—a faith that impelled him to obey the commandment of the Lord—and after he had obeyed he learned why the commandment was given. The angel told him that the sacrifice was in the similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father. Then he taught him the principles of the gospel, which Adam accepted and obeyed, thereby receiving all the blessings he never could have received without that obedience.

As Adam had to obey, so must we. God help us to listen to his living prophets and obey them, that we may gain the great rewards that the Lord holds out to us.
