Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

21

Obedience to law is liberty

There is a law," said the Lord, "irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

From this it follows that the rule of law is universal. ". . . that which is governed by law," reads another revelation, "is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin [sin being that which is contrary to the law], and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. . . ." (D&C 88:34-35.)

All things in God's economy, even those which seem inanimate, obey the laws by which they are governed. Consider, for example, this declaration: ". . . the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law." (D&C 88:25.)

"Therefore, . . . it shall be crowned with glory. . . . That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; . . . And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom. . . ." (D&C 88:18-21.)

The law of Christ is all-inclusive. It concerns not only rules prevailing in heaven, but also the laws of nature and civil laws—local, national, and international.

"Let no man break the laws of the land," said the Lord, "for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land. Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign. . . ." (D&C 58:21-22.)

"Civil [law] is of divine origin . . . [and] even at its worst, it is better than anarchy. Revolutionary movements that aim at the abolition of government itself are contrary to the law of God. . . ." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, Deseret Book, 1954, p. 339.)

Wherever the rule of law breaks down in a family, a community, a state, or a nation, chaos reigns. We should all strictly obey the law and do it with good and honest hearts.

The Ten Commandments are not only basic laws of God; but they also constitute the foundations of Judeo-Christian secular law. In this day of declining morals and lawlessness, we can all profit by checking our own performance against them. Doing so will help us to obey both civil and divine law.

The Lord himself took a hand in establishing the supreme law of this land. In 1833, referring to the United States, he said that he had established our Constitution by the hands of wise men raised up for "this very purpose." (D&C 101:80.) Earlier he said that the "rights and privileges" protected by that Constitution belong "to all mankind." (D&C 98:4-5.)

We are under a divine charge to inform ourselves concerning laws both secular and divine. ". . . verily I say unto you," says the Lord, "it is my will that you should hasten . . . to obtain a knowledge . . . of laws of God and man." (D&C 93:53.)

The Nephites, for example, by the exercise of their agency, brought themselves to such a state of affairs that their course led to political bondage. This they did while living under a government providing for the freest exercise of agency. "For as their laws and their governments were established by the voice of the people, and they who chose evil were more numerous than they who chose good, therefore . . . they could not be governed by the law nor justice, save it were to their destruction." (Helaman 5:2-3.)

Under these circumstances, they chose as rulers wicked men who would certainly destroy their political liberties, to replace righteous men who had in the past protected and preserved those liberties, and would have continued in the future to do so.

This sequence was followed in the days of Israel. The people, rejecting government by judges—which God had established—clamored for Samuel to give them a king. Notwithstanding Samuel's warning that a king would make servants of their children, lay heavy taxes and services upon their backs, and send them to war, "the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; saying Nay; but we will have a king over us; That we also may be like all the nations." (See 1 Samuel 8.) Samuel therefore anointed Saul to be their king. In due course, just as Samuel had predicted, heavy burdens were laid upon them, their sons and daughters were made servants of the king, and war came. The nation was divided into two kingdoms, Israel and Judah, both of which were, in their turn, carried away into captivity. Not only did they lose their political freedom, but their very political existence as nations was terminated.

With respect to the loss of personal liberty through the misuse of free agency, our daily lives are filled with tragic evidence. We see the alcoholic with his craving for drink, the dope fiend in his frenzy, and worse, the pervert with his irretrievable loss of manhood. Who will say that these enjoy liberty?

But notwithstanding the fact that through its misuse, political, economic, and personal liberty are lost, free agency must always endure, because without it there is no existence. (D&C 93:30-31.) The free agency possessed by any person is increased or diminished by the use to which he puts it.

What we seek is the liberty and freedom of which Jesus spoke when he said, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-32.)

This is the liberty that results from obedience to law.
