Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

22

Our strength in unity

A number of years ago the First Presidency issued the following statement:

"In the midst of this welter of lying and deception, of woe and misery, of death and destruction, of violent disorder and threatening chaos, the only saving forces on earth are the eternal principles of the everlasting gospel of Christ and the rights and powers of the priesthood of Almighty God. We of this church stand as the sole possessors of these mighty forces which we have for our own blessing, salvation, and exaltation, not only, but also we hold them in trust for all mankind." (Message of the First Presidency, October 3, 1942.)

It seems to me that standing thus as God's representatives in the earth, charged with the responsibility of carrying the banner of righteousness in the mighty conflict with Satan and his forces now raging between truth and error, we are under great responsibility to be one, for we fight against tremendous odds, and we need all the strength we can get. United we are strong.

I call to mind the building of the Nauvoo Temple. The Saints were poor. Securing the money for the purchase of the materials they used required sacrifices beyond any that we have been asked to make in recent times. They knew that as soon as the building was completed and they had received their endowments therein, they would have to abandon it. Still they held to their purpose, though they had to complete the construction with a sword in one hand and a trowel in the other. That building is gone, but the monument erected in the hearts of the builders shall live forever as a testimony to their faith and unity.

The missionary work of the Church is another example of what can be done when the people are united. It is one of the marvels of the age to all who are acquainted with it.

The erection of the grain elevator on Welfare Square in Salt Lake City is a further evidence of what can be done with united effort. When the erection of that structure was being contemplated, it was stated by one of the consulting engineers that the building could not be erected without a skilled crew, and that it would take such a crew between fourteen and fifteen days to pour the cement for the bins. The cement was poured in eight and one-half days, almost wholly by an unskilled force of volunteer workers.

It is my conviction that since we are engaged in the Lord's work, we can accomplish everything he wants us to do if we will but be united.

In the record of Saul of Tarsus, who became Paul, the apostle to the Gentiles, we have a prime example of a man who, having obeyed the law of God, enjoyed freedom of the soul even while he suffered the deprivation of almost every other liberty. In his ministry he suffered stripes often, was imprisoned frequently, and faced death repeatedly. Reviewing some of his experiences to the Corinthians, he said,

Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.

Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;

In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;

In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. (2 Corinthians 11:24-27.)

Notwithstanding all this, he could write to his beloved Timothy, from his prison cell in Rome shortly before his death,

. . . I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. (2 Timothy 4:6-8.)

Surely Paul, in his soul, enjoyed liberty and freedom.

Paul's conclusion that the reward won by him is available to others gives assurance that by following his pattern of living, each of us may attain it.

I submit for your consideration and decision the foregoing evidence and argument as support of the proposition that obedience to law is liberty.

A few years ago while riding through Cleveland, Ohio, on a passenger train, I noticed on a building the inscription "Obedience to Law Is Liberty." The synonyms liberty and freedom are commonly used interchangeably; their meaning, however, is difficult to circumscribe.

Abraham Lincoln was of the opinion that "the world has never had a good definition of the word liberty. . . . We all declare for liberty," he said, "but in using the same word we do not mean the same thing. With some, the word liberty may mean for each man to do as he pleases with himself and the product of his labor; while with others the same word may mean for some men to do as they please with other men and the product of other men's labor." (Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, p. 639.)

Again he said, "The shepherd drives the wolf from the sheep's throat, for which the sheep thanks the shepherd as his liberator, while the wolf denounces him for the same act," as the destroyer of liberty. (Ibid.)

The liberty and freedom most frequently advocated may be classified as (1) political independence and power, (2) economic sufficiency, and (3) free agency.

Much as these three freedoms contribute to liberty, however, no one of them nor all of them together guarantee the freedom connoted in the saying "obedience to law is liberty." Such liberty is freedom of the soul.

In the area of political independence and power, perhaps the exploits of Alexander the Great are among the most widely known. With high physical courage, impulsive energy, and fervid imagination, he, at the unripe age of thirty-two years, became to all intents and purposes master of the then known world. But he was far from enjoying liberty, for of himself he was not master. In his thirty-third year he died, a victim of his own excesses, a total stranger to freedom of the soul.

Edwin Arlington Robinson, in his short poem "Richard Cory," depicts another rather interesting situation, a sort of apparent self-sufficiency combined with apparent economic abundance that also falls short of freedom of the soul.

Whenever Richard Cory went down town,

We people on the pavement looked at him:

He was a gentleman from sole to crown,

Clean favored, and imperially slim.

And he was always quietly arrayed,

And he was always human when he talked;

But still he fluttered pulses when he said,

"Good morning," and he glittered when he walked.

And he was rich—yes, richer than a king—

And admirably schooled in every grace:

In fine, we thought that he was everything

To make us wish that we were in his place.

So on we worked, and waited for the light,

And went without the meat, and cursed the bread;

And Richard Cory, one calm summer night,

Went home and put a bullet through his head.

It is not uncommon for free agency to be considered as synonymous with liberty and freedom. And it is true that this God-given right to choose one's course of action is an indispensable prerequisite to freedom. Without it we can scarcely enjoy any type of liberty—political, economic, or personal. It is one of our greatest heritages. It is God-given. Lawyers particularly should be ever alert in its defense.

Free agency, however, precious as it is, is not of itself the liberty we seek, nor does it necessarily lead thereto. As a matter of fact, through the exercise of their agency more people have come to political, economic, and personal bondage than to liberty.

Can we not be so in all things? The answer is obvious and certain. We can, but there is only one way, and that is for each one of us to find out what the Lord wants done, and then for all of us to proceed together with energy to do it.

Unity never comes while each man charts his own course and walks in his own way. The Lord made this very clear in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, when he marked such a practice as one of the reasons for the calamities he saw coming upon the inhabitants of the earth. He said:

And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people;

For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant;

They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall. (D&C 1:13-16.)

This message was intended for all the world, as the Lord says. For nearly one hundred and fifty years the Lord's servants have been carrying it to the world, explaining that the cause of all this strife, trouble, and wickedness is that men rely upon the counsel of their fellowmen and trust in the arm of flesh and walk in their own ways after the image of their own gods, rather than seek the true and living God to establish his righteousness.

The only path to unity is to find out the will of the Lord and then follow it. The way to find it out is, first, to be humble. We must not be hard of heart. We must assume our proper relationship to our Father in heaven, recognizing that in his infinite wisdom he knows what ought to be done. Therefore, we should be willing to subject our personal opinions and actions to his will.

In this attitude, we should learn what his will is by a study of his word, as given in the standard works of the Church and through the living prophets. This study must be made in faith and prayer. We should ask the Lord to help us comprehend the prophets' words and understand their application to us.

As an illustration of this approach, I call your attention to some Book of Mormon history. You will recall that Father Lehi had a dream, in which he saw the tree of life, the fountain of water, the iron rod, and the large and spacious building, and that when he told his sons about it, they did not understand its meaning. Nephi had such a desire to know what it meant, and such faith that the Lord could make it known unto him, that he was caught away into a high mountain and given its interpretation. When he returned to the tent of his father, he found his brothers disputing as to the meaning of the words of their father. The words were hard to understand in the wisdom of men, for Nephi says that his father spoke "many great things unto them which were hard to be understood, save a man should inquire of the Lord." His brothers, being hard in their hearts, had not inquired of the Lord, saying that the Lord "maketh no such things known unto us." Then Nephi said:

"How is it that ye do not keep the commandments of the Lord? How is it that ye will perish, because of the hardness of your hearts? Do ye not remember the things which the Lord hath said? If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you." (1 Nephi 15:10-11.)

One of the activities of the Church is the welfare work. If I understand the counsel of the brethren correctly in connection with this program, we must become a self-sustaining, independent people. This means that the Church members, individually and as a body, must become independent of direct public relief of all kinds. We have done a magnificent work in our production program and in many other welfare activities. What we need to do now is to become united as one man in our determination to accomplish this great objective of independence. This we can do by understanding and following the advice of the brethren and the instructions issued from the headquarters of the Church.

It seems to me that there is no greater threat today against our fundamental institutions than that of losing our independence. It is possible, through our welfare plan, to free every member of the church oof Christ from the necessity of accepting direct relief from any public agency and to make all, except the permanently disabled, self-sustaining. May God help us to become united in our understanding and in our efforts to accomplish this great objective.
