Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

24

If ye are prepared, ye shall not fear

Latter-day Saints, because of the knowledge they have received in the revelations, are better prepared to meet the perplexities of our times than are any other people. We know more about the difficulties that are coming, and we have the key to their solution.

I suppose that most people have a tendency to interpret their own experiences and world affairs in the light of certain standards that have become fixed in their thinking. The fact that the Lord Almighty will take care of his people during these latter days of stress and trial became fixed in my mind very early.

As a child I lived in a land torn by a devastating revolution. As the contending forces pursued each other back and forth through the country, I became greatly disturbed and agitated. Well do I remember when word came that the rebels were marching on Chihuahua City from Ciudad Juarez to the north, and that the Federals were marching on the same city from Torreon on the south. My distress turned to fright—in fact, to terror—when they met at Casas Grandes, just ten miles away, and the shooting began. Some of our more adventuresome young men climbed to the top of the Montezuma Mountain where, through field glasses, they could watch the fighting.

Through those stirring and never-forgotten childhood experiences it was difficult for me to understand this doctrine of peace in one's heart while there was war in the land. But even then, my fears were tempered some as I saw and listened to my sainted mother lull her babies to sleep. The words of the songs she sang comforted me. Some of them have been ringing in my mind through all the years of the intervening half century—these, for example, from "Guide Us O Thou Great Jehovah":

When the earth begins to tremble,

Bid our fearful thoughts be still;

When Thy judgments spread destruction,

Keep us safe on Zion's hill.

—Hymns, no. 56

And these from Parley P. Pratt:

Come, O thou King of Kings!

We've waited long for thee,

With healing in thy wings

To set thy people free.

Come, make an end to sin

And cleanse the earth by fire.

—Hymns, no. 20

And from W. W. Phelps:

In faith we'll rely on the arm of Jehovah

To guide through these last days of trouble and gloom;

And after the scourges and harvest are over,

We'll rise with the just when the Savior doth come.

—Hymns, no. 118

As the years passed and I became acquainted a little with the scriptures, I learned that the brethren who had written these beautiful lines of hope and courage had learned from the revelations that the Lord would take care of his saints through the calamities that he foresaw and foretold. Nephi, speaking of our days, said:

For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous.

Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire. (1 Nephi 22:16-17.)

When the Lord gave, by revelation, the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, he said that he was willing to make the things he had revealed

known unto all flesh; For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world. (D&C 1:34-36.)

Jesus himself previewed our times and the days to follow. As he stood before his disciples on the Mount of Olives, they asked him concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the signs of his second coming. Replying, he told them that

this people [the generation among whom he lived] shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations. . . .

But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them. . . .

And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound.

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel;

But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

And there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land.

But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another. (D&C 45:24-33. Italics added.)

I am convinced that if we are to have peace in our hearts, we must learn how to preserve it in our hearts in the midst of trouble and trial. I know that if we lived the gospel, we would not have war. We would have peace if enough people lived the gospel, but for myself I do not expect them to do so. I do not expect enough people to repent to spare the world from serious trouble, and I think the scriptures sustain this conclusion.

When the Savior had made the above statement to his disciples, he saw that they were troubled, and he said unto them:

Be not troubled, but, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled.

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.

And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke.

And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven.

And the remnant shall be gathered unto this place [Jerusalem];

And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the cloud of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off.

And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived . . . shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day. (D&C 45:35; 39-44; 56-57.)

"They that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived." I think we are not safe just because we say we intend to do what's right. I think the people who are safe are those who have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide and have not been deceived. These are they who shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

"The earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance." This earth isn't going to be inherited by our enemies. "The earth shall be given unto [those who have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived] for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation. For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver." (D&C 45:58-59.)

I think the Savior was talking about the Holy Ghost when he said, "those who have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide." The Holy Ghost is the spirit of truth. To have the Holy Spirit with us as the Savior speaks of it here is to be guided by revelation from heaven. I know that such guidance can be had.

Each one of us who is a member of the Church has had hands laid upon his head and has been given the gift of the Holy Ghost. But, as I remember, when I was confirmed, the Holy Ghost was not directed to come to me; I was directed to "receive the Holy Ghost." If I receive the Holy Ghost and follow his guidance, I will be among those who are protected and carried through these troubled times. And so will you, and so will every other soul who lives under his direction. We need to seek that spirit. We need to realize that it is a real guide. The Lord has given us several tests by which we may know when we have that spirit.

By revelation through the Prophet Joseph, the Lord revealed to Oliver Cowdery a very simple test. Oliver was complaining because the Lord had withdrawn from him the gift to translate the Book of Mormon records. The Lord said to him:

Do not murmur, my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you after this manner.

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought. (D&C 9:6-9.)

We can make every decision in our lives correctly if we can learn to follow the guidance of the Holy Spirit. This we can do if we will discipline ourselves to yield our own feelings to the promptings of the Spirit. We must study our problems and prayerfully make a decision, then take that decision and say to the Father, in simple, honest supplication, "Father, I want to make the right decision. I want to do the right thing. This is what I think I should do; let me know if it is the right course." Doing this, we can get the burning in our bosom, if our decision is right. If we do not get the burning, then we must change our decision and submit a new one. When we learn to walk by the Spirit, we never need to make a mistake.

I know what it is to have this burning witness. I know also that there are other manifestations of guidance by the Spirit.

I know, for example, what Enos was talking about when he said, "The voice of the Lord came into my mind again." He did not say it came into his ear, but that it came into his mind. He had been asking the Lord to bless his brethren, the Nephites, as everyone who gets the Spirit asks the Lord to bless his brethren and his fellowmen.

I know that we can be guided by the Spirit if we will more diligently seek, through earnest prayer, the guidance of the Spirit and learn to live our lives by the guidance of the Spirit.

I think every Latter-day Saint ought to go on his knees, night and morning, in secret prayer, in addition to family prayer. I have always been thrilled with the statement of the Savior to his disciples that when they prayed, they were not to "do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

"But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:5-6.)

That's the way to pray to reach the Lord—all alone, where one is not fashioning prayers for the ears of any mortal person. In secret prayer one can kneel down and, in the sincerity of his heart, pour out his soul to God alone.

The path from man to God is prayer. We need to do as the Book of Mormon prophets advise: "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart." (Moroni 7:48.) The answer to such prayer is the guidance of the Holy Spirit. The key to happiness is to get the Spirit and keep it. We were given the right to get it when we were confirmed members of this church. We may walk by it back into the presence of God. So doing, we will not need to be put to flight by our troubles.
