Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities ( 1977)

25

Be not troubled"

As we search the scriptures for predictions of Christ's coming, we are impressed with the fact that most Old Testament prophecies concerning his advent refer to his coming in the meridian of time. There are, however, a few scriptures that refer to his second advent. For example, the Psalmist sang, "Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him." (Psalm 50:3.)

Isaiah gave this assurance: "Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you." (Isaiah 35:4.)

And the Lord said to Enoch: "As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance." (Moses 7:60.)

It is clear, from New Testament record, that the associates of Jesus knew he would return to earth and that they associated his return with the end of the world. This we know because as Jesus "sat upon the mount of Olives, [his] disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us . . . what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?" His response was, ". . . as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. . . . and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory." (Matthew 24:3, 27, 30.)

Another prediction of his second coming was given at the time of his ascension. While his disciples "beheld, [the Lord] was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

"And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

"Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:9-11.)

When Jesus visited the Nephites in America, following his postresurrection ministry among his disciples in the land of Jerusalem, he made it plain that he would come again. On this point the record says that to the Nephite multitude "he did expound all things, even from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory. . . ." (3 Nephi 26:3.)

Later, to three of his twelve Nephite disciples, he said: ". . . ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven." (3 Nephi 28:7.)

In 1830, soon after his church was organized in this last dispensation, the Lord gave this admonition to Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet: ". . . be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom—For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that I come quickly. . . ." (D&C 33:17-18.)

That Christ shall come again is certain in the minds of believers.

Although we know he is coming, we do not know precisely when he will come. ". . . of that day and hour knoweth no man," said Jesus, "no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only." (Matthew 24:36.) We have been advised, however, of the signs that will portend his coming.

As Jesus stood before his disciples in the flesh, just a few days before his crucifixion, he "spake unto them, saying: As ye have asked of me concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in the clouds of heaven, . . . I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall come. . . ."

He then told them that "desolation shall come upon this generation [referring, of course, to the generation of Jews then living] as a thief in the night, and this people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations. But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (D&C 45:16-17, 19, 25.)

The times of the gentiles refers to the period of time in which we are now living. In these last days the times of the gentiles came in with the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith; it will be fulfilled when the missionaries are withdrawn from the gentile nations and sent to the remnants of the house of Israel. On this theme Orson Pratt said in 1875:

After the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, . . . another scene will open up before the world, in the grand panorama of the last days. What is that? The downfall of the Gentile nations. Says one—"Whom do you call Gentiles?" Every nation excepting the literal descendants of Israel. We, the Latter-day Saints, are Gentiles; in other words, we have come from among the Gentile nations, though many of us may have the blood of Israel within our veins. When God has called out the righteous, when the warning voice has been sufficiently proclaimed among these Gentile nations, and the Lord says: "It is enough," he will also say to his servants—"O, ye, my servants, come home, come out from the midst of these Gentile nations, where you have labored and borne testimony for so long a period; come out from among them, for they are not worthy; they do not receive the message that I have sent forth, they do not repent of their sins; come out from their midst, their times are fulfilled. Seal up the testimony among them and bind up the law." What then? Then the word of the Lord will be—"O, ye, my servants, I have a new commission for you. Instead of going forth to convert the Gentile nations, go unto the remnants of the house of Israel that are scattered in the four quarters of the earth. Go and proclaim to them that the times of their dispersion are accomplished; that the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled; that the time has arrived for my people Israel, who have been scattered for generations in a dark and cloudy day, to gather unto their own homes again, and to build up old Jerusalem on its former heap. And then will commence the gathering of the Jews to old Jerusalem; then the ten tribes in the northern regions, wherever they may be, after having been concealed from the nations for twenty-five hundred years, will come forth and will return, as Jeremiah has said, from the north country." (Journal of Discourses 18:64.)

To return to what Jesus said to his disciples on that memorable day:

And in that day [today and the immediate future] shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth.

And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound.

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel. [This, of course, refers to the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith.]

But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

And there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land.

But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another.

And now, when I the Lord had spoken these words unto my disciples, they were troubled.

And I said unto them: Be not troubled, for when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled.

And when the light shall begin to break forth it shall be with them like unto a parable which I will show you—

Ye look and behold the fig-trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand;

Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.

And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke.

And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven.

And the remnant shall be gathered unto this place;

And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off.

But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud.

Wherefore, if ye have slept in peace blessed are you; for as you now behold me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me and your souls shall live, and your redemption shall be perfected; and the saints shall come forth from the four quarters of the earth.

Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king.

And then shall the heathen nations be redeemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them.

And Satan shall be bound, that he shall have no place in the hearts of the children of men.

And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation.

For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver. (D&C 45:21-59.)

Surely the Lord was speaking literally when on November 4, 1830, he said, through Joseph Smith to Orson Pratt, ". . . it shall be a great day at the time of my coming." (D&C 34:8.)

It shall be a great and glorious day for those who are prepared, and it shall be a great and dreadful day for those who are not prepared.

As we observe current events in light of the scriptures, we know that trying times lie ahead. We regret the predicted calamities. We also know, however, that after the night, the morning cometh. This gives us cause to follow the admonition of the Savior to his disciples: "Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled." (D&C 45:35.)

These assurances bring to mind William Cowper's verse:

Ye fearful Saints, fresh courage take;

The clouds ye so much dread

Are big with mercy and shall break

In blessings on your head.

—Hymns, no. 48

We also remember James Russell Lowell's lines:

. . . behind the dim unknown,

Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch above his own.

There is a most significant feature that all of the foregoing expressions have in common: the comforting assurance given by each of them is restricted to a special limited class. Lowell extends his assurance to God's own. Cowper restricts his to the saints. Jesus was speaking directly to his ancient disciples. In the full text, he extended his comforting assurance to his disciples in these latter days; to the saints who, in the meantime, had died and slept in peace; to the saints "from the four quarters of the earth" who will be living when he comes; in short, to all his disciples past, present, or future, whether living or dead.

Because only his disciples shall receive the promised blessings, I feel obligated set forth the scriptural definition of a disciple of Jesus Christ in order that we may qualify and "be not troubled" as we experience the predicted events that shall transpire between now and the time of his coming.

I shall start with the statement Jesus made to Joseph Smith in 1831 as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants: "He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple; and he that saith he receiveth it and doeth it not, the same is not my disciple, and shall be cast out from among you." (D&C 41:5.)

Christ's invitation to become his disciple is universal. He extends it to everyone. His call and promise are: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.) He has put no money price tag on his invitation. Nephi quotes him as saying: "Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price." (2 Nephi 25:26.)

This does not mean, of course, that there is no cost involved. There is a cost—a very real cost—but it is a performance cost. Jesus taught this plainly. In Luke we read:

And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee withersoever thou goest.

And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.

Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.

And another . . . said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.

And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. (Luke 9:57-62.)

Of another occasion, Luke wrote:

And there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them,

If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple. (Luke 14:25-27, 33.)

In these seemingly harsh statements, Jesus was not specifying "literal hatred toward one's family . . . as a condition of discipleship." He was emphasizing "the preeminence of duty toward God over personal or family demands" on the part of those who would be his disciples. (James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 453.)

To us of these latter days who would be his disciples, he said: "Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again. And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (D&C 103:27-28.)

If we are his disciples, we need not fear.
