Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the New Testament: The Four Gospels ( 1982)

The New Testament is the most widely accepted testament of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the four accounts of the gospel written by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John form the basis of the New Testament.

One purpose of this work, A Companion to Your Study of the New Testament: The Four Gospels, is to help the reader of the New Testament better appreciate and understand the many contributions of the four writers of the gospel message. Numerous commentaries on various scriptural passages by inspired prophets of this dispensation and by other scriptural scholars have been included to help achieve this purpose.

The basic scriptural text referred to by this book is the King James Version of the New Testament. The many other study aids referred to are in the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible, published in 1979 by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including chapter headings, footnotes, maps, and entries in the Topical Guide (TG), Bible Dictionary (BD), and Gazetteer.

The following publications have been particularly helpful and are quoted quite extensively in this book. Students of the New Testament are encouraged to study these books in their entirety:

Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, volume 1, by Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73.)

Jesus the Christ, by Elder James E. Talmage, an earlier apostle in the Church. (12th ed. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1924.)

Life and Teachings of Jesus, prepared by the Church Educational System. (Salt Lake City, 1978.)

The author of this book is fully aware of the admonition of Peter: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) Thus, specific interpretations of scriptural passages have been left largely to those who have been called, ordained, and set apart to speak for the Lord in these latter days: the prophets, seers, and revelators of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

In section 1, a list of key words and terms from the New Testament. "BD" indicates that the Bible Dictionary contains an entry for that word. Section 1 also contains definitions of many of these words and terms. This should prove very helpful to students of the New Testament, as the English language has changed a great deal since the King James Version of the Bible was prepared in 1611. The definitions given in section 1 have been carefully checked with standard Bible dictionaries and with a 1737 edition of An Universal Etymological English Dictionary published by N. Bailey publishers in England. Section 1 also includes many cross-references to the scriptures, so that if the reader has a question on a certain topic during his reading, he can turn to section 1 and find other scriptures covering that topic.

In section 2, some scripture references are in large italics, for example, 1:1-17. Such references indicate major sections within chapters.

Because of the many contributions of the articles in the Bible Dictionary and because other books and manuals on the New Testament are readily available, it was not felt necessary to include in this volume a section pertaining to the origin of the New Testament itself nor to the background of the four writers of the gospels. Thus, after section 1, this book begins directly with commentaries on the writings of Matthew.
