13:1 The Joseph Smith Translation begins this account, "And there were present at that time, some who spake unto him of the Galileans . . ."

13:4 See BD, "Siloam."

13:6-9 A certain husbandman (God) had a fig tree (the Jewish remnant of Israel) planted in his vineyard (the world); and he came (in the meridian of time) and sought fruit thereon (faith, righteousness, good works, gifts of the Spirit), and found none. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard (the son of God), Behold, these three years (the period of Jesus' ministry) I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none; cut it down (destroy the Jewish nation as an organized kingdom); why cumbereth it the ground (why should it prevent the conversion of the world by occupying the ground and pre-empting the time of my servants)? And he (the Son of God) answering said unto him (God, the husbandman), Lord, let it alone this year also till I shall dig about it, and dung it (preach the gospel, raise the warning voice, show forth signs and wonders, organize the Church, and offer every opportunity for the conversion of the Jewish nation). And if it bear fruit, the tree is saved (the Jewish nation shall be preserved as such and its members gain salvation), and if not, after that thou shalt cut it down (destroy the Jews as a nation, make them a hiss and a byword, and scatter them among all nations). (DNTC 1:477.)

(See section 1, "Fig tree.")

13:6 The Joseph Smith Translation uses "husbandman" in place of "man."

13:7 "Why cumbereth it the ground" has also been translated "Why should it go on using up the soil."

13:9 And if it bear fruit, the tree is saved, and if not, after that thou shalt cut it down. And many other parables spake he unto the people. (JST; italics added.)

13:10-17 This is another incident of Jesus healing on the sabbath day. (See text and commentaries for Matt. 12:10-13.)

This particular healing is recorded in detail, not because of its miraculous nature, for many others equalled or surpassed it in this respect, but because it took place on the Sabbath day. See John 5:1-16. Out of the occurrences surrounding it we learn:

(1) For 18 years the woman had been bound by Satan with "a spirit of infirmity," presumably meaning that some mental or spiritual affliction attended her physical illness. Though Satan may rejoice in the afflictions—whether physical, mental, or spiritual—which befall mortal men, it is not to be assumed that he has power to impose them, except in isolated instances where people have complied with laws which permit such an imposition; otherwise, Satan would shackle all men with ills so drastic as to destroy them.

(2) Jesus appears to have sought out this woman and performed the miracle on his own initiate on the Sabbath to teach the principle that it is lawful to do good and work righteousness on that holy day.

(3) Though it was not always his habit so to do, in this instance he performed the healing by the laying on of hands, a physical performance which helps faith increase in the hearts of afflicted persons.

(4) False beliefs—as those relative to sabbath observance—lead to bigotry and place their adherents in a position where they deny and reject the pure mercies of God and become hypocrites.

(5) Every soul is honorable and deserving of dignified respect in the eyes of Deity. This woman, though decrepit and infirm, though shackled with atrophied muscles and seemingly afflicted mentally and spiritually as well, was hailed by Jesus as a daughter of Abraham, a soul worthy of the blessings and mercies of Abraham's God. (DNTC 1:493-94.)

(See section 1, "Sabbath: Healing on.")

13:11 "Was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself" could have been translated "was bent double and was unable to raise herself up at all."

Behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bound together, and could in no wise straighten up. (JST; italics added.)

13:14 "Answered" is replaced by "was filled" in the Joseph Smith Translation.

13:15 "Hypocrite" should be plural, according to the Greek text. Evidently, Jesus was referring to all of the people in the audience.

13:17 It was "his disciples" who rejoiced (rather than "all the people"), according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

13:18-19 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 13:31-32. Read also Mark 4:30-32.

13:18 "Whereunto shall I resemble it" could have been translated "to what shall I liken it" or "with what shall I compare it."

13:19 "Waxed" could have been translated "became."

13:20-21 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 13:33.

13:22-30 The discussion in these verses is primarily in response to the question, "Lord, are there few that be saved?"

Will few or many attain eternal life in the celestial kingdom? The answer, of great concern to all who seek salvation, depends upon what is meant by few. Few of what group? Of all persons born into the world? Of the portion of mankind who grow to a sufficient maturity to become accountable for their own sins? Or of the members of the Church who have covenanted in the waters of baptism to serve God and keep his commandments in return for the promise of eternal salvation hereafter?

There are, of course, three kingdoms of glory to which resurrected persons will go—the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial. (1 Cor. 15:39-42; D. C. 76.) Of these three, only the celestial is the kingdom of God; it is the kingdom reserved for the saints who obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Great hosts of persons will go to the other kingdoms and hence will not attain salvation in the full gospel sense.

From the spirit and letter of the Prophet's vision on the degrees of glory, it appears that great majority of accountable persons in the world will go to the telestial kingdom. He recorded in the revelation that the inhabitants of that lowest kingdom would be "as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore." (D. C. 76:109.)

On the other hand, speaking to accountable persons and of attainment of the celestial kingdom, Jesus said in the Sermon on the Mount; "Few there be that find it." (Matt. 7:14.) In other words, proportionately few of the earth's total accountable inhabitants will gain salvation. The overwhelming majority of them will go to lesser kingdoms and receive lower rewards.

Yet the total number who will gain salvation will be great and not small. John on one occasion saw in vision a group of exalted persons who exceeded 100,000,000 in number (Rev. 5:9-11) and on another occasion he beheld a group of saved persons which formed such a great multitude that "no man could number" them. (Rev. 7:9.)

Included among the celestial inhabitants will be all the children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability. (Teachings, p. 107.) Of this group President John Taylor said: "Without Adam's transgression those children could not have existed. Through the atonement they are placed in a state of salvation without any act of their own. These would embrace, according to the opinion of statisticians, more than one-half of the human family who can attribute their salvation only to the mediation and atonement of the Savior." (John Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, p. 119.)

As to members of the Church, many will gain salvation, many will not. For accountable persons to receive a celestial inheritance baptism coupled with personal righteousness is essential. For such persons to inherit eternal life in the celestial world, celestial marriage plus conformity to gospel law is required. Those members of the Church who act accordingly, will gain the rewards indicated; those who do not abide the laws involved will go to lesser inheritances in lower kingdoms and will not gain full salvation. (DNTC 1:495-96.)

13:23-24 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 7:13-14, See 3 Nephi 14:13-14.

And there said one unto him, Lord, are there few only that be saved? and he answered him, and said,

Strive to enter in at the straight gate; for I say unto you, Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; for the Lord shall not always strive with man. (JST; italics added.)

Except during the brief hour of his personal ministry among men, the strivings of the Lord with men, to get them to believe, repent, and obey, are performed through his Spirit—the Spirit of Jesus Christ or Light of Christ. This is the Spirit that enlightens and guides all men and that leads them in paths of light and truth as long as they hearken to its voice. (D. C. 84:44-48; 88:6-13; Moro. 7.) But when men rebel against truth and light, the Spirit withdraws its benign influence, "for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts." (D. C. 1:33.) (DNTC 1:496.)

13:24 "Strive to enter in at the strait gate" could have been translated "Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door."

13:25-30 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 7:21-29. Read also Luke 6:46-49. See 3 Nephi 14:21-27; DC 11:16-25.

13:25 Therefore, when once the Lord of the kingdom is risen up, and hath shut the door of the kingdom, then ye shall stand without, and knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But the Lord shall answer and say unto you, I will not receive you, for ye know not from whence ye are. (JST; italics added.)

13:27 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the word "from": "ye know not from whence ye are." (Italics added.)

13:28 The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth among you . . ." (Italics added.)

13:30 The Joseph Smith Translation adds a clause at the end of this verse: "and shall be saved therein." Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased this verse:

There are those Gentiles in all nations to whom the gospel is offered last who shall be saved ahead of you Jews to whom the word of God came first, and there are those among you who first had opportunity to hear the truth who shall be last as to honor, preference, and salvation hereafter. (DNTC 1:497.)

13:31-33 This material is found only in Luke.

13:31 The Joseph Smith Translation begins this verse: "And as he was thus teaching, there came to him certain of the Pharisees . . ." (Italics added.)

"The same day" means "In that very hour."

13:32 "Fox" is replaced by "Herod" in the Joseph Smith Translation.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained the clause "I shall be perfected":

Jesus was then perfect in the sense that he was without sin and was completely obedient to his Father's commands. But there was yet an eternal perfection for him to attain, the perfection spoken of in the command: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) This future perfection, which would make him like his Father, was available to him only following his resurrection in connection with his receipt of "all power . . . in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18; D. C. 93:2-22.) (DNTC 1:498.)

13:33 What pointed irony is this! 'I shall not be killed by Herod here in Perea, for my work is not yet finished. But I shall go to Jerusalem, that great spiritual capital of the world, that city wherein ye think all religious light is centered. There, enveloped in the light that has become darkness, I shall be slain, not by pagan Herod, but by my own people.' (DNTC 1:498.)

The Joseph Smith Translation adds the following after verse 33: "This he spake, signifying of his death. And in this very hour he began to weep over Jerusalem, . . ."

13:34-35 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 23:37-39.

13:34 The Joseph Smith Translation ties this verse to the preceding verse by beginning it: "Saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou who killest the prophets . . ." (Italics added.)

13:35 The Joseph Smith Translation adds significantly to this verse: "Ye shall not know me, until ye have received from the hand of the Lord a just recompense for all your sins; until the time come when ye shall say . . ." (Italics added.)
