14:1-6 Although this specific incident of healing is contained only in the account by Luke, other healings by Jesus on the Sabbath are found in Matthew 12:1-15; Luke 13:10-17; John 5:1-16.

A possible reason for the propensity of Jesus to heal on the Sabbath has been proposed by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

Why did Jesus, again and again and again, seek occasion to exercise his healing powers on the Sabbath? Apparently this was one of his ways of keeping in the headlines. He was teaching the truths of salvation and inviting men to believe in him as the Son of God so that they might become heirs of eternal salvation. His miracles testified of his divine mission, and miraculous works wrought on the Sabbath would be known to more people, discussed in more synagogues, investigated by more truth seekers than those performed at any other time. (DNTC 1:499.)

(See section 1, "Sabbath: Healing on.")

14:5 The Savior's statement could have been translated more completely "Who of you, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the sabbath day?"

14:7-11 This parable is found in this form only in Luke. The same principles are taught elsewhere in the scriptures, including Proverbs 25:6-7.

14:7 And he put forth a parable unto them concerning those who were bidden to a wedding; for he knew how they chose out the chief rooms, and exalted themselves one above another; wherefore he spake unto them, saying, . . . (JST; italics added.)

14:9 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "And he who bade thee, with him who is more honorable, come . . ." (Italics added.)

14:10 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the end of this verse reads, "then shalt thou have honor of God, in the presence of them who sit at meat with thee." (Italics added.)

"Worship" could have been more literally translated "honor," "glory," or "respect."

14:11 In a sense, Jesus here summarizes the whole plan and purpose of this mortal probation. It is to test men and see whether they will seek for worldly things—wealth, learning, honors, power—or whether they will flee from pride, humble themselves before God, and walk before him with an eye single to his glory. Without this basic Christian virtue of humility there is neither spiritual progression here nor eternal life hereafter. With it men are able to gain every godly attribute in this life and to qualify for full salvation in the mansions on high. "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand and give thee answer to thy prayers." (D. C. 112:10.) (DNTC 1:500.)

14:12-24 The Parable of the Great Supper, contained only in Luke, is somewhat similar to the Parable of the Marriage of the King's Son in Matthew 22:2-10.

Explication of the parable was left to the learned men to whom the story was addressed. Surely some of them would fathom its meaning, in part at least. The covenant people, Israel, were the specially invited guests. They had been bidden long enough aforetime, and by their own profession as the Lord's own had agreed to be partakers of the feast. When all was ready, on the appointed day, they were severally summoned by the Messenger who had been sent by the Father; He was even then in their midst. But the cares of riches, the allurement of material things, and the pleasures of social and domestic life had engrossed them and they prayed to be excused or irreverently declared they could not or would not come. Then the gladsome invitation was to be carried to the Gentiles, who were looked upon as spiritually poor, maimed, halt, and blind. And later, even the pagans beyond the walls, strangers in the gates of the holy city, would be bidden to the supper. These, surprised at the unexpected summons, would hesitate, until by gentle urging and effective assurance that they were really included among the bidden guests, they would feel themselves constrained or compelled to come. The possibility of some of the discourteous ones arriving later, after they had attended to their more absorbing affairs, is indicated in the Lord's closing words: "For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper." (JTC, p. 452; italics added.)

14:12 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "Then said he also concerning him who bade to the wedding . . ." (Italics added.)

14:23 "Go out into the highways and hedges" could have been more literally translated "Go out into the roads and the fenced-in places." The meaning is that the servant was being sent to the cultivated places.

14:25-33 This list of requirements for being a true disciple of Jesus is found only in Luke and is difficult to understand without the significant contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation.

14:25-26 And when he had finished these sayings, he departed thence, and there went great multitudes with him, and he turned and said unto them,

If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, or husband, yea and their own life also; or in other words, is afraid to lay down their life for my sake, cannot be my disciple. (JST; italics added.)

Not hate in the sense of intense aversion or abhorrence; such is contrary to the whole spirit and tenor of the gospel. Men are to love even their enemies, to say nothing of their own flesh and blood. (Matt. 5:43-48.) Rather, the sense and meaning of Jesus' present instruction is that true disciples have a duty toward God which takes precedence over any family or personal obligation. It is in thought content similar to the message previously given the Twelve: "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matt. 10:37.) (DNTC 1:503.)

14:27 The Joseph Smith Translation adds, "Wherefore, settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you."

14:28-33 That these verses pertain to converts to the Church is made clear in the addition to verse 30 in the Joseph Smith Translation: "And this he said, signifying there should not any man follow him, unless he was able to continue; saying . . ." The last word also ties the two consecutive parables together.

These two parables teach that converts should count the cost before joining the Church; that they should come into the kingdom only if they are prepared to make the sacrifices required; that they should go the whole way in the gospel cause, or stay out entirely; that they should "not . . . follow him, unless" they are "able to continue" in his word, to "do the things" which he teaches and commands.

Lukewarm saints are damned; unless they repent and become zealous the Lord promised to spue them out of his mouth. (Rev. 3:14-19.) Only the valiant gain celestial salvation; those saints "who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus" can ascend no higher than the terrestrial world. (D. C. 76:79.)

Those who are not able and determined to keep the commandments are better off outside the Church, "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D. C. 82:3.) (DNTC 1:504.)

14:28 The Joseph Smith Translation ends this verse, "whether he have money to finish his work?" (Italics added.)

14:29 "Haply" is changed to "unhappily" in the Joseph Smith Translation. The Greek word thus translated has the element of uncertainty, and could have been translated "perhaps."

14:32 "He sendeth an ambassage" could have been translated "he will send a delegation."

14:34-35 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 5:13-16. Read also Luke 8:16; 11:33; 3 Nephi 12:13-16; DC 101:39-40.

Then certain of them came to him, saying, Good Master, we have Moses and the prophets, and whosoever shall live by them, shall he not have life?

And Jesus answered, saying, Ye know not Moses, neither the prophets; for if ye had known them, ye would have believed on me; for to this intent they were written. For I am sent that ye might have life. Therefore I will liken it unto salt which is good;

But if the salt has lost its savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned?

It is neither fit for the land, not yet for the dung hill; men cast it out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear. These things he said, signifying that which was written, verily must all be fulfilled. (JST; italics added.)

For nearly 1500 years righteous Israelites had sought salvation through conformity to the laws and ordinances revealed by Moses and the prophets. Now those among whom Jesus ministered erroneously assumed that the preaching of the ancients and the powers of past prophets were sufficient to give them a hope of eternal life. Hence they asked what was to them an obvious question: "Since we have the truths of salvation as revealed by Moses and the prophets, what need have we to hearken to you and your teachings about spiritual things?"

In reply, Jesus said in effect:

(1) "Ye do err, for ye neither know nor understand the teachings of Moses or the prophets. If ye understood their teachings, ye would believe in me, for all their teachings were given to prepare men for my coming and the salvation which I would bring."

(2) "Further, even assuming that ye believe Moses and the prophets, yet ye must turn to me, for 'salvation doth not come by the law alone' (Mosiah 13:28), for it is only in and through my atoning sacrifice that life and salvation come."

(3) "And now that I have come, the law of Moses has lost such saving power as it had; it has become as salt that has lost its savor and it cannot be seasoned again; yea, the law is dead in me, and from henceforth it is not fit for anything except to be cast out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear." (DNTC 1:506.)
