15:1-7 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 18:11-14.

Sheep go where grass is. It seems apparent that the sheep in the parable was not lost through willful disobedience or careless neglect; it simply strayed away in search of greener pastures and soon was lost.

I ask you tonight, how did that sheep get lost? He was not rebellious. If you follow the comparison, the lamb was seeking its livelihood in a perfectly legitimate manner, but either stupidly, perhaps unconsciously, it followed the enticement of the field, the prospect of better grass until it got out beyond the fold and was lost.

So we have those in the Church, young men and young women, who wander away from the fold in perfectly legitimate ways. They are seeking success, success in business, success in their professions, and before long they become disinterested in Church and finally disconnected from the fold; they have lost track of what true success is, perhaps stupidly, perhaps unconsciously, in some cases, perhaps willingly. They are blind to what constitutes true success. (David O. McKay, CR, Apr. 1945, p. 120.)

15:1 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "all" with "many."

15:5 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the shepherd did not leave the ninety and nine sheep in the wilderness; rather he left the ninety and nine to "go into the wilderness after that which is lost." (Italics added.)

15:8-10 In this case the thing lost was not in itself responsible. The one who had been trusted with that coin had, through carelessness or neglect, mislaid it or dropped it. There is a difference, and this is the one-third, which I think applies to us tonight. Our charge is not only coins, but living souls of children, youth, and adults. They are our charges. . . . Someone may be wandering because of the careless remark of a girl of her age in Mutual (and I have in mind a case), and the president of the Mutual lets her go, fails to follow her next Tuesday night and invite her to come. Another may be lost because of the inactivity of the Sunday School teacher, or the indifference of the Sunday School teacher who is satisfied with the fifteen people there that morning, instead of thinking of the fifteen who are wandering because of neglect. (David O. McKay, CR, Apr. 1945, pp. 121-22.)

15:11-32 The third parable is the prodigal son, the "younger son," we are told, so he was immature in his judgment. He was irking under the restraint, and he rather resented the father's careful guiding eye. He evidently longed for so-called freedom, wanted, so to speak, to try his wings. So he said, "Father, give me my portion, and I will go." The father gave him his portion, and out the lad went.

Here is a case of volition, here is choice, deliberate choice. Here is, in a way, rebellion against authority. And what did he do? He spend his means in riotous living, he wasted his portion with harlots. That is the way they are lost.

Youth who start out to indulge their appetites and passions are on the downward road to apostasy as sure as the sun rises in the east. I do not confine it to youth; any man or woman who starts out on that road of intemperance, of dissolute living will separate himself or herself from the fold as inevitably as darkness follows the day.

"My spirit shall not always strive with man" (Gen. 6:3), says the Lord. "My spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle." He who tries to live a double life, who does live a double life in violation of his covenants, to quote one author, "is either a knave or a fool." Often he is both, because he himself is using his free agency to gratify his passions, to waste his substance in riotous living, to violate the covenants that he has made in the house of God.

In such cases there is little we can do but warn and plead until the recreant, as the prodigal son, at last "comes to himself." (David O. McKay, CR, Apr. 1945, pp. 122-23.)

Pharisees and scribes, to whom this masterpiece of illustrative incident was delivered, must have taken to themselves its personal application. They were typified by the elder son, laboriously attentive to routine, methodically plodding by rule and rote in the multifarious labors of the field, without interest except that of self, and all unwilling to welcome a repentant publican or a returned sinner. From all such they were estranged; such a one might be to the indulgent and forgiving Father, "this thy son," but never to them, a brother. They cared not who or how many were lost, so long as they were undisturbed in heirship and possession by the return of penitent prodigals. But the parable was not for them alone; it is a living perennial yielding the fruit of wholesome doctrine and soul-sustaining nourishment for all time. Not a word appears in condonation or excuse for the prodigal's sin; upon that the Father could not look with the least degree of allowance; but over that sinner's repentance and contrition of soul, God and the household of heaven rejoiced. (JTC, pp. 460-61.)

15:13 "Wasted his substance with riotous living" could have been translated "squandered his property by living a debauched life." The basic meaning is that he was a spendthrift and wasted his inheritance.

15:16 Other translations of this verse are:

He wished he could fill himself with the bean pods the pigs ate, but no one gave him anything to eat. (TEV.)

He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything. (NIV.)

(See BD, "Husks.")

15:17 "And when he came to himself" could have also been translated "When he finally came to his senses."

15:21 The Greek text indicates that the following sentence should be added at the end of this verse: "Make me as one of your hired men."
