16:1-13 The Parable of the Unjust Steward is contained only in Luke, but some of the principles in the parable are found in Matthew 6:19-34; Luke 11:33-36; 12:22-32.

It was not the steward's dishonesty that was extolled; his prudence and foresight were commended, however; for while he misapplied his master's substance, he gave relief to the debtors; and in so doing he did not exceed his legal powers, for he was still steward though he was morally guilty of malfeasance. The lesson may be summed up in this wise: Make such use of your wealth as shall insure your friends hereafter. Be diligent; for the day in which you can use your earthly riches will soon pass. Take a lesson from even the dishonest and the evil; if they are so prudent as to provide for the only future they think of, how much more should you, who believe in an eternal future, provide therefor! If you have not learned wisdom and prudence in the use of "unrighteous mammon," how can you be trusted with the more enduring riches? If you have not learned how to use properly the wealth of another, which has been committed to you as steward, how can you expect to be successful in the handling of great wealth should such be given you as your own? Emulate the unjust steward and the lovers of mammon, not in their dishonesty, stupidity, and miserly hoarding of the wealth that is at best but transitory, but in their zeal, forethought, and provision for the future. Moreover, let not wealth become your master; keep it to its place as a servant, for, "No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (JTC, p. 464.)

16:6-7 "Bill" could have been translated "written agreement."

16:9-13 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 6:19-34. Read also Luke 11:33-36; 12:22-32. See 3 Nephi 13:19-34.

16:9 (Read text and commentaries for Matt. 6:24-25.) "Mammon" is an Aramaic word meaning "riches." (See section 1, "Mammon.")

In the Revised Version this verse reads: "And I say unto you, Make to yourself friends by means of the mammon of unrighteousness, that, when it shall fail, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles." The sense and meaning is: "Ye saints of God, be as wise and prudent in spiritual things as the unjust steward was in worldly things. Use the things of this world—which are God's and with reference to which you are stewards—to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and heal the sick, always remembering that when ye do any of these things unto the least of one of these my brethren, ye do it unto me. By such a course, when your money is gone and your life is past, your friends in heaven will welcome you into eternal mansions of bliss." (DNTC 1:514-15.)

16:14-18 And they said unto him, We have the law, and the prophets; but as for this man we will not receive him to be our ruler; for he maketh himself to be a judge over us.

Then said Jesus unto them, The law and the prophets testify of me; yea, and all the prophets who have written, even until John, have foretold of these days.

Since that time, the kingdom of God is preached, and every man who seeketh truth presseth into it.

And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than for one tittle of the law to fail.

And why teach ye the law, and deny that which is written; and condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfill the law, that you might all be redeemed?

O fools! for you have said in your hearts, There is no God. And you pervert the right way; and the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence of you; and you persecute the meek; and in your violence you seek to destroy the kingdom; and ye take the children of the kingdom by force. Woe unto you, ye adulterers!

And they reviled him again, being angry for the saying, that they were adulterers.

But he continued, saying, Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her who is put away from her husband, committeth adultery. (JST; italics added.)

16:14 This verse could have been more literally translated "Now the Pharisees, who were money lovers, were listening to all these things, and they began to sneer at him." The Revised Version renders this verse: "And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things; and they scoffed at him."

16:15 Our Lord's reply to their words of derision was a further condemnation. They knew all the tricks of the business world, and could outdo the righteous steward in crafty manipulation; and yet so successfully could they justify themselves before man as to be outwardly honest and straightforward; furthermore, they made ostentatious display of a certain type of simplicity, plainness, and self-denial, in which external observances they asserted superiority over the luxury loving Sadducees; they had grown arrogantly proud of their humility, but God knew their hearts, and the traits and practices they most esteemed were an abomination in his sight. (JTC, p. 465.)

16:16 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 11:1-19. Read also Luke 7:18-35.

16:17 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 5:17-20. See 3 Nephi 12:17-20, 46-47.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained the meaning of verses 16 and 17 as enlarged upon in the Joseph Smith Translation.

All of the divine teachings, revelations, visions, prophecies, miracles, and wonders of the past were considered by the Jews to have come through and because of the law and the prophets. Beginning with Adam, their father, the first man, the Lord God had sent prophets, at frequent and recurring intervals, to warn, teach, and guide his people. The whole body of their prophecies and inspired writings were known as the prophets. From the day of Moses, Israel had been under the law—the set of divine requirements and regulations which governed the chosen people in both temporal and spiritual matters.

With all this—the whole body of revealed knowledge about God and salvation and all things incident thereto—why, the Pharisees reasoned, was there a need for this Jesus and his teachings; what right did he have to rule and judge Israel.

The answer—"The law and the prophets testify of me. Yea, the whole purpose of the law was to teach Israel that I would come to redeem my people; all its requirements and performances were types and shadows of things to come; it was a schoolmaster to prepare Israel to receive me and my gospel. And as to the prophets, all 'who have prophesied ever since the world began' have testified of me, of my coming in the flesh, and of the redemption I would make for my people. (Mosiah 13:27-35.) Further: I am he who gave the law and in me it shall be fulfilled; not one tittle shall fail, but it shall all be fullfilled in me. (3 Ne. 12:17-19; 15:2-10.) Why do ye pretend to teach the law when ye condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfil it and to redeem you?" (DNTC 1:517-18.)

16:18 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 5:27-32. See 3 Nephi 12:31-32.

16:19-31 Verily I say unto you, I will liken you unto the rich man.

For there was a certain rich man, who was clothed in purple, and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day. (JST; italics added.)

Wealth can save or damn men. In the Parable of the Unjust Steward, Jesus taught that unless men use their money wisely and in accordance with true principles, they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. He now continues the same theme in the Parable of Lazarus and the Rich Man and, also, adds a flood of light relative to the state of the souls of men between death and the resurrection.

Riches as such will not send a man to hell, nor will poverty, without accompanying righteousness, assure him of the rest and peace of paradise. Jesus here describes a man of wealth and influence who was callous and indifferent to the known suffering of one of his fellow beings. Implicit in the account is the fact that Lazarus was poor in spirit, patient in suffering, had faith in God, and lived righteously. The rich man reveled in luxury, worldliness, selfishness, and unbelief; Lazarus found comfort in a life that would make him a companion of faithful Abraham.

The same doctrine, relative to riches and poverty, which the money-loving Pharisees were taught in a parable was given by the Lord to the saints in modern times in plain words. [DC 56:16-20.] (DNTC 1:519.)

16:22 "Abraham's bosom" is the temporary abode of the righteous between death and resurrection. Alma refers to this place as "paradise" and describes some of the conditions there. (See Alma 40:11-14.)

16:23 "Hell," as used in this verse, refers to the temporary abode of wicked disembodied spirits awaiting the resurrection. Several other terms have been applied to this place, including spirit prison and outer darkness.

16:26 This "great gulf" between paradise and the spirit prison existed until the time of the resurrection of Jesus:

There was no intermingling by the spirits in paradise and hell until after Christ bridged the "great gulf" between these two spirit abodes. (Alma 40:11-14.) This he did while his body lay in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea and his own disembodied spirit continued to minister to men in their spirit prison. (1 Pet. 3:18-21; 4:6; Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., pp. 472-476.) [DC 138.] "Until that day" the prisoners remained bound and the gospel was not preached to them. (Moses 7:37-39.) The hope of salvation for the dead was yet future.

But now, since our Lord has proclaimed "liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isa. 61:1), the gospel is preached in all parts of the spirit world, repentance is granted to those who seek it, vicarious ordinances are administered in earthly temples, and there is a hope of salvation for the spirits of those men who would have received the gospel with all their hearts in this life had the opportunity come to them. (Teachings, p. 107.) At this time, as Joseph Smith explained it, "Hades, sheol, paradise, spirits in prison, are all one: it is a world of spirits." (Teachings, p. 310.) (DNTC 1:521-22.)

16:31 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause reads, "though one should rise from the dead." (Italics added.)

Two great and eternal truths are here taught: (1) Deity chooses and sends his own agents and witnesses to mortal men to cry repentance and preach the gospel of salvation; unless men heed their message they are damned; and (2) Those who refuse to hear the living oracles sent to them in their day, and to believe the recorded teachings of the ancient prophets, would not be converted by a display of miracles that even included the raising of the dead.

Lazarus rose from the dead at Jesus' command and mingled again among men as a mortal being. Instead of being converted, many of the rebellious Jews sought to put him to death to prevent receptive persons from believing in Jesus and his divine power. (John 11:1-52; 12:10-11.) Our Lord himself rose from the dead in glorious immortality, appeared to many, and sent witnesses into all the world to testify of his resurrection and yet men did not believe. (DNTC 1:522.)
