17:1-2 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 18:6-10. Read also Mark 9:42-50.

17:1 "Impossible" could have been translated "unavoidable."

17:3-4 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 18:15-22.

17:5-6 This brief example of faith is included only in the acount by Luke. The Lectures on Faith, by the Prophet Joseph Smith, contain a great deal of information on this subject. These lectures teach that faith can be increased through several means:

The Prophet Joseph Smith then indicates some of the results of an "increase in faith":

When faith comes it brings its train of attendants with it—apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. All these appear when faith appears on the earth, and disappear when it disappears from the earth; for these are the effects of faith, and always have, and always will, attend it. For where faith is, there will the knowledge of God be also, with all things which pertain thereto—revelations, visions, and dreams, as well as every necessary thing, in order that the possessors of faith may be perfected, and obtain salvation. (Lectures on Faith, pp. 70-71.)

(See section 1, "Faith.")

17:6 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "sycamine" and "root" with "sycamore" and "roots."

17:7-10 This parable, included only by Luke, should be read in context of Jesus' reply to the request, "Lord, increase our faith." (JST.)

King Benjamin indicated that the Lord has a claim upon the services of his people, and that if we should serve him all the days of our lives with our souls "yet [we] would be unprofitable servants." (Mosiah 2:21-24.)

17:8 "And gird thyself" has also been translated "then put on your apron" and "make yourself tidy."

17:9 "Trow" means "suppose" or "think." Most Greek manuscripts do not include words that could be translated "I trow not," thus no equivalent expressions are included in most modern translations.

17:10 "We have done that which was our duty to do" could have been more literally translated "What we have done is what we ought to have done." The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "We have done that which was no more than our duty to do."

17:11-19 This account is contained primarily in Luke.

We are told that the grateful one was a Samaritan, from which we infer that some or all of the others were Jews. Pained over the lack of gratitude on the part of the nine, Jesus exclaimed: "Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? There are not found that return to give glory to God, save this stranger." And to the cleansed Samaritan, still worshiping at His feet, the Lord said: "Arise, go thy way thy faith hath made thee whole." Doubtless the nine who came not back were obedient to the strict letter of the Lord's command; for He had told them to go to the priests; but their lack of gratitude and their failure to acknowledge the power of God in their restoration stand in unfavorable contrast with the spirit of the one; and he was a Samaritan. The occurrence must have impressed the apostles as another evidence of acceptability and possible excellence on the part of aliens, to the disparagement of Jewish claims of superiority irrespective of merit. (JTC, p. 471.)

(See section 1, "Leper.")

17:12-13 That the lepers were "afar off" and had to "lift up their voices" (shout) indicates that they were living apart from the other people, as was prescribed by their laws and customs. (See Lev. 13:45-46.)

17:14-16 Their laws required them to show themselves to the priests in such instances. (See Lev. 13:49; 14:2-3.) Perhaps this was also a test of their faith, to see if they would obey the law.

17:20-21 These two important verses have been variously interpreted by New Testament scholars and students. One difficulty is the translation "within" for a Greek term that could have been better translated "among," inasmuch as this "you" is plural in the Greek. Thus, the last clause of verse 20 could have been translated "the kingdom of God is among you" or "the kingdom of God is in your midst." The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "the kingdom of God has already come unto you."

One of the heresies which prevails in a large part of modern Christendom is the concept that Jesus did not organize a Church or set up a formal kingdom through which salvation might be offered to men. This poorly translated verse is one of those used to support the erroneous concept that the kingdom of God is wholly spiritual; that it is made up of those who confess Jesus with their lips, regardless of what church affiliation they may have; that the kingdom of God is within every person in the sense that all have the potential of attaining the highest spiritual goals; and that baptism, the laying on of hands, celestial marriage, and other ordinances and laws are not essential to the attainment of salvation.

It is true that men have the inherent capacity to gain salvation in the celestial world; in a sense this power is within them; and so it might be said that the kingdom of God is within a person, if it is understood that such expression means that a person can gain that eternal world by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. But it is also true that Jesus did organize his Church and did give the keys of such kingdom to legal administrators on earth. (Matt. 16:13-19.)

Even the marginal reading in the King James Version changes the language here involved to read, 'The kingdom of God is in the midst of you,' meaning 'The Church is now organized in the midst of your society.' The Prophet's rendering of Jesus' thought, as such is recorded in the Inspired Versior, is of course the best of all. Its essential meaning is: "The Church and kingdom has already been organized; it is here; it has come unto you: now enter the kingdom, obey its laws and be saved." (DNTC 1:540.)

Prophecies foretelling the events incident to the first and second comings of the Messiah were confused in the minds of the Jews. They falsely assumed that at his first coming he would come with an outward display of power which would overthrow and destroy all earthly kingdoms. Accordingly, basing their inquiry on a false premise, and with some apparent sarcasm, they demand an answer to this mocking question: "If thou art the promised Messiah, as you have repeatedly claimed to be, when will thy power be manifest, when will the Roman yoke be broken, when will the kingdom of God actually come?"

Jesus' reply is perfect. He simply goes back to basic principles, corrects their false understanding of the doctrine involved, and announces what the fact is. "You do err. This is my first appearance among men, and I came to work out the atoning sacrifice by which redemption comes. This time the kingdom of God cometh not with observation; there will be no great display of power and destruction. Men will not be able to say, Lo here! or, lo there! for all this is reserved for the Second Coming of the Son of Man. But as for this day and generation, the kingdom of God is my Church and it has already been organized and set up in your midst; it has already come unto you." (DNTC 1:539-40.)

17:22-25 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 24:23-27. Read also Mark 13:21-23.

17:22-24 And he said unto his disciples, The days will come, when they will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and they shall not see it.

And if they shall say to you, See here! or, See there! Go not after them, nor follow them.

For as the light of the morning, that shineth out of the one part under heaven, and lighteneth to the other part under heaven; so shall also the Son of Man be in his day. (JST; italics added.)

17:25 The statement by Jesus that "first" he must "suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation" clearly indicates that the other events in his statement pertain to his second coming.

The Joseph Smith Translation use of "they" rather than the "ye" would also indicate this.

17:26-37 Much of the material in these verses is also contained in Matthew 24 and Mark 13, but sometimes in different sequences. (Read text and commentaries for Matt. 24:15-41. Also read Mark 13:14-23; Luke 21:20-24.)

17:26-30 (Read Matt. 24:36-39; Mark 13:22.) By comparing the events of his second coming to those of the "days of Noah" (v. 26) and the "days of Lot" (v. 28), Jesus is teaching about the destruction of the wicked and also of the dreadful nature of that time for the wicked; it will be for them essentially the same as it was for the wicked in Sodom when "it rained fire and brimstone from heaven" (v. 29).

17:31-33 (Read Matt. 24:15-22; Mark 13:14-20; Luke 21:20-24.) In the Joseph Smith Translation, verse 31 reads, "the disciple who shall be on the housetop . . ." (Italics added.)

17:34-37 (Read Matt. 24:40-41.) In verses 34-36, the Joseph Smith Translation does not indicate the sex of any of the "two" who shall be "in one bed," "grinding together," or "in the field." Also, most Greek texts do not indicate whether these persons are male, female, or both. Thus several other translations simply indicate "two people."

17:36-37 And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord, shall they be taken.

And he said unto them, Wheresoever the body is gathered; or, in other words, whithersoever the saints are gathered, thither will the eagles be gathered together; or, thither will the remainder be gathered together.

This he spake, signifying the gathering of his saints; and of angels descending and gathering the remainder unto them; the one from the bed, the other from the grinding, and the other from the field, whithersoever he listeth.

For verily there shall be new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

And there shall be no unclean thing; for the earth becoming old, even as a garment, having waxed in corruption, wherefore it vanisheth away, and the footstool remaineth sanctified, cleansed from all sin. (JST; italics added.)

17:37 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 24:28.
