19:1 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 20:29-34; Mark 10:46-52; Luke 18:35-43.

19:2-10 The story of Zacchaeus is told only by Luke. Zacchaeus is obviously a Jew as his name is a variant of Zacharias with a Greek designation at the end. That he was particularly hated by other Jews is evident from his position as "chief among the publicans, and he was rich." The publicans were all employed by the hated Romans to collect despised taxes. The desire of Jesus to bring such persons to repentance and apply the mercy of forgiveness must have been a vivid lesson for all who saw and heard. (See BD, "Zacchaeus.")

19:3 "Press" could have been translated "crowd."

19:5 Jesus invites himself to meet with and teach Zacchaeus; he does not wait for an invitation. Similar procedures are followed by his representatives (missionaries) today.

19:7 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that it was "the disciples" who murmured.

19:8 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "false accusation" with "unjust means." Restitution is an integral part of repentance, and "fourfold" restitution for means unjustly taken would not have been unusual: "If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep." (Ex. 22:1.)

19:11-28 Jesus was enroute to Jerusalem for the last time. In about ten days he would die upon the cross, and to the Jews generally it would appear that he had failed to set up the promised Messianic kingdom. To correct the false concept that "the kingdom of God"—meaning the political kingdom, the kingdom which should rule all nations with King Messiah at its head, the millennial kingdom—"should immediately appear," Jesus gave the Parable of the Pounds. (DNTC 1:571.)

Christ is the nobleman; the far off country is heaven; the kingdom there to be given him is "all power . . . in heaven and in earth" (Matt. 28:18); and his promised return is the glorious Second Coming, when the literal and visible kingdom shall be set up on earth. The ten servants are the members of the Church to whom he has given physical, mental, and spiritual capacities (pounds) to be used in his service. Those designated as "citizens" are the other people in the world, those who are subject to him because he is the God of the whole earth, but who have not accepted his gospel and come into his fold as servants. The servants are commanded to labor in the vineyard on their Lord's errand until he returns. (DNTC 1:572.)

19:11 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the final clause reads, "because the Jews taught that the kingdom of God should immediately appear." (Italics added.)

19:13 "Occupy" means "Do business." "Occupy till I come" has also been translated "Trade with these till I come," "See what you can earn with this while I am gone," and "Put this money to work . . . until I come back."

19:14 "A message after him" could have been translated "a body of ambassadors after him." The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "a messenger after him." (Italics added.)

In his commentary on this verse, Farrar points out that it was not unusual in those days for a person to go somewhere else to receive a kingdom. Indeed, some of the current rulers in the land had gone to Rome in order to obtain their authority over the people:

"A nobleman going into a far country to receive a kingdom" would be utterly unintelligible, had we not fortunately known that this was done both by Archelaus and by Antipas. And in the case of Archelaus the Jews had actually sent to Augustus a deputation of fifty, to recount his cruelties and oppose his claims, which, though it failed at the time, was subsequently successful. Philipus defended the property of Archelaus, during his absence, from the encroachments of the Proconsul Sabinus. The magnificent palace which Archelaus had built at Jericho would naturally recall these circumstances to the mind of Jesus, and the parable is another striking example of the manner in which he utilized the most ordinary circumstances around him, and made them the bases of His highest teachings. It is also another unsuspected indication of the authenticity and truthfulness of the Gospels. (Farrar, p. 493, note, cited in JTC, p. 522.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented on the statement "We will not have this man to reign over us":

How literally this prophetic part of the parable was fulfilled! But a few days hence and the Jews would be proclaiming, "We have no king but Caesar," and "Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews." (John 19:15, 21.) Then after the Nobleman's ascension to heaven these same "citizens" would continue to exhibit violent hostility against his infant Church. (DNTC 1:572.)

19:17 The Joseph Smith Translation begins this verse, "And he said unto him, Well done, thou good servant . . ." (Italics added.)

19:23 "I might have required mine own with usury" could have been literally translated "I would have collected it with interest."

The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "required" with "received."

19:26 The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "For I say unto you, That unto every one who occupieth, shall be given; and from him who occupieth not, even that he hath received shall be taken away from him." (JST; italics added.)

19:29-40 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 21:1-11. Read also Mark 11:1-11; John 12:12-19.

19:36 This verse could have been more literally translated "As he moved along they kept spreading their outer garments on the road."

Only kings and conquerors received such an extraordinary token of respect as this. (2 Kings 9:13.) In every part of this triumphal entry to Jerusalem, Jesus seems not only to permit but to court the adulation and homage normally reserved for kings and great rulers. (DNTC 1:578.)

19:38 "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord" could have been more literally translated "Blessed is the One coming as the King in Jehovah's name."

19:39-40 Those acclaiming Jesus as Lord and God were disciples, believers, persons who had heard and understood the gospel message. In accepting and encouraging their reverential salutations, Jesus fulfilled the scripture and left a witness of his own divinity that would live in the hearts of true disciples ever after. (DNTC 1:579.)

19:41-44 Many of these details are recorded only by Luke.

19:41 It was the inhabitants of the city, not the beautiful buildings or the commanding view that the Savior saw through tear bedimmed eyes when he cried: "if thou hadst known . . . the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes." (Luke 19:42.) He saw the people divided into conflicting and contending sects, each professing more holiness and righteousness than the other and all closing their eyes to the truth. There were the conservative Hebraic Jews, holding rigidly to the Mosaic law; there were the more liberal minded, Hellenistic Jews whose views had been modified by pagan philosophy; there were a few Essenes with their asceticism and rejection of the Aaronic Priesthood; there were the Sadducees with their lifeless and formal observance of the Sabbath, and their denial of the resurrection; and, finally, the Pharisees with their "ostentatious almsgiving," "broadened phylacteries," "greedy avarice," "haughty assertion of preeminence," "ill-concealed hypocrisy" which was often hidden under a venerable assumption of superior holiness. . . .

Such were the people whom the Son of Man saw when he stood twenty centuries ago on the Mount of Olives and "beheld the city and wept over it." (David O. McKay, CR, Oct. 1944, p. 78.)

(See section 1, "Jerusalem.")

19:42 Other translations of this verse are "Saying, If you only knew today what is needed for peace! But now you cannot see it!" and "Saying, Would that even today you knew the things that make for peace! But now they are hid from your eyes."

19:43 In the course of the siege, a wall was constructed about the entire city, thus fulfilling the Lord's prediction (Luke 19:43), "thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee," in which, by the admittedly better translation, "bank," or "palisade" should appear instead of "trench." In September A.D. 70 the city fell into the hands of the Romans; and its destruction was afterward made so thorough that its site was plowed up. Jerusalem was "trodden down of the Gentiles," and ever since has been under Gentile dominion, and so shall continue to be "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Luke 21:24.) (JTC, p. 588.)

19:45-48 Read commentaries for Matthew 21:12-17. Read also Mark 11:15-19.
