24:1-11 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 28:1-10. Read also Mark 16:1-8; Luke 23:55-56.

24:1 The Joseph Smith Translation identifies they as "the women."

24:2-3 And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre, and two angels standing by it in shining garments.

And they entered into the sepulchre, and not finding the body of the Lord Jesus, they were much perplexed thereabout;

And were affrighted, and bowed down their faces to the earth. But behold the angels said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? (JST; italics added.)

24:5 "Why seek ye the living among the dead?" could have been more literally translated "Why are you looking for the living One among the dead ones?"

24:6 On the third day there was a great earthquake. The stone was rolled back from the door of the tomb. Some of the women, among the most devoted of his followers, came to the place with spices "and found not the body of the Lord Jesus." (Luke 24:3.)

Angels appeared and said simply, "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen."

There is nothing in history to equal that dramatic announcement: "He is not here, but is risen." (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, Apr. 1964, p. 119.)

24:11 Mary Magdalene and the other women told the wonderful story of their several experiences to the disciples, but the brethren could not credit their words, which "seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not." After all that Christ had taught concerning His rising from the dead on that third day, the apostles were unable to accept the actuality of the occurrence; to their minds the resurrection was some mysterious and remote event, not a present possibility. There was neither precedent nor analogy for the stories these women told—of a dead person returning to life, with a body of flesh and bones, such as could be seen and felt—except the instances of the young man of Nain, the daughter of Jairus, and the beloved Lazarus of Bethany, between whose cases of restoration to a renewal of mortal life and the reported resurrection of Jesus they recognized essential differences. The grief and the sense of irreparable loss which had characterized the yesterday Sabbath, were replaced by profound perplexity and contending doubts on this first day of the week. But while the apostles hesitated to believe that Christ had actually risen, the women, less skeptical, more trustful, knew, for they had both seen Him and heard His voice, and some of them had touched His feet. (JTC, pp. 682-83.)

24:12 A more detailed account of this experience is given in John 20:1-10.

The Joseph Smith Translation of this verse begins, "Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre and went in . . ." (Italics added.)

24:13-32 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 28:11-15. Read also Mark 16:12-13.

Why did the risen Lord take this means of appearing to Cleopas and his companion (perhaps Luke, since it is he who records the account)? Was it to quote and interpret the Messianic prophecies "beginning at Moses and all the prophets"? Such could have been done under more effective circumstances, and for that matter, Luke does not even record the explanations given. Why did Jesus keep his identity hidden? Why walk and talk, perhaps for hours, along the dusty lanes of Palestine?

Obviously it was to show what a resurrected being is like. He was teaching the gospel as only he could, teaching a living sermon, a sermon that was to be climaxed shortly in an upper room in the presence of his apostles. See Luke 24:36-44.

Jesus walked down a Judean lane, walked for hours and taught the truths of the gospel, exactly as he had during three and a half years of his mortal ministry. So much did he seem like any other wayfaring teacher, in demeanor, in dress, in speech, in physical appearance, in conversation, that they did not recognize him as the Jesus whom they assumed was dead. "Abide with us," they said, as they would have done to Peter or John. "Come in and eat and sleep; you must be tired and hungry." They thought he was a mortal man. Could anyone devise a more perfect way to teach what a resurrected being is like when his glory is retained within him? Men are men whether mortal or immortal, and there need be no spiritualizing away of the reality of the resurrection, not after this Emmaus road episode. (DNTC 1:850.)

24:13 The distance of "about threescore furlongs" is approximately seven miles. The exact site of Emmaus has not been determined in modern times. (See BD, "Emmaus.")

24:16 This verse could have been more literally translated "But their eyes were kept from recognizing him."

The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "But their eyes were holden, or covered, that they could not know him." (Italics added.)

24:18 See BD, "Cleopas."

24:26 This verse could have been more literally translated "Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?"

24:29 "But they constrained him" has also been translated "but they held him back," "But they urged him strongly," and "but they pressed him to stay."

24:31 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause in this verse reads, "and he was taken up out of their sight." (Italics added.)

There may have been something in the fervency of the blessing, or in the manner of breaking and distributing the bread, that revived memories of former days; or, possibly, they caught sight of the pierced hands; but, whatever the immediate cause, they looked upon their Guest, "and their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight." (JTC, p. 686.)

24:33-35 Only Luke tells of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus to Simon Peter alone, although the incident is referred to in 1 Corinthians 15:3-8.

This is the sole mention made by the Gospel writers of Christ's personal appearance to Simon Peter on that day. The interview between the Lord and His once recreant but now repentant apostle must have been affecting in the extreme Peter's remorseful penitence over his denial of Christ in the palace of the high priest was deep and pitiful; he may have doubted that ever again would the Master call him His servant; but hope must have been engendered through the message from the tomb brought by the women, in which the Lord sent greetings to the apostles, whom for the first time He designated as His brethren, and from this honorable and affectionate characterization Peter had not been excluded; moreover, the angel's commission to the women had given prominence to Peter by particular mention. To the repentant Peter came the Lord, doubtless with forgiveness and loving assurance. The apostle himself maintains a reverent silence respecting the visitation, but the fact thereof is attested by Paul as one of the definite proofs of the Lord's resurrection. (JTC, p. 687.)

But Jesus' appearance to Peter perhaps had additional significance. Earlier, during his mortal ministry, Jesus had announced that he would confer the "keys of the kingdom" upon Peter (Matthew 16:19). Peter, in conjunction with James and John, who would preside with him, received those keys on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matthew 17:1-8; Luke 9:28-36), and thereafter "acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day." (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152.) Those keys "belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (DC 81:2), and can be exercised in their fulness on the earth by only one man at a time; and that man in the period just after Jesus ascended into heaven was Peter. It may have been, then, that Jesus' special appearance to peter was associated in some way with the principle of keys. (LTJA, p. 200.)

24:34 The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "And they told what things they saw and heard in the way, and how he was known to them, in breaking bread." (Italics added.)

24:36-44 (Read also Mark 16:14; John 20:19-21.) Several important truths are affirmed in this incident, including that spirits have bodies that look like the bodies of physical men and women but are not bodies of flesh and bones, and that resurrected beings can eat the foods of this earth.

On the Emmaus road Jesus walked, talked, and appeared as a mortal man. Now he comes through the walls or roof of an enclosed room, thus showing another power and capacity of a resurrected body. Standing before his terrified and frightened disciples—and the group included the apostles, plus others (Luke 24:33)—he continued his "living sermon" on the resurrection by demonstrating further what a resurrected body was and how it operated.

The apostles and other disciples thought he was "a spirit," a misconception which, however, reveals what a spirit is. As Jesus stood before them he seemed in every respect to be a man. In other words a spirit is a man, an entity, a personage, not an ineffable nothingness pervading immensity. A spirit is what the Brother of Jared saw on the mountain when the yet unembodied Lord appeared and said: "This body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; . . . and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh." (Ether 3:16.)

Jesus then confirmed the disciples' belief that a spirit is a personage by showing how a resurrected body differs from a spirit body. He announced that his body was made of "flesh and bones" and invited all present to handle, feel, and learn of its corporeal nature. Then lest any feel later that their senses had been deceived, he asked for food and ate it before them, not to satisfy hunger, but to demonstrate that resurrected beings are tangible and can eat and digest food. See Luke 24:13-35.

When Paul adds to what is here revealed that the risen Lord is in "the express image of his" Father's "person" (Heb. 1:3), we have perfect Biblical confirmation of the revealed truth that "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also." (D. C. 130:22.) (DNTC 1:853.)

24:38 "Thoughts" could have been translated "doubts."

24:41 "Have ye here any meat?" could have been translated "Do you have something there to eat?"

24:45 This special spiritual endowment was a temporary gift. Scriptures are given and understood only by the power of the Holy Ghost. (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) The disciples would receive the ability to understand the scriptures in the full and continuing sense only after they gained the gift of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost.

A similar thing to this happened also in the case of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Following their baptism at the direction of John the Baptist, and before the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored so they could receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, the inspired account says: "We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of." (Jos. Smith 2:73-74.) But both the ancient and the modern disciples, in order to continue to enjoy the full guidance and endowment of the Spirit had to receive, in due course, the gift of the Holy Ghost. To a degree every sincere investigator begins to have his mind opened to the scriptures, as he seeks the truth even before baptism, but the great flood of enlightenment comes after the receipt of the companionship of the Holy Ghost. (DNTC 1:853-54.)

24:46 "Behoved" means "was proper for" or "was necessary for."

24:47 The admonition that "repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations" indicates that Jesus and his gospel require more than "belief" as claimed by some modern "born again" Christians.

24:49 This account is contained only in Luke.

It is common in Christendom to suppose that Jesus here commanded his apostles to tarry in Jerusalem until the promised gift of the Holy Ghost was received, which gift would constitute an endowment of power from on high. Perhaps the statement can be so used, for certainly the disciples were marvelously and powerfully endowed when the Holy Spirit came into their lives on the day of Pentecost. (Acts 2.)

But from latter-day revelation we learn that the Lord had something more in mind in issuing this instruction. In this dispensation, after the elders had received the gift of the Holy Ghost and as early as January, 1831, the Lord began to reveal unto them that he had an endowment in store for the faithful (D. C. 38:22; 43:16), "a blessing such as is not known among the children of men." (D. C. 39:15.) In June, 1833, he said: "I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem." (D. C. 95:8-9; 105:11-12, 18, 33.)

Thus the apostles—or any ministers or missionaries in any age—are not fully qualified to go forth, preach the gospel, and build up the kingdom, unless they have the gift of the Holy Ghost and also are endowed with power from on high, meaning have received certain knowledge, powers, and special blessings, normally given only in the Lord's Temple. (DNTC 1:859.)

24:50-53 Read text and commentary for Mark 16:19-20.

Worshipfully and with great joy the apostles returned to Jerusalem, there to await the coming of the Comforter. The Lord's ascension was accomplished; it was as truly a literal departure of a material Being as His resurrection had been an actual return of His spirit to His own corporeal body, theretofore dead. With the world abode and yet abides the glorious promise, that Jesus the Christ, the same Being who ascended from Olivet in His immortalized body of flesh and bones, shall return, descending from the heavens, in similarly material form and substance. (JTC, p. 697.)
