1:1-5 This is John's introduction to his book.

In the beginning was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was God.

In him was the gospel, and the gospel was the life, and the life was the light of men;

And the light shineth in the world, and the world perceiveth it not. (JST; italics added.)

1:3 See DC 93:6-9.

The passage is simple, precise and unambiguous. We may reasonably give to the phrase "In the beginning" the same meaning as attaches thereto in the first line of Genesis; and such signification must indicate a time antecedent to the earliest stages of human existence upon the earth. That the Word is Jesus Christ, who was with the Father in that beginning and who was Himself invested with the powers and rank of Godship, and that He came into the world and dwelt among men, are definitely affirmed. These statements are corroborated through a revelation given to Moses, in which he was permitted to see many of the creations of God, and to hear the voice of the Father with respect to the things that had been made: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth." [Moses 1:32-33.] (JTC, p. 10.)

1:4 "In him" could have been more literally translated "by means of him."

1:6-37 For additional information on the life and mission of John the Baptist, see text and commentaries for Matthew 3:1-6, Mark 1:1-8, Luke 3:1-6; 3:7-18. See also 1 Nephi 10:7-10; DC 35:4; 84:27-28; 93:10-17.

1:7-10 The same came into the world for a witness, to bear witness of the light, to bear record of the gospel through the Son, unto all, that through him men might believe.

He was not that light, but came to bear witness of that light,

Which was the true light, which lighteth every man who cometh into the world;

Even the Son of God. He who was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. (JST; italics added.)

1:7 That John was "to bear record of the gospel through the Son, unto all" indicates that John was not only to bear witness that Jesus was the Son of God, but also was to testify that the gospel would be made efficacious through the life and teachings of the Son.

1:9 For further scriptural evidence that Jesus is "the true light, which lighteth every man who cometh into the world," see Moroni 7:12-19 and DC 84:44-47.

1:11 Why was it at that time or why is it now that some will not receive him? No doubt they had expected something entirely different. They were looking for a leader in political and social reform and they had little interest in spiritual things. "The world was made by him, and the world knew him not." There are those today who pass him by without recognizing him. (Howard W. Hunter, CR, Oct. 1968, p. 141.)

1:13 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "He was born . . ." (Italics added.)

1:14 The Joseph Smith Translation deletes the parentheses and capitalizes the key words in the title "the Only Begotten of the Father." It begins this verse, "And the same word was made flesh . . ." (Italics added.)

1:15 "For he was before me" could have been translated "because he existed before me."

From latter-day revelation we learn that the material in the forepart of the gospel of John (the Apostle, Revelator, and Beloved Disciple) was written originally by John the Baptist. By revelation the Lord restored to Joseph Smith part of what John the Baptist had written and promised to reveal the balance when men became sufficiently faithful to warrant receiving it. (D. C. 93:6-18.) Verse 15 of this passage is the key to the identity of the particular John spoken of. This verse should be compared with Matt. 3:16-17 to learn the identity of the writer.

Even without revelation, however, it should be evident that John the Baptist had something to do with the recording of events in the forepart of John's gospel, for some of the occurrences include his conversations with the Jews and a record of what he saw when our Lord was baptized—all of which matters would have been unknown to John the Apostle whose ministry began somewhat later than that of the Baptist's. There is little doubt but that the Beloved Disciple had before him the Baptist's account when he wrote his gospel. The latter John either copied or paraphrased what the earlier prophet of the same name had written. The only other possibility is that the Lord revealed to the gospel author the words that had been recorded by the earlier messenger who prepared the way before him. (DNTC 1:70-71.)

1:16-17 See DC 93:12-14, 16-17.

For in the beginning was the Word, even the Son, who is made flesh, and sent unto us by the will of the Father. And as many as believe on his name shall receive of his fulness. And of his fulness have all we received, even immortality and eternal life, through his grace.

For the law was given through Moses, but life and truth came through Jesus Christ.

For the law was after a carnal commandment, to the administration of death; but the gospel was after the power of an endless life, through Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father. (JST; italics added.)

To gain the fulness of the Father means to attain exaltation and godhood. This fulness consists of (1) all power, both in heaven and on earth, and (2) eternal increase or "a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." (D. C. 132:19-24; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 275-276.) As is the case with all men, our Lord worked out his own salvation and exaltation. Having been made flesh, he continued in obedience to the whole law, until having overcome all things, he rose in the triumph of a glorious resurrection to receive, inherit, and possess all things, that is, to the "fulness of the glory of the Father." Having set the example himself, our Lord now proclaims: "If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness and be glorified in me as I am in the Father." (D. C. 93:20.)

Because the law of carnal commandments, as it prevailed from Moses to Christ, was administered by the Aaronic Priesthood, it was "the administration of death." That is, no one could gain the fulness of the Father by the Mosaic law alone. There is no celestial marriage without the Melchizedek Priesthood, and without celestial marriage and the consequent continuation of the family unit in eternity, men inherit what the Lord calls "the deaths." (D. C. 132:25.) They do not have spirit children in the resurrection.

On the other hand, in the fulness of the gospel, as restored in the meridian of time by the Son, is found "the power of an endless life," meaning that through the Melchizedek Priesthood (which always accompanies the fulness of the gospel) men may gain endless life, or eternal life, or exaltation. In other words they may gain the fulness of the Father, which includes "eternal lives" as contrasted with "the deaths." To inherit "eternal lives" means to have eternal increase or spirit progeny forever. (D. C. 132:15-32.) (DNTC 1:76.)

1:18 And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved. (JST; italics added.)

As presently found in the King James Version this passage is one of the classical examples of scriptural mistranslation. The whole body of revealed truth bears record that Deity has been seen by man. What John actually taught was that the Father had never appeared to any man except for the purpose of introducing and bearing record of the Son. The joint appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith shows the pattern that has always been followed. (Jos. Smith 2:14-20.)

All things center in Christ. He is the God of Israel, the God of the Old Testament, the Advocate, Mediator, and Intercessor. Since the fall of Adam, all of the dealings of Deity with man have been through the Son. On occasions, however, in accordance with the principle of divine investiture of authority, the Son has and does speak in the first person as though he were the Father, because the Father has put his name on the Son. The visions of Moses as revealed anew to the Prophet in this day fall in this category. (Moses 1; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 24-25, 122, 355, 428-429.) (DNTC 1:77.)

1:19-28 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 3:7-12; Mark 1:4-5, 8; Luke 3:7-18.

1:20-21 And he confessed, and denied not that he was Elias; but confessed, saying; I am not the Christ.

And they asked him, saying; How art thou then Elias? And he said, I am not that Elias who was to restore all things. And they asked him saying, Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. (JST; italics added.)

In the time of Jesus and John, the whole Jewish nation was stirred up with anxious expectation, awaiting the momentary appearance of the Messiah and his Elias. With great hosts from Jerusalem and all Judea flocking to John and accepting him as a prophet, and with the banks of the Jordan crowded with his baptized converts, it was natural for the leading Jews—members of the great Sanhedrin, whose obligation it was to test prophetic claims—to send priests and Levites to make detailed investigation. To their pointed questions, John gave bold and authoritative answers:

Art thou Elias? "Yes, I am Messiah's forerunner, his Elias; I have come in the spirit and power of Elias to prepare the way before him. I hold the Priesthood of Elias, the Aaronic Priesthood; I baptize with water only. He shall come in the power and authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood and baptize both with water and the Spirit. But, do not be confused, I am not that Elias who was to restore all things, for that Elias is the Messiah himself; he shall restore all things, even the fulness of the gospel which was had by Adam and Abraham and many of the prophets of old. He shall replace the lesser law of Moses with the high law of Christ." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 203-206.)

Art thou that prophet like unto Moses whose coming is promised? See John 7:41. (Deut. 18:15-22.) "No; I am not that prophet, for that prophet is the promised Messiah himself. He it is who, coming after me, is preferred before me. Instead, I am the prophet whose coming Isaiah foretold (Isa. 40); I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, who is the prophet of whom Moses spoke."

Art thou the Christ? "No; I am not the Christ; nor am I worthy to fill his place, or even to unloose the very latchet of his shoes. But I bear record of him; and he now standeth among you, and he is the Son of God." (DNTC 1:129-30.)

(See Section 1, "Elias: John is an.")

1:25 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this question is worded, "Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias who was to restore all things, neither that prophet?" (Italics added.)

1:27 He it is of whom I bear record. He is the prophet, even Elias, who, coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose, or whose place I am not able to fill; for he shall baptize, not only with water, but with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. (JST; italics added.)

"Shoe's latchet" could have been more precisely translated "lace of the sandal."

1:28 The Joseph Smith Translation places this verse at the end of the account of the baptism of Jesus (that is, after verse 34) indicating that "Bethabara beyond Jordan" is where John was baptizing. (See BD, "Bethabara.")

1:29 Although this verse contains the first New Testament reference to Jesus as the "Lamb of God," the terms "Lamb" or "Lamb of God" are used many times in the Book of Mormon before the birth of Jesus Christ, including at least fifty-seven times between 1 Nephi 10:10 and 14:27.

How fitting for John—whose mission was to close the door on the past glory and worship of Israel, and to open it for the coming gospel and worship which was to be made available for all men of all races—to testify that Jesus was the Lamb of God! For four thousand years righteous men had sacrificed the firstlings of their flocks, lambs and other animals without spot or blemish, in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Son of God. (Moses 5:5-8.) Now Deity's own Son, born of woman, grown to maturity and commencing his ministry, was soon to be slain as a Paschal Lamb to atone for the sins of the world. (DNTC 1:131.)

(See BD, "Lamb of God.")

1:30 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "And John bare record of him unto the people, saying, This is he . . ." (Italics added.)

1:31 The Joseph Smith Translation deletes "not," which would be consistent with the remainder of the testimony of John, inasmuch as he was testifying concerning that which he had already witnessed. (See commentary for John 1:33.)

1:32-34 For other materials pertaining to the baptism of Jesus by John, see text and commentaries for Matthew 3:13-17; Mark 1:9-11; Luke 3:21-22. See also 1 Nephi 10:7-10; 2 Nephi 31:4-21. (See section 1, "Dove: Sign of.")

1:32 And John bare record, saying, When he was baptized of me, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. (JST; italics added.)

1:33 "Not" is deleted in the Joseph Smith Translation. This is consistent with the remainder of the testimony of John, who was testifying here of things he had both seen and heard. (See commentary for John 1:31.)

John's reference to "he that sent me" indicates that prophets must be sent of God to be legal administrators in the affairs of the kingdom of God.

1:35-37 Only one of these two disciples of John is identified by name: Andrew, the brother of Simon (Peter). Many students of the scriptures believe the other disciple may well have been John the Beloved who wrote this account but out of modesty might not have mentioned his own name. This would be consistent with the recounting of later events when he does not use his own name. (See John 13:23; 21:20-24.)

1:38-42 And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jona, thou shalt be called Cephas, which is, by interpretation, a seer, or a stone. And they were fishermen. And they straightway left all, and followed Jesus. (JST; italics added.)

(See BD, "Cephas.")

1:43-51 These verses contain the account of the meetings with Philip and Nathanael.

1:44 Bethsaida means "house of fish" in Hebrew, an appropriate name for a town near the shore of the sea of Galilee and the home of such fishermen as Simon and Andrew.

The Joseph Smith Translation reads, "Philip was at Bethsaida" rather than "of Bethsaida."

1:45 When Philip stated that Jesus was he "of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write," he was testifying that Jesus was the Messiah.

1:46 Nathanael's response, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" indicates the relatively bad reputation of Nazareth in those days. Just as Jesus chose to be born in a small village in humble circumstances, he evidently also chose to be reared in a village with no great reputation. (See BD, "Nathanael.")

1:47 "Guile" could have been translated as "deceit" or "fraud."

1:50 Our present New Testament account does not indicate which "greater things than these" may have been witnessed by Nathanael. Some scholars believe Nathanael may have been Bartholomew the apostle (Matt. 10:3), although the present evidence is inconclusive.

1:51 The sacred title "Son of Man" should always be capitalized and refers only to Jesus Christ, the Son of Man of Holiness (our Heavenly Father). (See Moses 6:57; 7:35; also, see text and commentary for Matt. 16:13; section 1, "Son of Man.")

"The Son of Man" was and is, specifically and exclusively, Jesus Christ. While as a matter of solemn certainty He was the only male human being from Adam down who was not the son of a mortal man, He used the title in a way to conclusively demonstrate that it was peculiarly and solely His own. It is plainly evident that the expression is fraught with a meaning beyond that conveyed by the words in common usage. The distinguishing appellation has been construed by many to indicate our Lord's humble station as a mortal, and to connote that He stood as the type of humanity, holding a particular and unique relationship to the entire human family. There is, however, a more profound significance attaching to the Lord's use of the title "The Son of Man"; and this lies in the fact that He knew His Father to be the one and only supremely exalted Man, whose Son Jesus was both in spirit and in body—the Firstborn among all the spirit-children of the Father, the Only Begotten in the flesh—and therefore, in a sense applicable to Himself alone, He was and is the Son of the "Man of Holiness," Elohim, the Eternal Father. In His distinctive titles of Sonship, Jesus expressed His spiritual and bodily descent from, and His filial submission to, that exalted Father. (JTC, pp. 142-43.)
