2:1-11 The account of the "beginning of miracles . . . in Cana of Galilee" (verse 11) has been preserved only by John. (See section 1, "Miracles"; BD, "Cana of Galilee.")

2:1 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "And on the third day of the week . . ." (Italics added.)

2:4 Jesus said unto her, Woman, what wilt thou have me do for thee? that will I do; for mine hour is not yet come. (JST; italics added.)

The noun of address, "Woman," as applied by a son to his mother may sound to our ears somewhat harsh, if not disrespectful; but its use was really an expression of opposite import. To every son the mother ought to be preeminently the woman of women; She is the one woman in the world to whom the son owes his earthly existence; and though the title "Mother" belongs to every woman who has earned the honors of maternity, yet to no child is there more than one woman whom by natural right he can address by that title of respectful acknowledgment. When, in the last dread scenes of His mortal existence, Christ hung in dying agony upon the cross, He looked down upon the weeping Mary, His mother, and commended her to the care of the beloved apostle John, with the words: "Woman, behold thy son!" Can it be thought that in this supreme moment, our Lord's concern for the mother from whom He was about to be separated by death was associated with any emotion other than that of honor, tenderness and love? (JTC, pp. 144-45.)

2:6 A firkin is about nine gallons. Thus each of the six waterpots contained around 18 to 27 gallons of water, with the result that Jesus then created between 100 and 150 gallons of wine—a miracle showing that the wedding celebration was quite large. (LTJA, p. 29.)

2:9 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "ruler" to "governor," indicating this is the same person mentioned in verse 8. Other translations have been "master of ceremonies," "steward of the feast," and "master of the banquet."

"Knew not whence it was" means "he did not know where this wine had come from."

2:11 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "and the faith of his disciples was strengthened in him." (Italics added.)

First of the miraculous signs of his ministry, that is, the first of those intended for public knowledge, those designed as witnesses of the divine powers resident in him. He previously may well have performed other personal or private miracles. Indeed, Mary's appeal to him at the wedding celebration for aid carries an inference of her prior knowledge of his miraculous abilities. (DNTC 1:137.)

John's record of the marriage in Cana is fragmentary; it does not by any means tell the whole story. From what is recorded, however, we learn:

(1) Mary seemed to be the hostess at the marriage party, the one in charge, the one responsible for the entertainment of the guests. It was she who recognized the need for more wine, who sought to replenish the supply, who directed the servants to follow whatever instructions Jesus gave. Considering the customs of the day, it is a virtual certainty that one of Mary's children was being married.

(2) Jesus also had a close personal interest in and connection with the marriage and the subsequent festivities which attended it. He and apparently at least five of his disciples (John, Andrew, Peter, Philip, and Nathanael) were "called" to attend. Since the shortage of wine occurred near the close of the festivities, and since these commonly lasted from seven to fourteen days, it is apparent that Jesus' party was remaining for the entire celebration. Seemingly, also, he had some personal responsibility for entertaining the guests and felt an obligation to supply them with added refreshments.

(3) Participation by Jesus and his disciples in the marriage customs of that day places an endorsing stamp of divine approval upon the system of matrimony itself and also upon reasonable and modest display attending its solemnization.

(4) Jesus was no recluse, no hermit, no ascetic. He came eating and drinking, enjoying the natural, normal, and wholesome social intercourse of the day.

(5) By turning water into wine, he manifest during the early days of his ministry that he had power over temporal, physical matters.

(6) The faith of his disciples was strengthened in him.

(7) Obviously, also, it would be with this as with his subsequent miracles: when word of his miraculous powers was noised among the people, many would investigate, hear the proclamation of his Messiahship, listen to his teachings, believe his message of salvation, and become heirs of eternal life. (DNTC 1:135-36.)

2:12 This transitional verse between the miracle at Cana and the cleansing of the temple in Jerusalem could indicate the passage of considerable time.

"They continued there not many days" means "they stayed there a few days."

For further background on the brethren of Jesus (as contrasted with "his disciples"), see text and commentaries for Matthew 12:46-50.

2:13-17 The first cleansing of the temple by Jesus is preserved only by John. For information of his later experience with the money changers near the temple, see text and commentaries for Matthew 21:12-17.

2:13-14 See text and commentaries for Matthew 26:17-20, 26-29:

Ancient Israel in the day of Moses, was freed from temporal bondage in Egypt by the Lord Jehovah. To commemorate this deliverance, they were commanded to keep the Feast of the Passover. This feast was designed to bring two things to their remembrance: (1) That the angel of death passed over the houses and flocks of Israel, while slaying the firstborn among the men and beasts of the Egyptians; and (2) That Jehovah was their Deliverer, the same holy being who in due course would come into the world as King-Messiah to work out the infinite and eternal atonement.

All of the symbolisms of the feast centered around these two events. The feast (more so in the days of its inception than in the time of Jesus) was eaten in haste as though preparatory to flight; the sacrificial lamb was one without blemish, whose blood was shed, but whose bones were not broken; blood was sprinkled on the houses to be spared—all of which provided types and symbols for Messiah's coming mortal sacrifice. (Ex. 12.)

And now nearly a millennium and a half after Jehovah gave the Passover to Israel, he himself, tabernacled among men, was preparing to celebrate the feast, to fulfil the law given to Moses. (DNTC 1:704.)

2:14-16 The incident of Christ's forcible clearing of the temple is a contradiction of the traditional conception of Him as of One so gentle and unassertive in demeanor as to appear unmanly. Gentle He was, and patient under affliction, merciful and long-suffering in dealing with contrite sinners, yet stern and inflexible in the presence of hypocrisy, and unsparing in His denunciation of persistent evil-doers. His mood was adapted to the conditions to which He addressed Himself; tender words of encouragement or burning expletives of righteous indignation issued with equal fluency from His lips. His nature was no poetic conception of cherubic sweetness ever present, but that of a Man, with the emotions and passions essential to manhood and manliness. He, who often wept with compassion, at other times evinced in word and action the righteous anger of a God. But of all His passions, however gently they rippled or strongly surged, He was ever master. Contrast the gentle Jesus moved to hospitable service by the needs of a festal party in Cana, with the indignant Christ plying His whip, and amidst commotion and turmoil of His own making, driving cattle and men before Him as an unclean herd. (JTC, p. 158.)

As Jesus entered the outer courts of the temple, during the first Passover of his ministry, he beheld what he was to call three years later on a similar occasion, "a den of thieves." (Matt. 21:13.) Before him were stalls of oxen, pens of sheep, cages of doves and pigeons, with greedy hucksters offering them at exorbitant prices for sacrificial purposes. Crowded on every hand were the tables of the money-changers who, for a profit, changed the Roman and other coins into temple coins so that sacrificial animals could be purchased and the half shekel poll tax required at this season of the year might be paid. In righteous anger and with physical force he drove the apostate priesthood from their unhallowed merchandising enterprises.

This dramatic episode in the life of our Lord has been preserved to bear record:

(1) That the meek and lowly Nazarene was a man of action; a dynamic forceful character; a man of courage and physical strength; one whose soul filled with righteous indignation upon seeing the desecration of sacred things; one who responded zealously and vigorously in the cause of righteousness, though all men opposed him;

(2) That God was his Father; and

(3) That the temple was still his Father's house, though virtually all who worshiped there were walking in dark and direful apostasy. (DNTC 1:137-38.)

2:15 "A scourge of small cords" could have been translated "a whip of ropes."

2:17 The scripture that the "disciples remembered" is found in Psalm 69:9: "For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."

2:18-22 As Jesus has indicated elsewhere, it is "an evil and adulterous generation" that seeks for a sign. (See text and commentaries for Matt. 12:39; Mark 16:17.)

Blinded by their own craft, unwilling to acknowledge the Lord's authority, yet fearful of the possibility that they were opposing one who had the right to act, the perturbed officials found in the words of Jesus reference to the imposing temple of masonry within whose walls they stood. They took courage; this strange Galilean, who openly flouted their authority, spoke irreverently of their temple, the visible expression of the profession they so proudly flaunted in words—that they were children of the covenant, worshipers of the true and living God, and hence superior to all heathen and pagan peoples. With seeming indignation they rejoined; "Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?" Though frustrated in their desire to arouse popular indignation against Jesus at this time, the Jews refused to forget or forgive His words. When afterward He stood an undefended prisoner, undergoing an illegal pretense of trial before a sin-impeached court, the blackest perjury uttered against Him was that of the false witnesses who testified: "We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands." And while He hung in mortal suffering, the scoffers who passed by the cross wagged their heads and taunted the dying Christ with "Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself, and come down from the cross." Yet His words to the Jews who had demanded the credentials of a sign had no reference to the colossal Temple of Herod, but to the sanctuary of His own body, in which, more literally than in the man-built Holy of Holies, dwelt the ever living Spirit of the Eternal God. "The Father is in me" was His doctrine. (JTC, pp. 156-57.)

2:18 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "Then spake the Jews and said unto him . . ." (Italics added.)

2:19-21 On this and other occasions Jesus taught his own death and resurrection, and though disbelieving, the Jews knew what he was teaching and understood the meaning of the figurative expressions he used. Later, after his crucifixion, these same Jews, hearking back to Jesus' teaching that he would be resurrected, told Pilate: "Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again." (Matt. 27:63.) Their testimony to the contrary at his trial was part of the conspiracy of perjury which led to his death. (Mark 14:58.) (DNTC 1:139.)

2:22 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "believed" to "remembered."

Only after the resurrection did the full and complete meaning of Jesus' announcement of his coming resurrection dawn upon his disciples. Then they remembered that the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel himself, after his birth into mortality, was to die and be resurrected. They remembered that Isaiah had said of him: "He was cut off out of the land of the living: . . . He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death." (Isa. 53:8-9.) They remembered that the great Jehovah had said to Israel: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." (Isa. 26:4, 19.) (DNTC 1:139.)

2:23-25 Only John records that many in Jerusalem at this Passover believed on Jesus "when they saw the miracles which he did."

2:24 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "men" to "things." The first part of this verse has been translated "But Jesus did not trust himself to them."

During his mortal life our Lord went from grace to grace and from truth to truth. He progressed from intelligence to intelligence until finally after the triumph of a glorious resurrection he gained all power, all knowledge, and all truth. It is only in this exalted and resurrected state that he came to a knowledge of all things in the ultimate and unlimited sense. (D. C. 93:6-28.) However, in the course of his mortal probation, he knew all things in the sense that, having the constant companionship of that Spirit (the Holy Ghost) who does know all things, Jesus could and did receive revelation of all that was needed for his ministry from time to time. He knew all things in the sense that a knowledge of all things was constantly available to him.

In this same sense faithful saints are entitled to receive revelation from the Spirit, or in other words to "have the mind of Christ." (1 Cor. 2:16.) Those who gain their exaltation will, like Christ, be glorified in truth and light and know all things in the ultimate and absolute sense, meaning there will be no truth they do not know, no knowledge they have not mastered. (D. C. 93:27-28.) (DNTC 1:139-40.)
