3:1-18 This interview between the Pharisee Nicodemus, "a ruler of the Jews," and Jesus is recorded only by John.

The narrative of this interview between Nicodemus and the Christ constitutes one of our most instructive and precious scriptures relating to the absolute necessity of unreserved compliance with the laws and ordinances of the gospel, as the means indispensable to salvation. Faith in Jesus Christ as the Son of God, through whom alone men may gain eternal life; the forsaking of sin by resolute turning away from the gross darkness of evil to the saving light of righteousness; the unqualified requirement of a new birth through baptism in water, and this of necessity by the mode of immersion, since otherwise the figure of a birth would be meaningless; and the completion of the new birth through baptism by the Spirit—all these principles are taught herein in such simplicity and plainness as to make plausible no man's excuse for ignorance. (JTC, p. 162.)

To a limited extent this ruler of the Jews manifest faith in Christ, but as far as the New Testament record reveals, he never quite attained that state of valiant devotion which would classify him as a true disciple. This interview, at which presumably John and others were present, took place at night, away from the prying eyes of other members of the Sanhedrin. Later, when officers of that body were reporting upon their failure to take Jesus into custody, it was Nicodemus who queried his colleagues of the Sanhedrin by saying: "Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?" (John 7:30-39, 50-53.) Still later we read of Nicodemus bringing a costly "mixture of myrrh and aloes" to use in preparing the body of the crucified Lord for burial. (John 19:38-42.) Whether he himself was ever born of water and of the Spirit remains unknown. (DNTC 1:141.)

(See BD, "Nicodemus.")

3:3 Several other scriptures refer to the necessity of a spiritual rebirth. (See Mosiah 3:19; 5:7; Alma 7:14;1 Pet. 2:2.) To Alma the younger the Lord said: "Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God." ( Mosiah 27:24-29.)

3:3-5 The Greek words translated in verse 3 as "See" and in verse 5 as "enter" are different words. To "see" the kingdom of God is to receive a testimony of the gospel. To "enter" the kingdom of God is to have faith, repent, be baptized, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

It is one thing to see the kingdom of God, and another thing to enter into it. We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe the articles of adoption to enter therein. (TPJS, p. 328.)

3:5 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 3:2; 6:10. See section 1, "Kingdom of Heaven or Kingdom of God."

The kingdom of God mentioned by the Savior in his conversation with Nicodemus points clearly to the fact that it is the celestial kingdom that is meant. This is also implied in the instructions given by our Savior to his apostles when he left them. They were to go into all the world and preach the gospel, all who accepted and were baptized should enter the celestial kingdom, but all others would be damned, or be assigned to one of the other kingdoms. (AGQ 5:147-48.)

3:9-21 A footnote in the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version reads: "The Greek construction suggests that verses 11-21 contain a direct quotation. This testimony of Jesus was given to a member of the Sanhedrin."

3:11 The plural pronouns "we" and "our" suggest that Jesus was also including the testimony and witness of the disciples in this statement.

3:12 That is: "If I have told you the simple, basic truths about being born again; if I have told you the first principles—faith, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost; and ye believe not; how shall ye either believe or understand if I tell you the 'wonders of eternity,' 'the hidden mysteries of my kingdom,' the 'things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man'?" (DNTC 1:142.)

3:13 The Joseph Smith Translation of this verse begins, "I tell you, No man . . ." (Italics added.) Also, the sacred title "Son of Man" is capitalized in the Joseph Smith Translation.

One of the "heavenly things," of which Jesus bore record, was that he, the Messiah who had come down from heaven, was the Son of Man of Holiness who is in heaven. (Moses 6:57.) Like Nicodemus, almost the whole so-called Christian world, as yet unable to understand even "earthly things," rejects the full and literal meaning of this divine testimony. (DNTC 1:143.)

3:14-15 Numbers 21:4-9 is the initial reference to the serpent Moses raised up in the wilderness. However, the symbol is also emphasized in the Book of Mormon (see Hel. 8:13-15), and some LDS scholars believe this symbol is the basis for one of the names given by the early native Americans to the God who came out of the sky like a bird but who had been lifted up like the serpent—Quetzalcoatl, the "bird serpent."

3:16 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has identified this verse as "perhaps the most famous and powerful single verse of scripture ever uttered."

It summarizes the whole plan of salvation, tying together the Father, the Son, his atoning sacrifice, that belief in him which presupposes righteous works, and ultimate eternal exaltation for the faithful.

Similarly, our Lord "so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would believe might become the sons of God." (D. C. 34:3.) . . . Only begotten in the flesh . . . in mortality. This designation of our Lord signifies that he was begotten by Man of Holiness as literally as any mortal father begets a son. The natural processes of procreation were involved; Jesus was begotten by his Father as literally as he was conceived by his mother. (DNTC 1:144.)

3:18 He who believeth on him is not condemned; but he who believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed on the name of the Only Begotten Son of God, which before was preached by the mouth of the holy prophets; for they testified of me. (JST; italics added.)

The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that this testimony was definitely given by Jesus and is not simply an observation by John, as some scholars have assumed.

3:21 The last part of this verse is expanded into a full verse in the Joseph Smith Translation: "And he who obeyeth the truth, the works which he doeth they are of God."

3:22 The Greek text makes it clear that Jesus was doing some of the baptizing with his disciples. This would agree with the substance of verse 26 and with the Joseph Smith Translation of John 4:2. (See commentary for John 4:1-2; section 1, "Baptism: Jesus practiced.")

3:23-24 That John was baptizing in a place "because there was much water there" would indicate that he was definitely baptizing by immersion, as "much water" is not needed for the false practices of sprinkling and pouring. (See BD, "Aenon," "Salim.")

3:25-26 The ministries of Jesus and John overlapped. Both were now preaching and baptizing. John's baptisms were in water only, after which his disciples were told (as John the apostle and Andrew had been) to follow Jesus who would baptize them with fire and the Holy Ghost. Jesus baptisms were also in water unto repentance, but then he added the promise that in due course his converts would be baptized by the Spirit. Further, John, who had once baptized to cleanse, purify, and prepare a people for a Messiah who was to come, now was baptizing into the kingdom set up by the Holy One of Israel who had come. However, according to the apostate Jewish traditions, the purifying power of baptism was needed only for Gentile proselytes; those of the seed of Abraham claimed exemption from its cleansing power and substituted various ritualistic cleansing ordinances of their own. (Mark 7:1-8.)

It is not unnatural that these diverse views should arouse questions "between some of John's disciples and the Jews about purifying," and that those disciples should come to John to inquire about Jesus and the baptizing being done by him and his disciples. In answer John preached one of the greatest sermons ever delivered on the divinity of Christ and the obligation resting upon all men to accept him as the Son of God if they would be saved. Few if any prophets have ever preached stronger doctrine or testified more powerfully to the divinity of their Lord than did the Lord's own forerunner on this occasion. Verses 27-36 contain a brief digest of his inspired utterances. (DNTC 1:146-47.)

3:26 (See text and commentaries for John 3:22 and 4:1-2.) In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "the same baptizeth, and he receiveth of all people who come unto him." (Italics added.)

3:27-36 This inspiring testimony by John the Baptist has been preserved only in the writings of John. In it, John explains somewhat concerning his lesser role as a forerunner of the greater One who is Jesus.

3:29 In this symbolism, Jesus would be the Bridegroom, the chosen covenant people the bride, and John the "friend of the bridegroom."

3:32 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause reads, "and but few men receive his testimony." (Italics added.)

3:33 This verse could have been translated "He that has accepted his witness has put his seal to it that God is true." The Revised Standard Version reads: "he who receives his testimony sets his seal to this, that God is true."

3:34 For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God giveth him not the Spirit by measure, for he dwelleth in him, even the fulness. (JST; italics added.)

3:36 And he who believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and shall receive of his fulness. But he who believeth not the Son, shall not receive of his fulness; for the wrath of God is upon him. (JST; italics added.)
