4:1-3 For other information relating to Jesus leaving Judea and going to the Galilee, see text and commentaries for Matthew 4:13-16. Read also Mark 1:14; Luke 4:14-15; John 4:43-46.

4:1-2 When therefore the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,

They sought more diligently some means that they might put him to death; for many received John as a prophet, but they believed not on Jesus.

Now the Lord knew this, though he himself baptized not so many as his disciples;

For he suffered them for an example, preferring one another. (JST; italics added.)

(See section 1, "Baptism: Jesus practiced.")

These verses prove that Jesus baptized others, and they substantiate similar statements in John 3:22, 26.

The statement that "Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John" should not be interpreted to mean that Jesus baptized more people than John. Verse 3 of the Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that Jesus did not baptize as many people as his disciples, but does not compare his baptisms with the number of baptisms performed by John.

Also, the statement in verse 2 of the Joseph Smith Translation that "many received John as a prophet" should not be interpreted to mean that they accepted him in the full sense; otherwise, they would have accepted Jesus as the Messiah. They accepted John as a prophet in much the same way as many Christians today accept the prophets of old but do not always follow their teachings.

4:4-30 These verses contain the only account of Jesus' visit with a woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well.

4:4 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse reads, "And said unto his disciples, I must needs go through Samaria." (Italics added.)

4:6 Here we view one of the most human scenes of the Master's whole ministry. The Lord of heaven, who created and controls all things, having made clay his tabernacle, is physically tired, weary, hungry, and thirsty, following his long journey from Judea. He who had power to draw food and drink from the elements, who could have transported himself at will to any location, sought rest and refreshments at Jacob's well. In all things he was subjecting himself to the proper experiences of mortality. (DNTC 1:151.)

4:8 "Meat" means "food." (See text and commentaries for Matt. 6:25-26; Mark 8:8; Luke 9:13; section 1, "Meat.")

4:9 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "Wherefore he being alone, the woman of Samaria said unto him . . ." (Italics added.)

Why the Jews had "no dealings with the Samaritans" is explained in the commentaries for Luke 17:11-19. Also, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

When the Ten Tribes were transported to Assyria more than seven centuries before the Christian Era, Samaria was repeopled by heathen colonists from other Assyrian provinces. These pagan peoples, intermixing somewhat with scattered remnants of Israel, founded the race of despised and hated Samaritans of Jesus' day. As a nation, they claimed Jacob as their father and maintained they were inheritors of the blessings of the chosen seed. Their religion, partially pagan in nature, accepted the Pentateuch, but rejected the prophets and the psalms. In the day of Jesus they were friendly to Herod and Rome, but bitter toward the Jews, a feeling fully reciprocated by their Jewish kindred. (DNTC 1:151.)

4:10 How graphically Jesus uses the simple truths of everyday life to teach the eternal spiritual realities of his gospel! For the thirsty and choking traveler in a desert wilderness to find water, is to find life, to find an escape from agonizing death; similarly, the weary pilgrim traveling through the wilderness of mortality saves himself eternally by drinking from the wells of living water found in the gospel.

Living water is the words of eternal life, the message of salvation, the truths about God and his kingdom; it is the doctrines of the gospel. Those who thirst are invited to come unto Christ and drink. (John 7:37-38.) Where there are prophets of God, there will be found rivers of living water, wells filled with eternal truths, springs bubbling forth their life-giving draughts that save from spiritual death. "Unto him that keepeth my commandments," the Lord says, "I will give the mysteries of my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life." (D. C. 63:23.) (DNTC 1:151-52.)

4:13 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "water" with "well." This seems to be consistent with the "well of water" in verse 14.

4:14 The Greek word translated "well" in this verse is not the same word so translated in verses 11 and 12. A more correct translation is "spring" or "fountain."

4:20 The Samaritan woman was referring to Mount Gerizim when she said, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain." The Samaritans who live in modern Nablus at the foot of Mount Gerizim still conduct some of their Passover services on this mount. (See BD, "Gerizim.")

4:22 "Ye worship ye know not what" might also be applied to many so-called Christians today who refer to the nature of God as a "mystery."

In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause in this verse reads, "and salvation is of the Jews." (Italics added.)

Though in that day most of the Jews were in a state of apostasy, yet they did have the prophetic writings and the psalms, in which the knowledge about God was recorded. They had a reasonable knowledge of the nature and kind of Being Deity is. Further, salvation was to be offered to all men through the Jews, because they were the ones who preserved the scriptures and the recorded truths of salvation; and most importantly, Messiah himself, in whom salvation centers, was a Jew. (DNTC 1:153.)

This verse could have been more literally translated "You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, because salvation originates with the Jews."

4:24 For unto such hath God promised his Spirit. And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth. (JST; italics added.)

What marvels of mischief one mistranslated phrase has done! Jesus never, never, never said, "God is a Spirit," but rather that God had promised his Spirit unto those who worshiped him in Spirit and in truth. Yet, falsely supposing our Lord to be the author of this statement, the whole sectarian world has turned to it, more than any other single passage, to find support for their false creeds.

There is a sense in which it might be said, without impropriety, that God is a Spirit. He is most assuredly not a spirit in the sense in which the creeds speak, in the sense that he is an ethereal nothingness which fills the immensity of space and is everywhere and nowhere in particular present. But when it is remembered that a spirit is a personage, an entity, a living personality whose body is made of more pure and refined substance than the temporal bodies of men; and when it is remembered that such spirits live in preexistence, come to earth to gain temporary physical bodies, are separated from those bodies by the natural death, with the assurance that eventually body and spirit will be inseparably connected again in resurrected immortality; and when it is remembered, further, that God himself is an exalted, perfected, glorified, resurrected Man; then it might truly be said that God is a spirit. He is a Spirit Personage, a Personage with a body of flesh and bones. (D. C. 130:22.) He is a Spirit in the same sense that all men are spirits, and in the sense that all men eventually will have resurrected or spiritual bodies as contrasted with their present natural or mortal bodies. (1 Cor. 15:42-50; D. C. 88:25-28.) (DNTC 1:153.)

4:25-26 Unable or unwilling to understand Christ's meaning, the woman sought to terminate the lesson by a remark that probably was to her but casual: "I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things." Then, to her profound amazement, Jesus rejoined with the awe-inspiring declaration: "I that speak unto thee am he." The language was unequivocal, the assertion one that required no elucidation. The woman must regard Him thereafter as either an impostor or the Messiah. She left her pitcher at the well, and hastening to the town told of her experience, saying: "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" (JTC, p. 175.)

Jesus was his own chief witness; again, and again, and again—both in figurative language known to and understood by his hearers, and in plain, unequivocal utterances as here—he proclaimed himself as the Messiah, the King of Israel, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. It is a strange thing that there are people in the world today who accept him as the greatest moral teacher of the ages and yet reject his divine Sonship. How could he be a great moral teacher, if he taught and lived a lie, if he openly proclaimed himself as the Only Begotten in the flesh without in fact being such? (DNTC 1:154.)

(See section 1, "Messiah.")

4:27 The initial statement in this verse could have been translated "Now at this point his disciples arrived."

4:29 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "all things that ever I did" to "all things that I have ever done."

4:31-38 These verses contain the account of Jesus speaking to his disciples about missionary work.

4:31 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "while" to "time."

4:33 "Ought" is printed in italics, indicating that it did not appear in the Greek manuscript used by the King James translators.

4:34 Though weary and hungry Jesus' first concern was to plant the seeds of salvation in the hearts of the approaching multitude. Similarly, those sent forth by him to preach the gospel, who have the spirit of their calling, are so imbued with divine zeal that they scarcely take time to eat or rest as they herald the message of salvation to the world. (DNTC 1:156.)

4:37 "That saying" referred to by Jesus is not found in our present Old Testament. Evidently Paul was also acquainted with the ancient scripture, now unknown, when he wrote: "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase." (1 Cor. 3:6.)

4:38 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "other men laboured" to "the prophets have labored." Jesus is indicating to his disciples that they are building on the foundations established by the earlier prophets.

4:39-42 These verses recount Jesus' ministry among the Samaritans.

4:39 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause of this verse reads, "He told me all that I have ever done." (Italics added.)

4:42 The irony of the situation is that many of the Samaritans who were hated of the Jews and were not allowed to worship in Jerusalem came to know that Jesus was "indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world," whereas many of the self-righteous Jews at Jerusalem rejected him and later demanded his crucifixion.

4:43-46 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 4:13-16. Read also Mark 1:14; Luke 4:14-15; John 4:3.

4:46-54 Jesus was still in the vicinity of Cana when he gave the command that the son should be healed, and immediately some twenty miles distant the healing took place. This is a good example that the power of faith is not limited by distance. (See section 1, "Healing.")

4:52 "The hour when he began to amend" could have been translated "the hour in which he began to recover."

4:53 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "So the father knew that his son was healed in the same hour . . ."

4:54 This being the second miracle which Jesus had done when he had come out of Judea into Galilee. (JST; italics added.)

The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that Jesus had not performed only two miracles up to this time. John 2:23-25 mentions miracles performed by Jesus in Jerusalem, and evidently the report of these miracles prompted the nobleman to seek out Jesus and enlist his power.
