5:1 John does not make clear exactly which feast was being celebrated by the Jews at this time.

If, according to the traditional view, this was a Passover feast, then the active ministry of Jesus lasted three and a half year; if, as some scholars have speculated, it was the Feast of Purim, which takes place about a month before the Passover, then our Lord's ministry was a year less. (DNTC 1:188.)

5:2-16 These verses recount the healing at the pool of Bethesda.

5:2 "Porches" has also been translated "arches," "porticoes," and "colonnades."

5:4 No doubt the pool of Bethesda was a mineral spring whose waters had some curative virtue. But any notion that an angel came down and troubled the waters, so that the first person thereafter entering them would be healed, was pure superstition. Healing miracles are not wrought in any such manner If we had the account as John originally wrote it, it would probably contain an explanation that the part supposedly played by an angel was merely a superstitious legend comparable to some that have since been devised by some churches of Christendom. (DNTC 1:188.)

(See BD, "Bethesda.")

5:6 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "in that case" to "afflicted."

Seemingly Jesus deliberately sought out a man worthy to be healed so that he might exercise his curative powers on the Sabbath day. The interest and animosity resulting from this Sabbath miracle were such that our Lord gained an attentive, though largely disbelieving congregation of hearers, for what is perhaps his greatest recorded sermon of the relationship of the Father and the Son. (DNTC 1:188.)

5:8 "Bed" has also been translated "mat."

5:9 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause reads, "and it was on the Sabbath day." For other reactions to the healings of Jesus performed on the Sabbath, see text and commentaries for Matthew 12:10-13; Luke 13:10-17; 14:1-6.

The Scribes had elaborated from the command of Moses, a vast array of prohibitions and injunctions, covering the whole of social, individual, and public life, and carried it to the extreme of ridiculous caricature. Lengthened rules were prescribed as to the kinds of knots which might legally be tied on the Sabbath. The camel-driver's knot and the sailor's were unlawful, and it was equally illegal to tie or to loose them. A knot which could be untied with one hand might be undone. A shoe or sandal, a woman's cup, a wine or oil-skin, or a flesh-pot might be tied. A pitcher at a spring might be tied to the body-sash, but not with a cord. . . .

To kindle or extinguish a fire on the Sabbath was a great desecration of the day, nor was even sickness allowed to violate Rabbinical rules. It was forbidden to give an emetic on the Sabbath—to set a broken bone, or put back a dislocated joint, though some Rabbis, more liberal, held that whatever endangered life made the Sabbath law void, "for the commands were given to Israel only that they might live by them." One who was buried under ruins on the Sabbath, might be dug for and taken out, if alive, but, if dead, he was to be left where he was, till the Sabbath was over. (Geike, ch. 38, quoted in JTC, pp. 215-16.)

5:13 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "wist" to "knew."

This verse could have been more literally translated "But the healed man did not know who he [Jesus] was, for Jesus had turned aside, there being a crowd in the place."

5:15-16 The man went and told the rulers who it was that had healed him. This he may have done with a desire to honor and glorify the Giver of his boon; we are not justified in ascribing to him any unworthy purpose, though by his act he was instrumental in augmenting the persecution of his Lord. So intense was the hatred of the priestly faction that the rulers sought a means of putting Jesus to death, under the specious pretense of His being a Sabbath-breaker. We may well ask for what act they could possibly have hoped to convict Him, even under the strictest application of their rules. There was no proscription against speaking on the Sabbath; and Jesus had but spoken to heal. He had not carried the man's bed, nor had He attempted even the lightest physical labor. By their own interpretation of the law they had no case against Him. (JTC, p. 208.)

5:17-24 In these verses, Jesus explains the relationship of the Father and the Son.

5:17 Jesus reaffirmed that God's work must go forth even on the Sabbath. The injunction against work has to do with temporal, earthly pursuits ("ye shall do no servile work therein." [Lev. 23:8; italics added]), not to the Lord's work.

5:18 Though the Father is greater than the Son and takes precedence over him, yet the Son is equal with the Father in the sense that the Father has given all things into the hands of the Son, and that the Son has attained all power, all wisdom, all knowledge, all truth, and the fulness of all of the attributes of godliness. (D. C. 93:6-26.) In this same sense all men who gain exaltation shall "receive their inheritance and be made equal with" the Father and the Son. (D. C. 88:107; 93:27-34.) (DNTC 1:191.)

5:19-20 What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children. It is plain beyond disputation, and you thus learn some of the first principles of the Gospel, about which so much hath been said. (TPJS, pp. 347-48.)

5:19 Jesus is not independent of the Father, is not his rival, and does not act except in conformity with the Father's will. The Son has all power because the Father has bestowed it upon him. So it is with all righteous men; none ever act independent of Deity; rather, their power and authority comes from and is centered in the Almighty. (DNTC 1:192.)

5:20 The "greater things" yet to be shown are such things as the Atonement, including the Resurrection, the Second Coming, and the Judgment.

5:21 "Quickeneth" means "to cause to make alive." It could refer to the life that would come again after either physical or spiritual death.

5:22 The Judgment will be by the will and justice of the Father but under the direction of the Son.

5:25-30 These informative, but to some people confusing, statements of Jesus concerning his future work among the dead are found only in John. However, additional information may be obtained by reading Isaiah 24:22; 42:7; 61:1; 1 Peter 3:18-21; 4:6; DC 138; Moses 7:37-39; Abraham 2:10-11. These are all consistent with the teaching of Jesus that "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." (Matt. 22:32.)

5:25 "They that hear shall live" could also have been translated "those who will give heed will live." 1 Peter 4:6 indicates that when the dead have the gospel preached to them they will "be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

5:26 As an immortal, exalted, and resurrected being—one whose body and spirit are inseparably connected, one who cannot die—the Father has life in himself, life that is unending, eternal, everlasting. In him the power to live forever dwells independently. Because Jesus is literally his son, his offspring, the fruit of his body, he has inherited from his Father the power of immortality, the power to live forever, the power to unite body and spirit again in a resurrected state, he having voluntarily permitted them to be separated as an essential part of working out the infinite and eternal atonement. (DNTC 1:194-95.)

5:28-29 Jesus said that all "that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth." Thus, the gospel will be preached to everyone in the spirit world. Also, everyone will be resurrected from the dead. As Paul later recorded, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) Even the sons of perdition will come forth in the resurrection.

This enunciation of the resurrection, so plainly made that the most unlettered could understand, must have offended any Sadducees present, for they emphatically denied the actuality of the resurrection. The universality of a resurrection is here unquestionably affirmed; not only the righteous but even those who merit condemnation are to come forth from their graves in their bodies of flesh and bones. (JTC, p. 210.)

While working on the translation of the Bible, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were meditating upon verse 29 when they received the vision of the three degrees of glory that was later recorded as the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants.

5:29-30 The Joseph Smith Translation gives these two verses as follows:

And shall come forth; they who have done good, in the resurrection of the just; and they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust.

And shall all be judged of the Son of Man. For as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just;

For I can of mine own self do nothing; because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father who hath sent me. (Italics added.)

Resurrection of life, the first resurrection. Those coming forth in the morning of this resurrection do so with celestial bodies and shall inherit a celestial glory; these are they who are Christ's the firstfruits. Those coming forth in the afternoon of this resurrection do so with terrestrial bodies and consequently shall inherit that kingdom; they are described as being Christ's at this coming. All who have been resurrected so far have received celestial bodies; the coming forth of terrestrial beings does not commence until after the Second Coming. (D. C. 76:50-80; 88:95-99.)

Resurrection of damnation, the second resurrection. In this day of sorrow and remorse the bodies and spirits of the rest of mankind will be inseparably connected in immortality. At the end of the millennium, and in the morning of this second resurrection, those shall come forth who merit telestial bodies, and they shall be rewarded accordingly. Finally, in the afternoon of the second resurrection, those who "remain filthy still," those who having been raised in immortality are judged and found wholly wanting, those whom we call sons of perditions, shall be cast out with Lucifer and his angels to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire forever. (D. C. 76:25-49, 81-113; 88:101-102; 2 Ne. 9:14-16.) (DNTC 1:196-97.)

5:30 Independent action on the part of the Son is impossible; his power comes from the Father, according to the laws ordained by the Father. The Son has become and is a god because of obedience to the laws of the Father, and he is now so completely one with the Father that everything he thinks, says, and does is precisely what the Father would do under the same circumstances. . . .

That judgment which grows out of the fact of resurrection will be automatic, meaning that it will operate according to law, and all men will receive exactly what they merit, neither adding to nor diminishing from. Power of judgment will rest with the Son, but he will exercise it in accordance with the laws ordained by the Father; hence, "my judgment is just." (DNTC 1:197.)

5:31-38 These verses contain Jesus' teachings about witnesses.

5:31 Therefore if I bear witness of myself, yet my witness is true. (JST; italics added.)

This verse could have been more literally translated "If I alone bear witness about myself, my witness is not true."

If Jesus was the only witness of his Messiahship, then, according to the law of witnesses (see 2 Cor. 13:1), his hearers were not required to accept it. However, as indicated in the next verse, he has other witnesses of his divinity.

5:32 For I am not alone, there is another who beareth witness of me, and I know that the testimony which he giveth of me is true. (JST; italics added.)

5:34 And he received not his testimony of man, but of God, and ye yourselves say that he is a prophet, therefore ye ought to receive his testimony. These things I say that ye might be saved. (JST; italics added.)

5:36 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "But I have a greater witness than the testimony of John . . ." (Italics added.)

Who bears testimony that Jesus is indeed the Christ?

(1) Jesus himself, repeatedly, bluntly, plainly, over and over again testified of his own divine Sonship;

(2) His Father by his own voice out of heaven, by personally coming to earth to introduce the Son, and by sending the Holy Ghost to speak to the spirits of the contrite;

(3) The Holy Ghost, the Spirit member of the Godhead, whose mission is to bear record of the Father and the Son;

(4) The works performed by Jesus in his mortal ministry, including his miracles, teachings, resurrection, and atoning sacrifice which made immortality and eternal life a reality;

(5) Prophets and apostles of all ages—Moses, John, Peter, Nephi, Joseph Smith, the elders of Israel, a great host which no man can number; and

(6) The scriptures and recorded revelations of the past and present. (DNTC 1:198-99.)

5:37 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last sentence of this verse reads, "And verily I testify unto you, that ye have never heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape." (Italics added.)

Here Jesus clearly witnesses that his Father has shape, contrary to many dogmas of modern Christianity, which declare that God is "without body, parts, or passions."

5:38 This verse could have been more literally translated "And you do not have his word remaining in you, because the very one whom he dispatched you do not believe."

The Joseph Smith Translation begins this verse with "for" rather than "and."

5:39 Elsewhere Jesus had indicated that the fullness of the scriptures constituted the key to knowledge. (See text and commentaries for Luke 11:53.) Here, as in other places, he instructed a careful and diligent search of the scriptures. (See also text and commentaries for Matt. 24:30-31.)

Since we cannot "live by [the words which] proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" unless we know what they are, it is imperative that we study them. This the Lord has directed us to do.

As the Jews disputed with Jesus because he said that God was his Father, he pointedly responded: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.)

In the Lord's preface to his Book of Commandments, he said: "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled." (DC 1:37.)

We are under divine instruction to "teach the principles of [the] gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon." (DC 42:12.) This we cannot do unless we know what they are. (Marion G. Romney, CR, Apr. 1973, p. 117.)

5:40-47 These verses contain Jesus' teachings about honoring the Father and the Son.

5:40 And ye will not come to me that ye might have life, lest ye should honour me. (JST; italics added.)

What petty jealousies keep men from receiving gospel blessings! They will not accept the prophets sent of God, lest in doing so they thereby certify to the greatness and honor of the prophet-servant sent to minister to them. They reject the Son himself, lest in hearkening to his voice, they should honor him in the eyes of the people. What does it detract from one person because another is honored? Rightly viewed, is there not enough honor and to spare in God's kingdom for all who will receive it? (DNTC 1:201.)

5:41 No honor that man could bestow upon Jesus, "the Creator of the heavens and the earth and all things which in them are" could possibly add to the honor he already has and the honor he shares with the Father. Yet all we need do to share that honor is to keep their commandments, which we will do if we truly love God and our neighbors.

5:44 This verse could have been more literally translated "How can you believe, when you are accepting glory from one another and you are not seeking the glory that is from the only God?"

In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "How can ye believe, who seek honor one of another . . ." (Italics added.)

5:45 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "there is Moses who accuseth you, in whom ye trust."

5:46-47 The same concepts are taught by Nephi in the Book of Mormon: "Believe in Christ and deny him not, for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law." (2 Ne. 25:28.)
