6:1-14 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 14:13-21; Mark 6:30-44; Luke 9:10-17.

6:1 In this one verse the same body of water is referred to as "the sea of Galilee" and "sea of Tiberias." It is also called "the lake of Gennesaret." (Luke 5:1.)

6:5-14 As to the miracle itself, human knowledge is powerless to explain. Though wrought on so great a scale, it is no more nor less inexplicable than any other of the Lord's miraculous works. It was a manifestation of creative power, by which material elements were organized and compounded to serve a present and pressing need. The broken but unused portion exceeded in bulk and weight the whole of the original little store. Our Lord's direction to gather up the fragments was an impressive object-lesson against waste; and it may have been to afford such lesson that an excess was supplied. The fare was simple, yet nourishing, wholesome and satisfying. Barley bread and fish constituted the usual food of the poorer classes of the region. The conversion of water into wine at Cana was a qualitative transmutation; the feeding of the multitude involved a quantitative increase; who can say that one, or which, of these miracles of provision was the more wonderful? (JTC, pp. 334-35.)

(See section 1, "Miracles: Fed 5,000"; BD, "Barley.")

6:12 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "When they had eaten and were satisfied . . ." (Italics added.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented on the statement "Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost":

An object lesson in economy and the wise use of the temporal bounties so graciously bestowed by an omnipotent Deity. True the Incarnate Creator had but to speak and food and all needful things would be immediately at hand. But waste is sin. And his grace and compassion having been manifest, now the Twelve must make wise use of the excess food he had provided. (DNTC 1:345.)

6:15 Many of the Jews of Jesus' time were caught up in a feverish expectation for an imminent appearance of their longawaited Messiah. The oppressive hand of Roman domination grew heavier day by day. It was only natural, therefore, that they thought they saw in Jesus the fulfillment of their earthly hopes and dreams. Did he not possess miraculous powers? Had he not changed ordinary water into wine, raised the dead, healed the sick, and turned a few loaves of bread and fish into sufficient food to feed more than five thousand people? Could he not turn those same powers against Rome and free the Jews from foreign subjugation?

"The multitude, now fed and filled, gave some consideration to the miracle. In Jesus, by whom so great a work had been wrought, they recognized One having superhuman powers. 'This is of a truth the prophet that should come into the world,' said they—the Prophet whose coming had been foretold by Moses and who should be like unto himself. Even as Israel had been miraculously fed during the time of Moses, so now was bread provided in the desert by this new Prophet. In their enthusiasm the people proposed to proclaim Him king, and forcibly compel Him to become their leader. Such was their gross conception of Messianic supremacy." (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 335.) (LTJA, p. 90.)

6:16-21 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 14:22-23; Mark 6:45-52.

6:18 This verse could have been translated "Also, the sea began to be stirred up because a strong wind was blowing."

6:19 A furlong ("furrow long") is one hundred and twenty paces, or about one-eighth of a mile. Thus, the distance of "about five and twenty or thirty furlongs" would be approximately three and a half miles.

6:22-27 Other texts and commentaries concerned with the period immediately following the experience of Jesus walking on the waters of the sea of Galilee are Matthew 14:34-36 and Mark 6:53-56.

6:25 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "Rabbi, how camest thou hither?" (Italics added.)

The word rabbi which literally means "my great one," was a term of highest respect among the ancient Jews. The local rabbi in any given village was one of the most educated men in the area, generally a graduate of a recognized rabbinical school, and one designated to teach the people. Jesus' followers appear to have felt that he was such a graduate, likely because he showed so much learning. A rabbi literally devoted himself to serving the common people by teaching them in their synagogues, by administering to their wants and needs by charitable means, and by continuing study and application of the law of Moses (Torah) as he understood it. (LTJA, p. 90.)

(See section 1, "Rabbi.")

6:26-27 The ending of Jesus' answer reads as follows in the Joseph Smith Translation: "Ye seek me, not because ye desire to keep my sayings, neither because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled. Labor not for that meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man hath power to give unto you; for him hath God the Father sealed." (Italics added.)

"For him hath God the Father sealed" could have been translated "for upon this One the Father, even God, has put his seal [of approval]."

6:28-59 This masterful discourse on the Bread of Life is contained only in the account of John. Jesus, who pronounced himself as the "Bread of Life," was born in Bethlehem, the name of which in Hebrew means "House of Bread."

Elder James E. Talmage has shown the relationship of this sermon to the dialogue that immediately preceded it:

The Master's rebuke was followed by admonition and instruction: "Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for the meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed." This contrast between material and spiritual food they could not entirely fail to understand, and some of them asked what they should do to serve God, as Jesus required. The answer was: "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent." That Jesus was referring to Himself none could doubt; and straightway they demanded of Him further evidence of His divine commission; they would see greater signs. The miracle of the loaves and fishes was nearly a day old; and its impressiveness as evidence of Messianic attributes was waning. Moses had fed their fathers with manna in the desert, they said; and plainly they regarded a continued daily supply as a greater gift than a single meal of bread and fish, however much the latter may have been appreciated in the exigency of hunger. Moreover, the manna was heavenly food; whereas the bread He had given them was of earth, and only common barley bread at that. He must show them greater signs, and give them richer provender, before they would accept Him as the One whom they at first had taken Him to be and whom He now declared Himself to be. (JTC, pp. 339-40.)

6:30-31 These verses have been paraphrased by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

They said therefore unto him, We cannot accept your claim of divine Sonship unless you show us some great sign. True, you fed five thousand and more of us yesterday near Bethsaida with five loaves and two fishes, but surely you won't claim that as proof of the exalted claim to divinity which you now make. Why Moses, who was a man and not a god, fed millions of our fathers daily for forty years with manna from heaven. His miracle far exceeded yours of yesterday. Surely, if you are the Son of God, as you say, you will do some great work so we may believe on thee. Yea, we challenge your claim of divinity by asking, What miraculous work dost thou do? (DNTC 1:353.)

(See BD, "Manna.")

6:37 "I will in no wise cast out" means "I will by no means drive away."

6:40 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "and I will raise him up in the resurrection of the just at the last day." (Italics added.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased this verse:

And this also is the will of the Father who sent me, that everyone who receiveth me as the Son of God, and who believeth that I am the Christ, and who obeyeth the laws and ordinances of my gospel, enduring in righteousness to the end, shall have everlasting life; yea, it is his will that all such shall come forth in the resurrection of the just, raised in immortality and unto eternal life. (DNTC 1:354.)

6:44 No man can come unto me, except he doeth the will of my Father who hath sent me. And this is the will of him who hath sent me, that he receive the Son; for the Father beareth record of him; and he who receiveth the testimony, and doeth the will of him who sent me, I will raise up in the resurrection of the just. (JST; italics added.)

6:48-51 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased these verses to provide background for the rest of this sermon:

I am the bread of everlasting life, even that spiritual bread of which men must eat to gain everlasting life. This spiritual bread is that which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die spiritually, which spiritual death is to be cast out of the presence of the Lord and to die as pertaining to things of righteousness. True, your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, but they are dead, for this manna satisfied their temporal hunger only; it was not that spiritual bread of which men may eat and gain spiritual or eternal life. But I am the living bread, even the Son of God who came down from the Father in heaven. If any man shall eat of this spiritual bread, he shall live forever in that, being born again, he shall be spiritually alive in this world and inherit eternal life, which is spiritual life in the presence of the Father, in the world to come. And to eat the living bread is to accept me as the Son of God and to obey my commandments. And this living bread, which I shall give unto all who believe in me and obey my law, is my own flesh, in that it shall be because of my atoning sacrifice and temporal death that men shall have power to eat of the living bread and gain eternal life. Therefore say I unto you, I will give my flesh for the life of the world. (DNTC 1:356-57.)

6:52-58 There was little excuse for the Jews pretending to understand that our Lord meant an actual eating and drinking of His material flesh and blood. The utterances to which they objected were far more readily understood by them than they are by us on first reading; for the representation of the law and of truth in general as bread, and the acceptance thereof as a process of eating and drinking, were figures in everyday use by the rabbis of that time. Their failure to comprehend the symbolism of Christ's doctrine was an act of will, not the natural consequence of innocent ignorance. To eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ was and is to believe in and accept Him as the literal Son of God and Savior of the world, and to obey His commandments. By these means only may the Spirit of God become an abiding part of man's individual being, even as the substance of the food he eats is assimilated with the tissues of his body.

It is not sufficing to accept the precepts of Christ as we may adopt the doctrines of scientists, philosophers, and savants, however great the wisdom of these sages may be; for such acceptance is by mental assent or deliberate exercise of will, and has relation to the doctrine only as independent of the author. The teachings of Jesus Christ endure because of their intrinsic worth; and many men respect His aphorisms, proverbs, parables, and His profoundly philosophical precepts, who yet reject Him as the Son of God, the Only Begotten in the flesh, the God-Man in whom were united the attributes of Deity with those of humanity, the chosen and foreordained Redeemer of mankind, through whom alone may salvation be attained. But the figure used by Jesus—that of eating His flesh and drinking His blood as typical of unqualified and absolute acceptance of Himself as the Savior of men, is of superlative import; for thereby are affirmed the divinity of His Person, and the fact of His preexistent and eternal Godship. The sacrament of the Lord's supper, established by the Savior on the night of His betrayal, perpetuates the symbolism of eating His flesh and drinking His blood, by the partaking of bread and wine in remembrance of Him. Acceptance of Jesus as the Christ implies obedience to the laws and ordinances of His gospel; for to profess the One and refuse the other is but to convict ourselves of inconsistency, insincerity, and hypocrisy. (JTC, pp. 342-43.)

6:52 "The Jews therefore strove among themselves" means "Therefore the Jews began contending with one another."

6:53-54 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the end of verse 54 reads, "I will raise him up in the resurrection of the just at the last day." (Italics added.)

In substance and effect Jesus then said to the Jews:

"Solemnly and soberly I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his blood, by accepting me and my mission and obeying my gospel, ye have no spiritual life in you, but rather are spiritually dead and are not born again.

"Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood—by accepting me, keeping my commandments, and enduring unto the end—shall have eternal life; and I will raise him up in the resurrection of the just to an inheritance of exaltation in my Father's kingdom." (DNTC 1:359.)

In these words about eating his flesh and drinking his blood, Jesus reaches the climax of his great discourse on the Bread of Life. Since he is the Bread of Life (meaning the Son of God), which came down from the Father, and since men must eat this spiritual bread in order to gain salvation, it follows that eternal life is gained only by eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of God, or in other words, eternal life is gained only by accepting Jesus as the Christ and keeping his commandments.

To eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of God is, first, to accept him in the most literal and full sense, with no reservation whatever, as the personal offspring in the flesh of the Eternal Father; and, secondly, it is to keep the commandments of the Son by accepting his gospel, joining his Church, and enduring in obedience and righteousness unto the end. Those who by this course eat his flesh and drink his blood shall have eternal life, meaning exaltation in the highest heaven of the celestial world. Speaking of ancient Israel, for instance, Paul says: They "did all eat the same spiritual meat; And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (1 Cor. 10:3-4.) (DNTC 1:358.)

6:60-65 Why did Jesus select this particular time to stress a teaching many of "his disciples" felt was "an hard saying"?

By the simple expedient of teaching strong doctrine to the hosts who followed him, Jesus was able to separate the chaff from the wheat and choose out those who were worthy of membership in his earthly kingdom. Before entering the synagogue in Capernaum to preach his great discourse on the Bread of Life, Jesus was at the height of his popularity. Great multitudes of the common people followed him gladly; more than five thousand sympathizers had just sought to take him by force and make him king. For some two and a half years he had traveled, preached, and taught throughout all Palestine. At his command disciples had gone forth teaching his doctrine and testifying that he was the promised Messiah. All men knew of his message and miracles; his doctrine was discussed in every synagogue; his gospel was heralded from the housetops. The seeds, so profusely planted, had sprouted and grown; and now the time had arrived to begin to separate the chaff from the wheat, to test the faith of his disciples, to learn who, following him at all hazards, were worthy of him. Unable to believe and accept his strong and plain assertions about eating his flesh and drinking his blood, even many classified as disciples fell away. And this process of sifting, trial, and testing was to continue with increasing intensity for the final climactic year of his mortal ministry.

This testing and shifting process has ever been part of the Lord's system. Man have been placed on earth to be tried and tested, "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abra. 3:25.) After they accept the gospel and join the Church, this testing process continues, indeed, is often intensified. "I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me." (D. C. 98:14-15.) (DNTC 1:361-62.)

6:65 And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except he doeth the will of my Father who hath sent me. (JST; italics added.)

6:66-71 [The sermon on the Bread of Life as recorded by John] is highly spiritual, and contains references about Christ as the "Bread of Life," which His followers could not believe. They could not comprehend what He was saying, and many of them walked away. . . . The twelve . . . slightly glimpsed the spiritual significance of that sermon. . . . Those apostles had that day the power and privilege of making a choice—whether they would walk with those who were impressed only with the physical favors, advantages, which nature could give, or whether their gifts heed to the spiritual in man. . . . Such a decision may determine whether one responds to the call of one's soul to rise, or yields to the tendency to grovel. . . The disciples of Jesus glimpsed a light that would enlighten their souls spiritually as the sun replaces darkness with beams of light. But there are few persons who see that Light or even believe in the fuller life, and often after glimpsing it, they turn away to the grosser and more sordid things. (David O. McKay, "Whither Shall We Go?" Speeches of the Year, 1961, pp. 2-4; italics added.)
