7:1 "In Jewry" actually reads in the Greek text "in Judea" and is so worded in most modern translations.

7:2-9 Read text and commentary for Matthew 12:46-50.

A testimony of the divinity of Christ and of the saving power of his gospel is not bestowed automatically because of family relationship. It comes only by personal obedience to those eternal laws upon which its receipt is predicted. In nearly all ages there have been prophets and righteous men whose sons and daughters have forsaken the faith of their fathers and have chosen to walk after the manner of the world.

Frequent special reference is made to the sons of Joseph and Mary as the "brethren" of Jesus, though in fact they were his half brothers. (Matt. 12:46; 13:55; John 2:12; Acts 1:14; 1 Cor. 9:5.) Though they were reared in the same household and came under the benign influence of Joseph and Mary, though they were aware of the teachings, ministry, and miracles of Jesus himself, yet these his close relatives had not so far accepted him as the Messiah. However, all of them, apparently, were converted later (Acts 1:14); one of them, identified by Paul as "James the Lord's brother" (Gal. 1:19), was to minister in the holy apostleship; and yet another, Judas, who calls himself, "Jude, the . . . brother of James" (Jude 1), wrote the epistle of Jude. (DNTC 1:437.)

(See section 1, "Brethren of the Lord.")

7:3 The Joseph Smith Translation inserts "there" so that the verse ends "that thy disciples there also may see the works that thou doest." (Italics added.)

7:8 By stating that he was not going to the feast yet, Jesus indicated that he indeed intended to go later but at a time and under conditions of his own choosing. Thus he "abode still" (remained) in Galilee for a while longer. In the Joseph Smith Translation, verse 9 ends, "He continued still in Galilee." (Italics added.)

7:10 (Read Luke 9:51-56.) In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "But after his brethren were gone up . . ." (Italics added.)

Students of the New Testament have disagreed concerning the meaning of "as it were in secret." Some believe this means Jesus made the trip alone; others say he went only with his chosen twelve disciples; still others believe that he avoided going with one of the large caravans of people who would be going to Jerusalem for the Feast of Tabernacles. Also, he may have gone by a route that was not commonly traveled.

7:11-13 Apparently the hatred and persecution of Jesus was so great that even some of his closest disciples were afraid to speak "openly of him."

7:13 Today's English Version translates this verse "But no one talked about him openly, because they were afraid of the Jewish authorities."

7:14-24 The first part of His discourse is not recorded, but its scriptural soundness is intimated in the surprise of the Jewish teachers, who asked among themselves: "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" He was no graduate of their schools; He had never sat at the feet of their rabbis; He had not been officially accredited by them nor licensed to teach. Whence came His wisdom, before which all their academic attainments were as nothing? Jesus answered their troubled queries, saying: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." His Teacher, greater even than Himself, was the Eternal Father, whose will He proclaimed. The test proposed to determine the truth of His doctrine was in every way fair, and withal simple; anyone who would earnestly seek to do the will of the Father should know of himself whether Jesus spoke truth or error. (JTC, p. 400.)

7:16 The Father, not the Son, is the Author of the plan of salvation. This plan embodies the Father's doctrine, the Father's laws, the Father's gospel. He ordained and announced the whole plan of creation, redemption, salvation, and exaltation, and he chose one of his spirit offspring to be born into the world as his Son to work out the infinite and eternal atonement—all in accordance with his will. The laws which must be obeyed to gain salvation are spoken of as the gospel of Jesus Christ because our Lord himself conformed to them perfectly, adopted them as his own, taught them in the power of his Father, and worked out the atoning sacrifice, by means of which they gained full force and validity. (DNTC 1:441-42.)

7:17 In searching the record as it is given to us by men who associated daily with the Lord, we find that upon one occasion men who were listening to him cried out against him. They opposed his works, as men today oppose him. And one voice cried out and said in effect, "How do we know that what you tell us is true? How do we know that your profession of being the Son of God is true." And Jesus answered him in just a simple way (and note the test): "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17. Italics added.)

That test is most sound. It is most philosophical. It is the most simple test to give knowledge to an individual of which the human mind can conceive. Doing a thing, introducing it into your very being, will convince you whether it is good or whether it is bad. You may not be able to convince me of that which you know, but you know it because you have lived it. That is the test that the Savior gave to those men when they asked him how they should know whether the doctrine was of God or whether it was of man. (David O. McKay, CR, Oct. 1966, p. 136.)

7:22-23 In referring to the fact that the Jews were permitted to circumcise on the Sabbath day but not to do any healings, Jesus emphasized that their traditions had become more important and binding to them than the scriptures ("the law of Moses").

This colloquy between Jesus and his detractors is a perfect illustration of the damning power of false doctrine. Here we find an account of the Jews rejecting their Messiah, spurning his gospel, and even conspiring to slay him—all because his ministerial acts ran counter to their false traditions. They had circumscribed the law of sabbath observance with a host of ritualistic restrictions; Jesus violated these; therefore, he could not be the Messiah.

Nor is it any different with professing religionists today. Their false traditions say that revelation and prophecy ceased with the death of the ancient apostles; Joseph Smith comes among them wearing the prophetic mantle, thus running counter to all their preconceived notions; therefore, he could not be a prophet. (DNTC 1:442.)

7:24 Judge not according to your traditions, but judge righteous judgment. (JST; italics added.)

7:25-31 These verses contain the people's reactions to Jesus' teachings.

7:27 The following footnote on this verse is contained in the Jerusalem Bible: "Although the prophecy that the Messiah would be born in Bethlehem was well known, it was commonly believed that he would appear suddenly from some secret place."

7:30 That some leaders of the Jews "sought to take" Jesus as soon as he had finished his statement indicates that they clearly understood that he had claimed to be the Son of God; thus, they were ready to bring him to trial for blasphemy. However, "his hour was not yet come."

7:32-39 The unrepentant Jews would not be able to follow Jesus when he returned to his Father because no unclean thing can enter there. In John 14:1-3 he tells his faithful followers, "Where I am, there ye may be also."

7:37-39 In the majesty of his own eternal might, the Lord Jehovah had proclaimed to ancient Israel: "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring." (Isa. 44:3.) "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." (Isa. 55:1.)

Now the same Eternal One, tabernacled in the flesh, ministering as the Lord Jesus unto the seed and offspring of them of old, proclaimed his willingness to give the Holy Ghost to men so that floods of living water might be poured out upon them. His solemn invitation, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink," was a plain and open claim of Messiahship. In making it he identified himself as the very Jehovah who had promised drink to the thirsty through an outpouring of the Spirit. After such a pronouncement his hearers were faced with two choices: Either he was a blasphemer worthy of death, or he was in fact the God of Israel.

For the publicizing of such a sobering and transcendent doctrine Jesus chose one of the most solemn and dramatic moments of Jewish worship. On each of the eight days of the feast of Tabernacles, as most authorities agree, it was the custom, for the priest as part of the temple service, to take water in golden vessels from the stream of Siloam, which flowed under the temple-mountain, and pour it upon the altar. Then the words of Isaiah were sung: "With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." (Isa. 12:3.) And it was at this very moment of religious climax that Jesus stepped forth and offered draughts of living refreshment which would satisfy the deepest spiritual cravings of the thirsty soul. (DNTC 1:445-46.)

7:38 "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" is not found in the Old Testament, although Isaiah wrote, "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty. . . . . I will pour my spirit upon thy seed." (Isa. 44:3; see also 55:1; 58:11.) If "out of his belly" means "out of his inner heart" or "out of his inmost soul," then verse 39 might indicate that the gift of the Holy Ghost, given to true believers who are baptized, could be the "rivers of living water" that flow to others.

7:39 (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was promised unto them who believe, after that Jesus was glorified.) (JST; italics added.)

In this instance John is explaining two things about the Holy Ghost: (1) That it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that rivers of living water flow forth from the true disciples to all who will drink of them; and (2) That the actual enjoyment of the gift of the Holy Ghost by the disciples is yet future; the promise has been made that they shall have the coveted companionship; but the fulfilment of the promise is not to be realized until after Jesus returns to the Father in resurrected glory. The fact that the enjoyment of the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost was yet future did not mean that the disciples had not on occasions and from time to time received revelation and guidance from that member of the Godhead. The testimonies previously borne by them were born of the Spirit. (See Matt. 16:17.) (DNTC 1:447.)

(See section 1, "Holy Ghost.")

7:40-44 This "division among the people" brought forth the revealing comments that the people knew the Christ would come "of the seed of David" and "out of the town of Bethlehem." (See text and commentaries for Matthew 12:23; 22:41-46; Luke 1:32; 2:4.) The major question remaining was "Shall Christ come out of Galilee?" Isaiah had foretold that "the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali" would receive a special blessing (Isa. 9:1), and Matthew felt that when Jesus moved into the Galilee this fulfilled Isaiah's words. (See text and commentaries for Matt. 4:13-16.)

One wonders—in the midst of all the miracles and inquiry into his claimed Messiahship—why these religionists did not search out the fact that our Lord was both a Galilean and a Judean, that he came both from Nazareth and Bethlehem. But such a failure to investigate and learn the facts is ever the child of prejudice. In a similar sense one wonders why professing modern Christians—seeing the fruits of the ministry of Joseph Smith—do not make attentive and intelligent inquiry into the claims surrounding his divine mission. (DNTC 1:448-49.)

7:40-41 The distinction between "The Prophet" (v. 40) and "the Christ" indicates that the people believed they were to be two separate persons:

One of the great Messianic prophecies foretold that when Christ was raised up, he would come as a prophet like unto Moses. (Deut. 18:15-19; Acts 3:22-23; Jos. Smith 2:40; 3 Ne. 20:23.) The Prophet was to be the Christ. But in their darkened spiritual state some of the Jews attending the feast had come to view this prophet as a forerunner of the Messiah rather than as the Messiah himself. (DNTC 1:448.)

7:45-53 Even though "the officers" of the chief priests and Pharisees were duly impressed with the teachings of Jesus ("Never man spake like this man"), this did not keep them from seeking judgment against him. Only Nicodemus appears to have spoken in his favor.

Concerning the question put by Nicodemus ("Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?"), Elder Bruce R. McConkie, trained in the law himself, has observed.

How right Nicodemus was, as his fellow San Hedrinists well knew, for their whole system of jurisprudence was built around the revealed injunctions: (1) That men should not raise a false report, nor join with the wicked as unrighteous witnesses (Ex. 23:1); (2) That the judges in Israel were to hear the causes of the people before deciding them, and then they were to judge righteously (Deut. 1:16); (3) That issues could be decided only upon the prior, formal testimony of two or three competent witnesses. (Deut. 19:15.) (DNTC 1:449.)
