8:1-11 The account of the woman caught in adultery is recorded only by John.

8:3 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "in the midst of the people." (Italics added.)

8:5 Old Testament scriptures that mention death by stoning as the penalty for betrothed or married persons guilty of adultery include Exodus 20:14; Leviticus 20:10; Deuteronomy 13:9-10; 17:2-7; 22:13-22; Ezekiel 16:35-43. The law also prescribed that the two or more official witnesses whose testimony resulted in the conviction were to cast the first stones. (Deut. 13:9; 17:7; see also BD, "Adultery.")

8:6 "Tempting" has also been translated as "trap" and as "test."

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained how the scribes and the Pharisees were "tempting" Jesus:

In bringing this adulteress to Jesus, the scribes and Pharisees were laying this trap for the Master: (1) If he agreed with Moses that she should be stoned, he would both (a) arouse the ire of the people generally by seeming to advocate the reinstitution of a penalty which did not have popular support, and (b) run counter to the prevailing civil law by prescribing what Rome proscribed. (2) If he disagreed with Moses and advocated anything less than death by stoning, he would be accused of perverting the law, and of advocating disrespect of and departure from the hallowed practices of the past. (DNTC 1:450-51.)

8:9-11 And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst of the temple.

When Jesus had raised up himself, and saw none of her accusers, and the woman standing, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?

She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more. And the woman glorified God from that hour, and believed on his name. (JST; italics added.)

"Neither do I condemn thee" should not be construed to mean that the woman was completely pardoned or forgiven:

Did the Lord forgive the woman? Could he forgive her? There seems to be no evidence of forgiveness. His command to her was, "Go, and sin no more." He was directing the sinful woman to go her way, abandon her evil life, commit no more sin, transform her life. He was saying, Go, woman, and start your repentance; and he was indicating to her the beginning step—to abandon her transgressions. (MF, p. 165.)

Could this woman gain forgiveness of so gross a crime as adultery? Certainly. Through faith, repentance, baptism, and continued obedience, it was within her power to become clean and spotless before the Lord and a worthy candidate for his celestial presence. Repentant persons have power to cleanse themselves even from so evil a thing as sex immortality. (1 Cor. 6:9-11; 3 Ne. 30.) That such seemingly was the course taken by this woman is inferred from the Inspired Version statement that she believed in Christ and glorified God from that very hour. (DNTC 1:451.)

If Jesus were to stand by and be asked to judge those whom we accuse and should say to us, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her," and then should stoop and write in the sand, how many of us would feel to steal away ashamed, convicted in our own conscience? How sound is his counsel!" (N. Eldon Tanner, CR, Apr. 1972, p. 57.)

8:12-20 Jesus' statement "I am the light of the world" and his subsequent teachings on this witness of himself and the Father's witness of him are found in detail only in John.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has noted the appropriateness of Jesus teaching these things near the temple:

It appears to have been our Lord's deliberate design to dramatize the great truths relative to himself by associating them with the religious and social practices then prevailing. It was, for instance, while drinking at Jacob's well with the woman of Samaria (John 4:6-15), and again while the priests carried water in golden vessels from the pool Siloam during the Feast of Tabernacles (John 7:37-39), that he chose to speak of living water. It was after miraculously providing loaves and fishes for the hungering thousands, that he proclaimed himself as the living bread sent down from heaven. (John 6.) And so now, apparently while the great golden lamp-stands in the temple were blazing forth their light as part of the festivities of the Feast of Tabernacles, he took occasion to associate himself with the Messianic prophecies by announcing, "I am the light of the world."

His hearers well knew that their Messiah should stand as a light to all men; that is, they knew that he as the very source of light and truth, would stand forth as a light, an example, a dispenser of truth; they knew that his would be the mission to mark the course and light the way which all men should travel. (3 Ne. 15:9; 18:16, 24.) Messianic prophecies given to their fathers promised that he would be "a light to the Gentiles" (Isa. 49:6), a light piercing the darkness of error and unbelief. (Isa. 60:1-3.) Jesus' application of these prophecies to his own person was a clear proclamation of his own Messiahship and was so understood by his hearers. (DNTC 1:452-53.)

8:19 "Where is thy Father?" was an obvious challenge to Jesus to produce more evidence that he was indeed the Son of God.

8:21-30 These words Jesus spake "in the treasury, as he taught in the temple" are recorded only by John.

Jesus was soon to return to his Father in heaven. "No unclean thing can enter" into the presence of our Heavenly Father, so these unrepentant people could not follow Jesus there. (See 3 Ne. 27:19-20.)

8:25-28 The question "Who art thou?" indicates that the Pharisees still were not willing to receive Jesus as the Messiah, but wanted him to make the claim clearly so they could bring him to trial for blasphemy. In referring to himself by the sacred title "Son of Man," Jesus again proclaimed his divine nature.

8:31-59 These strong teachings, recorded only by John, reveal the weakness of many of the traditions of the Pharisees as contrasted with the teachings in their scriptures.

8:32 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has interpreted the foregoing expression to mean that we shall be made "free from the damning power of false doctrine; free from the bondage of appetite and lust; free from the shackles of sin; from every evil and corrupt influence and from every restraining and curtailing power; free to go on to the unlimited freedom enjoyed in its fulness only by exalted beings." (DNTC 1:456-57.) (LTJA, p. 108.)

8:33-34 Elder James E. Talmage has commented on the saying "the truth shall make you free," relating it to the response of the Pharisees:

At these words, so rich in blessing, so full of comfort for the believing soul, the people were stirred to angry demonstrations; their Jewish temper was immediately ablaze. To promise them freedom was to imply that they were not already free. "We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?" In their unbridled fanaticism they had forgotten the bondage of Egypt, the captivity of Babylon, and were oblivious of their existing state of vassalage to Rome. To say that Israel had never been in bondage was not only to convict themselves of falsehood but to stultify themselves wretchedly.

Jesus made it clear that He had not referred to freedom in its physical or political sense alone, though to this conception their false disavowal had been directed; the liberty He proclaimed was spiritual liberty; the grievous bondage from which He would deliver them was the serfdom of sin. (JTC, p. 409.)

8:37-40 Jesus made it clear that although the Pharisees might be of Abraham's seed physically, they were not spiritually his children, for they did not the works of Abraham.

For nearly 2,000 years all of Israel had clung tenaciously to God's promise to Abraham: "I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee." (Gen. 17:7.) Also: "And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 22:18.) Now these unbelieving Jews, a remnant of the seed of faithful Abraham, glorying in their Abrahamic descent, contended with Jesus about their assumed preferential status as the "seed" of that ancient patriarch.

To understand this discussion between Jesus and his Jewish detractors, it must be remembered that men are born in various families, nations, and races as a direct result of their pre-existent life. (Deut. 32:7-8; Acts 17:26.) Many choice spirits from preexistence are sent in selected families. This enables them to undergo their mortal probations under circumstances where the gospel and its blessings will be more readily available to them.

Abraham gained the promise from the Lord that his descendants, his "literal seed, . . . the seed of the body," would be natural heirs to all of "the blessings of the Gospel." (Abra. 2:11.) His seed were to be "lawful heirs, according to the flesh," because of their "lineage." (D. C. 86:8-11.) Accordingly, since Abraham's day, the Lord has sent a host of righteous spirits through that favored lineage.

Further, Abraham also gained the divine assurance that all those who thereafter received the gospel, no matter what their literal lineage, should be "accounted" his seed and should rise up and bless him as their father. (Abra. 2:10.) By adoption such converts would "become . . . the seed of Abraham." (D. C. 84:34.) Conversely, and in this spiritual sense, such of the literal seed of Abraham as rejected the gospel light would be cut off from the house of their fathers and be denied an eternal inheritance with Israel and Abraham. "For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel," as Paul explained it. "Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: . . . That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed." (Rom. 9:6-8.)

Thus there are two distinct meanings of the expression, "seed of Abraham": (1) There are his literal descendants who have sprung from his loins and who by virtue of their favored family status are natural heirs of the same blessings which Abraham himself enjoyed; and (2) There are those (including adopted members of the family) who become the "seed of Abraham" in the full spiritual sense by conformity to the same gospel principles which Abraham obeyed. In this spiritual sense, the disobedient literal descendants of Abraham, being "children of the flesh," are not "accounted" as Abraham's seed, but are cut off from the blessings of the gospel. (DNTC 1:458-60.)

(See BD, "Abraham, Covenant of.")

8:38 Jesus was contrasting the two "fathers" we may choose to obey: "my Father" (our Heavenly Father) and "your father" (the devil). (See v. 44.)

8:43 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse ends, "ye cannot bear my word." (Italics added.)

8:44 The devil was a "murderer from the beginning" because he influenced Cain to kill Abel and because he sought to destroy the truth. (See Alma 39:6; Ether 8:15; DC 76:25-27; Moses 5:18-25.)

"When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own" could have been more literally translated "When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition."

8:46 The first question in this verse has been translated "Which of you convicts me of sin?" and "Which one of you can prove that I am guilty of sin?"

8:47 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "heareth" and "hear" with "receiveth" and "receive."

8:48 Read text and commentaries for Luke 17:11-19 and John 4:9 for further background on the term Samaritan.

They had before called Him a Galilean; that appellative was but mildly depreciatory, and moreover was a truthful designation according to their knowledge; but the epithet "Samaritan" was inspired by hate, and by its application they meant to disown Him as a Jew. (JTC, p. 411.)

The inhabitants of Samaria were a mixed people, in whom the blood of Israel was mingled with that of the Assyrians and other nations; and one cause of the animosity existing between them and their neighbors both on the north and the south was the Samaritans' claim for recognition as Israelites; it was their boast that Jacob was their father; but this the Jews denied. The Samaritans had a version of the Pentateuch, which they revered as the law, but they rejected all the prophetical writings of what is now the Old Testament, because they considered themselves treated with insufficient respect therein.

To the orthodox Jew of the time a Samaritan was more unclean than a Gentile of any other nationality. It is interesting to note the extreme and even absurd restrictions then in force in the matter of regulating unavoidable relations between the two peoples. The testimony of a Samaritan could not be heard before a Jewish tribunal. For a Jew to eat food prepared by a Samaritan was at one time regarded by rabbinical authority as an offense as great as that of eating the flesh of swine. While it was admitted that produce from a field in Samaria was not unclean, inasmuch as it sprang directly from the soil, such produce became unclean if subjected to any treatment at Samaritan hands. Thus, grapes and grain might be purchased from Samaritans, but neither wine nor flour manufactured therefrom by Samaritan labor. On one occasion the epithet "Samaritan" was hurled at Christ as an intended insult. "Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil." (JTC, pp. 172-73.)

8:51-52 The Lord has said in this dispensation, "And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter." (DC 42:46-47; italics added.)

The statement in verse 51 has been translated in the New English Bible as "he shall never know what it is to die."

Another meaning is, of course, that those who follow the Savior will not die the spiritual death that is the consequence of sin.

8:53 "Whom makest thou thyself?" could have been more literally translated "Who do you claim to be?"

8:56 Jesus' statement "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day" indicates that at one time the Old Testament may have contained teachings similar to those in Abraham 2:6-11, where we learn that Jehovah appeared to Abraham and gave him many promises concerning the gospel and the priesthood.

This verse could have been more literally translated "Abraham your father rejoiced greatly in the prospect of seeing my day, and he saw it and rejoiced."

8:57 Jesus did not say he had seen Abraham, but rather that Abraham had seen him and his day, thus making himself greater than the foremost patriarch of the Jewish nation. But the Jews, in an apparent attempt to subtract honor from him in whose presence they then stood, twisted our Lord's statement to mean that he had looked back and seen the day of Abraham. (DNTC 1:463.)

8:58 "Before Abraham was, I am" could have been translated "Before Abraham came into existence, I have been." However, some Latter-day Saint authorities have indicated that a more correct rendering is "Before Abraham, was I AM."

This was an unequivocal and unambiguous declaration of our Lord's eternal Godship. By the awful title I AM He had made Himself known to Moses and thereafter was so known in Israel. . . . It is the equivalent of "Yahveh," or "Jahveh," now rendered "Jehovah," and signifies "The Self-existent One," "The Eternal," "The First and the Last." Jewish traditionalism forbade the utterance of the sacred Name; yet Jesus claimed it as His own. In an orgy of self-righteous indignation, the Jews seized upon the stones that lay in the unfinished courts, and would have crushed their Lord, but the hour of His death had not yet come, and unseen of them He passed through the crowd and departed from the temple.

His seniority to Abraham plainly referred to the status of each in the antemortal or preexistent state; Jesus was as literally the Firstborn in the spirit-world, as He was the Only Begotten in the flesh. Christ is as truly the Elder Brother of Abraham and Adam as of the last-born child of the earth. (JTC, pp. 411-12.)
