9:1-41 This account of the healing by Jesus of a man who "was blind from his birth" is contained only in John. The entire chapter forms a complete whole.

9:2 The intriguing question "Who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" indicates that the disciples believed in a pre-earthly existence and that it was possible to sin in the pre-earthly existence.

Apparently the Jews had some understanding of the doctrine of pre-existence. Among their righteous forbears it had been taught plainly as a basic gospel truth. (Moses 3:4-9; 4:1-4; 6:51; Abra. 3:22-28.) Such scriptures as were then available to them however, contained only passing allusions to it. (Num. 16:22; Isa. 14:12-20; Jer. 1:5.) But it was a doctrine implicit in the whole plan of salvation as such was known to and understood by them. They had, for instance, no more occasion to prove the ante-mortal existence of spirits than they did to prove God was a personal Being. Both truths were assumed; concepts to the contrary were heresies which gained prevalence in later ages.

Jesus' disciples—probably as a direct result of his teachings—knew and believed that men were the spirit children of God in pre-existence and that in such prior estate they were subject to law and endowed with agency. Otherwise they never would have asked nor would there have been any sense or reason to a question which is predicated upon the assumption that men can sin before they are born into mortality. (DNTC 1:480.)

(See section 1, "Blindness.")

9:4 I must work the works of him that sent me, while I am with you; the time cometh when I shall have finished my work, then I go unto the Father. (JST; italics added.)

The Book of Mormon also teaches that "a night" will come "when no man can work": "After this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:33.)

9:6 It is not clear exactly why Jesus "anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay"; he had not followed this practice in other healings. (See texts and commentaries for Matt. 4:24; Luke 4:40-44; John 4:46-54.) Some scholars have thought Jesus may have anointed the blind man's eyes to strengthen his faith.

9:7 By this act of giving sight to a blind beggar Jesus, in a dramatic and irrefutable manner, proclaimed himself as: (1) The Light of the World; and (2) The very Son of God. Incident to its performance he also: Confirmed the disciples' belief in pre-existence; rejected the belief of some that physical handicaps result from ante-mortal sin; taught that his own work was assigned him by the Father; reaffirmed that he stands in judgment upon the world; and taught that rejection of light and truth bring condemnation. (DNTC 1:479.)

9:13 And they brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees. (JST; italics added.)

9:14 For further background on the reactions of the apostate religious leaders to healings performed on the Sabbath, see texts and commentaries for Matthew 12:10-13; Luke 13:10-17; 14:1-6.

9:16 The Pharisees who accused Jesus of breaking the Sabbath in performing this healing were in fact acknowledging that the healing had taken place. However, whether or not the Sabbath had been properly kept was not the real issue:

The real problem bothering the Pharisees was not whether it was proper for Jesus to heal on the Sabbath day. Nor did it concern them whether or not Jesus was truly the Messiah. The Pharisees felt that their very existence as interpreters of the Mosaic Law was threatened. They demanded that every Jew conform his life to a harsh set of ritual rules and laws, the breaking of which would make him unclean and, therefore, unacceptable to God

In contrast, Jesus taught that God's laws were based on love; that obedience brought freedom, happiness, and fulfillment. The essence of Christ's teachings shed the light of truth upon those false and burdensome philosophies which kept men in the darkness of disbelief, ignorance, and sin. See John 9:39. Jesus clearly set forth the path by which men could achieve salvation and offered a choice: remain as you are, or transform your life and follow me. It was as though Jesus had said this:

"I am come into the world to sit in judgment upon all men, to divide them into two camps by their acceptance or rejection of my word. Those who are spiritually blind have their eyes opened through obedience to my gospel and shall see the things of the Spirit. Those who think they can see in the spiritual realm, but who do not accept me and my gospel shall remain in darkness and be made blind to the true spiritual realities." (McConkie, DNTC 1:482.) (LTJA, p. 109.)

9:22 "He should be put out of the synagogue" is the equivalent of "he should be excommunicated from the Church."

9:27 He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not believe; wherefore would you believe if I should tell you again? and would you be his disciples? (JST; italics added.)

9:29 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "fellow" to "man."

Concerning the thinking behind the statement "We know that God spake unto Moses; as for this man we know not from whence he is," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has observed:

From age to age disbelieving persons fall back on the same shaky notions to justify themselves from rejecting light and truth. In modern times they say, in effect, "We know that God spake unto Jesus, and unto Peter, James and John; but as for this Joseph Smith, we know not from whence he is." To which one whose eyes have been opened spiritually might aptly reply: "Why herein is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whether Joseph Smith was sent of God, and yet he hath communed with God, received revelation upon revelation, translated the Book of Mormon, performed many miracles, set up again the kingdom of God on earth, and organized a Church which is fast becoming a world power and to which hundreds of thousands of the elect are gathering from all parts of the earth. Now we know that God heareth not sinners: but if any be a worshiper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth. Since the world began was it not heard that any man could do the mighty works performed in this dispensation unless God was with him. If Joseph Smith were not of God, his fraudulent claims would have been uncovered long ago and his work come to naught." (DNTC 1:481.)

9:32 "Since the world began" could have been more literally translated "From of old."

The Joseph Smith Translation adds "except he be of God" at the end of this verse.

9:34 The accusation of the Pharisees that Jesus was "born in sins" could indicate they also understood the doctrine of a pre-earthly existence. (See text and commentary for John 9:2.)

9:35 The Greek text indicates that this statement could have been worded "Are you putting faith in the Son of Man?"

9:38 "Lord, I believe" could have been more literally translated "I do put faith in him, Lord."

9:39-41 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased and commented on these verses:

"I am come into the world to sit in judgment upon all men, to divide them into two camps by their acceptance or rejection of my word. Those who are spiritually blind have their eyes opened through obedience to my gospel and shall see the things of the Spirit. Those who think they can see in the spiritual realm, but who do not accept me and my gospel shall remain in darkness and be made blind to the true spiritual realities."

"He who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D. C. 82:3.) "Where there is no law . . . there is no condemnation." (2 Ne. 9:25.) Modern sectarians, to whom the message of the restoration is presented, are in this same state of blindness and sin. They have the scriptures before them; they study the gospel doctrines contained in them; they are concerned about religion in general; and then they hear the latter-day elders, speaking as those having authority, present the message of salvation—and yet they choose to remain in the churches of the day rather than accept the fulness of revealed truth. If they were blind, knowing none of these things, they would be under no condemnation for rejecting the light; but when the truth is offered to them and they reject it, claiming to have the light already, they are under condemnation, for their sin remaineth. (DNTC 1:482.)
