10:1-16 Among the pastoral people of Palestine, service as a pastor or shepherd was one of the most honorable and respected vocations. Accordingly, many of the prophets had used the shepherd's vocation as a basis for teaching great spiritual truths and as a means of foretelling the coming of the Messiah. Who would be the Good Shepherd. By means of this allegory of the shepherd and the sheepfold Jesus bears record of his own divinity and specifies how his true shepherds should deal in the spiritual pastures of the gospel. (DNTC 1:483-84.)

The shepherd in Palestine lived a lonely life and was noted for his faithfulness and protection to his sheep. At night the sheep would be brought into an enclosure called a sheepfold which had high walls to keep anything or anyone from getting in. At the top of the walls were placed thorns which prevented wolves from leaping into the enclosure. Proper entrance was at the door only. (John 10:1.)

Often several flocks were brought into one fold and one shepherd, called a porter, would stand guard at the door during the night while the others would go home to rest. When they would return in the morning, they would be recognized by the doorkeeper, allowed to enter, and each call his own flock and lead them forth to pasture. (John 10:2-3.) The shepherd provided the food for the sheep.

The shepherd walked ahead of his sheep and led them. The sheep knew the shepherd and trusted in him and would not follow a stranger. (John 10:4-5.) He generally had a name for each sheep and each knew its own name and would come when called. If a stranger called, the sheep became nervous and startled and would not obey the voice of the stranger, for they knew their master's voice. (John 10:3-4, 27.)

The true shepherd, the owner of the sheep, was willing to give his life for the sheep if need be. Sometimes a leopard or panther, when driven by hunger, would leap over the walls of the fold and into the midst of the frightened sheep. Then was the time when the nerve and heart of the shepherd was tried. A hireling, one who did not own the sheep, might at such a crisis flee from the danger and shrink from the duties of the shepherd. (John 10:11-13.) Unwatched, the hireling might not put the welfare of the sheep foremost in his life. Hirelings had been known to sell sheep and then pocket the money and account for the loss by saying that wolves came and destroyed the sheep. When this is applied to the gospel, it is seen what a "hireling" might do with the care of human souls. But the true shepherd's chief concern was the welfare of the sheep. (John 21:1-17.)

Even the shepherd's clothing was designed to aid him in his care of the sheep. The shepherd's coat generally had a large pocket inside, suitable for carrying a weak or wounded lamb to safety. Isaiah made reference to this pocket when he ascribed to Christ the role of shepherd. (Isaiah 40:10-11.)

Jesus' station as the Good Shepherd is complete in every detail. He is the door of the fold, by which we must enter. There is none other. (John 10:9.) He is not a hireling but is the true shepherd of human souls, and "we are not our own" (1 Corinthians 6:19-20), but he has purchased us with his precious blood. (1 Corinthians 7:23; 1 Peter 1:18-19; 2 Peter 2:1; Acts 20:28.) The shepherd provided the pasture on which the sheep feed. Jesus has given us his word. We are warned against the doctrines of men. Only the "pasture" that the Lord provides is proper food for his sheep, and no man can be saved in ignorance of his word or without his revelations. The true sheep know his voice. The true Shepherd knows and owns his sheep and he calls them. We thus take upon us the name of Christ, for the owns us; we are his sheep; and, if we have his name, we can enter "by the door." (Robert J. Matthews, The Parables of Jesus, pp. 75-76.)

10:3 "Porter" has also been translated "gatekeeper," "door-keeper," and "watchman."

10:4-5 Peter also used the imagery of the shepherd and of the sheep:

Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away. (1 Pet. 5:1-4.)

10:7 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "sheep" with "sheepfold."

10:8 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "All that ever came before me who testified not of me are thieves and robbers . . ." (Italics added.)

"To him give all the prophets witness." (Acts 10:43.) There never was a prophet of God in any age who did not testify of Christ and his mission. Any professing prophet, teacher, pastor, shepherd, minister, or priest, in any age, who is not in fact called of God and who does not bear witness of Christ is a false prophet, or as Jesus here says a thief and a robber. (DNTC 1:484-85.)

10:10 "Robber" could have been translated "plunderer." The latter translation is more consistent with the context, inasmuch as a "thief" and a "robber" are essentially the same, but there could be a substantial difference between a "thief" and a "plunderer."

10:11 "I am the Messiah, the Redeemer, the Son of God." All Israel knew their Messiah would be the great Shepherd, the Teacher, who as the Lord God incarnate, would make his sheep to lie down in green pastures, would lead them beside still waters, would restore their souls and lead them in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake, and who in the end would cause them to dwell in the house of the Lord forever. (Ps. 23.)

All Israel knew also that Isaiah had prophesied: "Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young." (Isa. 40:10-11.)

And now One ministered among them who said: "I am he!" (DNTC 1:485.)

10:12-13 The Joseph Smith Translation changes the beginning of each of these verses (italics added):

Verse 12: "And the shepherd is not as a hireling . . ."

Verse 13: "But he who is a hireling fleeth . . ."

Never has been written or spoken a stronger arraignment of false pastors, unauthorized teachers, self-seeking hirelings who teach for pelf and divine for dollars, deceivers who pose as shepherds yet avoid the door and climb over "some other way," prophets in the devil's employ, who to achieve their master's purpose, hesitate not to robe themselves in the garments of assumed sanctity, and appear in sheep's clothing, while inwardly they are ravening wolves. (JTC, pp. 417-18.)

10:14 The Joseph Smith Translation transposes versed 13 and 14 of the King James text, and begins verse 13 "For I am the good shepherd . . ." (Italics added.)

10:16 "They shall hear may voice; and there shall be one fold" could have been translated "they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock."

The "other sheep" here referred to constituted the separated flock or remnant of the house of Joseph, who, six centuries prior to the birth of Christ, had been miraculously detached from the Jewish fold in Palestine, and had been taken beyond the great deep to the American continent. When to them the resurrected Christ appeared He thus spake: "And verily, I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said, other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. [3 Ne. 15:21.] The Jews had vaguely understood Christ's reference to other sheep as meaning in some obscure way, the Gentile nations; and because of their unbelief and consequent inability to rightly comprehend, Jesus had withheld any plainer exposition of His meaning, for so, He informed the Nephites, had the Father directed. "This much did the Father command me," He explained, "that I should tell unto them, That other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." On the same occasion the Lord declared that there were yet other sheep, those of the Lost, or Ten, Tribes, to whom He was then about to go, and who would eventually be brought forth from their place of exile, and become part of the one blessed fold under the governance of the one supreme Shepherd and King. [3 Ne. 16:1-5.] (JTC, p. 419.)

10:17-21 Jesus had no father of the flesh, that is who was mortal and subject to death. Our Eternal Father to whom we pray is the Father of the body of Jesus Christ and from his Father he inherited life and death was always subject to him. He had the power to lay down his life, because he was the Son of Mary who was like us, mortal, and he had the power to take his life up again for that power was in him. In his teachings to the Jews and his disciples he frequently told them of this power and of his mission. (AGQ 1:33.)

10:19-21 The division among the Jews regarding Jesus was so deep and bitter that nearly his every teaching and act widened the gap between the believers and the unbelievers.

10:22-39 Nearly two hundred years before the public ministry of Jesus began, Antiochus Epiphanes, a Selucidian king who controlled Palestine, attempted to destroy Judaism by compelling his subjects to accept the Greek culture. In a show of utter contempt for the Jewish faith, Antiochus sacrificed a pig (the filthiest of animals, according to the Jews) upon a small Greek altar built for the occasion within the temple confines. Following this, Antiochus prohibited all religious ordinances enjoined by the law of Moses and ordered the burning of all known copies of the Jewish law. Finally, he ordered that heathen altars be constructed throughout Palestine and that the Jews worship the heathen gods or suffer death. This suppression of the Jewish religion precipitated what is known as the Maccabean revolution.

Judas Maccabaeus, together with his four brothers, gathered about him a number of devout Jews who refused to honor the demands of Antiochus. They formed a guerilla army and waged relentless war against the troops employed by Antiochus to enforce his religious policies. Eventually, the Maccabees seized control of Jerusalem. Judas then proceeded to purify the temple (which for three years had been used to make offerings to Zeus) and restore the worship of Jehovah. The Feast of Dedication, sometimes called the Feast of Lights, or Hanukkah, was inaugurated to celebrate the recovery and rededication of the Jewish temple. The feast takes place in the month of Chislev, corresponding to portions of our months of November and December, and lasts for eight days. It is marked by elaborate meals, special synagogue services, and extra illumination in all homes. Hence its title, "Feast of Lights." (LTJA, p. 118.)

10:23 "Solomon's porch" is generally considered to be the portico on the east side of the temple that was supposed to be part of the original temple built by Solomon and preserved in the reconstructions of Zerubabbel and of Herod. (See BD, "Solomon's Porch.")

10:27 Why do some persons believe in Christ and his saving truths while others do not? Why is it easier for some to believe all of the gospel truths than for others? There is only one rational explanation why selected sheep hearken more readily to the Master's voice; it is the fact that men developed different talents in pre-existence. Spirits sent to inhabit some mortal bodies developed talents for spirituality, for recognizing the truth, for believing spiritual realities while yet in pre-existence; others did not. Many of the offspring of Deity, having excelled in spiritual attainments in pre-existence, are born as members of the house of Israel in this life. (Deut. 32:7-9.) (DNTC 1:490.)

10:30 The Father and the Son are "one" in many ways: witness, testimony, teachings, doings, goals, purposes, ideals, attributes, powers. However, they are not one in personality:

The [Joseph Smith Translation] gives for John 10:30: "I and the Father are one" instead of "I and my Father are one." By "the Father" the Jews rightly understood the Eternal Father, God. In the original Greek "one" appears in the neuter gender, and therefore expresses oneness in attributes, power, or purpose, and not a oneness of personality which would have required the masculine form. (JTC, p. 500.)

10:31-33 "Blasphemy consists in either or both of the following: 1. Speaking irreverently, evilly, abusively, or scurrilously against God or sacred things; or 2. Speaking profanely or falsely about Deity." (Mormon Doctrine, p. 85.) In its most criminal and corrupt form it consists in claiming falsely to be God or the Son of God. Thus Jesus would have been guilty of the most terrible of all blasphemous crimes if his claim to divine Sonship had been false. Death by stoning was the penalty of blasphemy in ancient Israel. (Lev. 24:16.) (DNTC 1:490-91.)

10:34-35 Though "there is none other God but one" for men on this earth to worship, yet "there be gods many, and lords many" throughout the infinite expanse of eternity. (1 Cor. 8:4-7.) That is, there are many exalted, perfected, glorified personages who reign as gods over their own dominions. John saw 144,000 of them standing with Christ upon Mount Zion, all "having his Father's name written in their foreheads" (Rev. 14:1), which is to say that they were gods and were so identified by wearing crowns so stating. Indeed, to each person who overcomes and gains exaltation, Christ has promised: "I will write upon him the name of my God," and he shall "sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. 3:12, 21.)

Joseph Smith said: "Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a god to his dominions." (Teachings, p. 374.) All exalted persons "are gods, even the sons of God." (D. C. 76:58.) Through obedience to the whole gospel law, including celestial marriage, they attain the "fulness of the glory of the Father" (D. C. 93:6-28) and "a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them." (D. C. 132:19-20.)

But to us there is but one God, who is Elohim, and one Lord, who is the Lord Jehovah; the Holy Ghost acts as their minister; and these three are one Godhead, or as it is more graphically expressed, one God. Thus we find the Psalmist, whom Jesus quoted, saying: "God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods. . . . I have said, ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Ps. 82:1, 6.) (DNTC 1:491.)

10:36 In verse 24 the Jews had challenged Jesus to "tell us plainly" whether he professed to be the Son of God. His statement in verse 36 makes it clear that he had claimed to be the Son of God and that the Jews had to acknowledge that he had so claimed. (See section 1, "Son of God.")

10:37 This is the same sort of logic that Nephi uses to establish the truth of the Book of Mormon. "Believe in Christ," he says to those who read that book, "and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good." (2 Ne. 33:10.)

Similarly, and in effect, Jesus said: "ye say ye do not believe in me; very well, then believe in the works which I do, for ye cannot deny they have come by divine power; and if ye accept the works, then ye shall believe in me also, for I could not do the works alone; they came by the power of the Father." (DNTC 1:492.)

10:38 This verse could have been more literally translated "But if I am doing them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, in order that you may come to know and may continue knowing that the Father is in union with me and I am in union with the Father."

10:39-41 The exact spot to which Jesus retired is not made clear in our present scriptures, although it is generally understood that he went to the "other side of the Jordan":

Once again the Jews sought to take Jesus by force but did not succeed, because the time for his death and atoning sacrifice had not yet arrived. Instead, Jesus "went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized; and there he abode." (John 10:40.) This area beyond Jordan was known as Perea, a word which literally means "the land beyond." Elder Talmage writes: "The duration of this sojourn in Perea is nowhere recorded in our scriptures. It could not have lasted more than a few weeks at most. Possibly some of the discourses, instructions, and parables already treated as following the Lord's departure from Jerusalem after the Feast of Tabernacles in the preceding autumn, may chronologically belong to this interval. From this retreat of comparative quiet, Jesus returned to Judea in response to an earnest appeal from some whom He loved. He left the Bethany of Perea for the Judean Bethany, where dwelt Martha and Mary." (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 490.) (LTJA, p. 118.)
