11:1-46 This dramatic account of Jesus raising Lazarus from the dead is recorded only in John.

At least twice before Jesus had raised the dead, but neither time under such dramatic circumstances or with such a display of divine power as was evidenced in the case of Lazarus. The daughter of Jairus had been called back to mortality in a matter of hours and before her body had been prepared for burial (Luke 8:41-42, 49-56), and the widow's son in Nain had lived and breathed again after most of the burial preparations were complete and while the corpse was being carried to the grave. (Luke 7:11-17.) In neither of these instances had Jesus courted any especial publicity, and in the case of Jairus' daughter he had even enjoined secrecy on the part of those who witnessed the miracle.

But with "our friend Lazarus" it was different. Jesus with full knowledge of Lazarus' sickness, did nothing to prevent his death; allowed his body to be prepared for burial; waited until the funeral was over and the entombment accomplished; permitted four days to pass so that the processes of decomposition would be well under way; tested the faith of Mary and Martha to the utmost; came to the rock-barred tomb under circumstances which attracted many sceptics and unbelievers; conducted himself in every respect as though he were courting publicity; and then—using the prerogative of Deity to give life or death according to his own will—commanded: "Lazarus, come forth."

Why this studied buildup, this centering of attention upon one of the mightiest miracles of his ministry? Two reasons in particular stand out. (1) As our Lord neared the climax of his mortal ministry, he was again bearing testimony, in a way that could not be refuted, of his Messiahship, of his divine Sonship, of the fact that he was in very deed the literal Son of God; and (2) He was setting the stage, so as to dramatize for all time, one of his greatest teachings: That he was the resurrection and the life, that immortality and eternal life came by him, and that those who believed and obeyed his words should never die spiritually. (DNTC 1:530-31.)

11:1-2 Now a certain man was sick, whose name was Lazarus, of the town of Bethany;

And Mary, his sister, who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, lived with her sister Martha, in whose house her brother Lazarus was sick. (JST; italics added.)

11:4 Jesus' statement could have been translated "This sickness is not with death as its object, but is for the glory of God, in order that the Son of God may be glorified through it."

The Joseph Smith Translation of this verse begins "And when Jesus heard he was sick . . ." (Italics added.)

11:6 And Jesus tarried two days, after he heard that Lazarus was sick, in the same place where he was. (JST; italics added.)

Jesus and his intimate disciples were in Perea, at least twenty-five miles from Bethany. During the two days, before starting for Bethany, it appears that the Master performed a sabbath healing (Luke 14:1-6), discoursed on sacrifice (Luke 14:25-33), taught that the law and the prophets bore record of him (Luke 16:14-18), talked of faith (Luke 17:5-6), and gave a series of parables—the Parable of the Wedding Guests (Luke 14:7-11), of the Great Supper (Luke 14:12-24), of the Lost Sheep (Luke 15:3-7), of the Lost Coin (Luke 15:8-10), of the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:11-32), of the Unjust Steward (Luke 16:1-13), of Lazarus and the Rich Man (Luke 16:19-31), and of the Unprofitable Servant (Luke 17:1-10.) (DNTC 1:531.)

11:9-10 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased these verses:

Certainly Jesus would go to Judea in spite of the threats of death that faced him there. "Though it be the eleventh hour of my life, yet there are twelve hours in the day, and during that designated period, I shall do the work appointed me without stumbling or faltering. This is the time given me to do my work. I cannot wait for the night when perchance the opposition will die down. He that shirks his responsibilities and puts off his labors until the night shall stumble in the darkness and fail in his work." (DNTC 1:531.)

11:12 "Do well" could have been translated "Get well" or "be saved."

11:16 Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him; for they feared lest the Jews should take Jesus and put him to death, for as yet they did not understand the power of God. (JST; italics added.)

Didymus means "a twin." Although Thomas is often remembered as the apostle who insisted on feeling the resurrected body of Jesus before believing in the resurrection, here he showed his courage and devotion by being willing to die with the Lord.

11:17 And when Jesus came to Bethany, to Martha's house, Lazarus had already been in the grave four days. (JST.)

On the very probable assumption that the journey from Bethany in Judea to the place where Jesus was, in Perea, would require one day, Lazarus must have died on the day of the messenger's departure; for this day and the two days that elapsed before Jesus started toward Judea, and the day required for the return, would no more than cover the four days specified. It was and still is the custom in Palestine as in other oriental countries to bury on the day of death.

It was the popular belief that on the fourth day after death the spirit had finally departed from the vicinity of the corpse, and that thereafter decomposition proceeded unhindered. This may explain Martha's impulsive though gentle objection to having the tomb of her brother opened four days after his death. (John 11:39). It is possible that the consent of the next of kin was required for the lawful opening of a grave. Both Martha and Mary were present, and in the presence of many witnesses assented to the opening of the tomb in which their brother lay. (JTC, pp. 500-501.)

11:18 "About fifteen furlongs" is a little less than two miles. Because Bethany was so close to Jerusalem, it was relatively easy for friends and officials to come and mourn with Mary and Martha.

11:21 "My brother had not died" could have been more literally translated "my brother would not have died."

11:25-26 "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live" could have been translated "he that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life."

Jesus, in effect, is saying to Martha: "I am he through whom immortality and eternal life come. He that believes in me and obeys my gospel, though he die the natural death, yet through me he shall gain both immortality and eternal life. And whosoever is spiritually alive, having been born again so as to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost, and who thereafter endures in righteousness to the end, shall never die; that is, he shall have spiritual life in this world and eternal life in the world to come." (DNTC 1:532.)

11:29 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "As soon as Mary heard that Jesus was come . . ." (Italics added.)

11:31 This verse could have been more literally translated "Therefore the Jews that were with her in the house and that were consoling her, on seeing Mary rise quickly and go out, followed her, supposing [thinking] that she was going to the memorial tomb to weep there."

11:33 The marginal readings for "he groaned in the spirit" (John 11:33) and "again groaning in himself" (v. 38), as given in the revised version, are "was moved with indignation in the spirit" and "being moved with indignation in himself." All philological authorities agree that the words in the original Greek express sorrowful indignation, or as some aver, anger, and not alone a sympathetic emotion of grief. Any indignation the Lord may have felt, as intimated in verse 33, may be attributed to disapproval of the customary wailing over death, which as vented by the Jews on this occasion, profaned the real and soulful grief of Martha and Mary; and His indignation, expressed by groaning as mentioned in verse 38, may have been due to the carping criticism uttered by some of the Jews as recorded in verse 37. (JTC, p. 501.)

11:39-44 The procedure throughout was characterized by deep solemnity and by the entire absence of every element of unnecessary display. Jesus, who when miles away and without any ordinary means of receiving the information knew that Lazarus was dead, doubtless could have found the tomb; yet He inquired: "Where have ye laid him?" He who could still the waves of the sea by a word could have miraculously effected the removal of the stone that sealed the mouth of the sepulchre; yet He said: "Take ye away the stone." He who could reunite spirit and body could have loosened without hands the cerements by which the reanimated Lazarus was bound; yet He said: "Loose him, and let him go." All that human agency could do was left to man. In no instance do we find that Christ used unnecessarily the superhuman powers of His Godship; the divine energy was never wasted. (JTC, p. 495.)

11:45 The raising of Lazarus stands as the third recorded instance of restoration to life by Jesus. In each the miracle resulted in a resumption of mortal existence, and was in no sense a resurrection from death to immortality. In the raising of the daughter of Jairus, the spirit was recalled to its tenement within the hour of its quitting; the raising of the widow's son is an instance of restoration when the corpse was ready for the grave; the crowning miracle of the three was the calling of a spirit to reenter its body days after death, and when, by natural processes the corpse would be already in the early stages of decomposition. Lazarus was raised from the dead, not simply to assuage the grief of mourning relatives; myriads have had to mourn over death, and so myriads more shall have to do. One of the Lord's purposes was that of demonstrating the actuality of the power of God as shown forth in the works of Jesus the Christ, and Lazarus was the accepted subject of the manifestation. (JTC, pp. 495-96.)

11:47-53 These verses recount the reactions of members of the Sanhedrin, preserved only in the writings of John.

11:47 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "What do we?" to "What shall we do?"

According to the Greek text, the council referred to in this verse is the Sanhedrin.

11:47-48 What a testimony this is to the effect and verity of our Lord's miracles. None could explain them away. None could escape the very evident conclusion that they were performed by the power of God. None could justifiably attribute unrighteousness to him who performed them, for even the most spiritually untutored knew "that God heareth not sinners." (John 9:31.)

The miracles proved Jesus' claim to divine Sonship. Either they must cease or this Galilean must be accepted as the Messiah. To these sinsaturated souls who comprised the Sanhedrin, there was but one solution: Stop the miracles by slaying him who performed them. Such a course, they rationalized, was proper and justified, for it would avoid that tumult among the people which would bring on them further Roman restrictions. (DNTC 1:534-35.)

11:49-52 Caiaphas, the high priest mentioned by name, in a few short days would preside over the council that condemned Jesus to death. (See text and commentaries for Matt. 26:57-68. For further information on Caiaphas, read text and commentaries for Matt. 26:3; John 18:12-14. See section 1, "Caiaphas"; BD, "Caiaphas.")

John's statement that Caiaphas was high priest "that same year" must not be construed as meaning that the office of high priest was of a single year's tenure. Under Jewish law the presiding priest, who was known as the high priest, would remain in office indefinitely; but the Roman government had arrogated to itself the appointive power as applying to this office; and frequent changes were made. This Caiaphas, whose full name was Josephus Caiaphas, was high priest under Roman appointment during a period of eleven years. To such appointments the Jews had to submit, though they often recognized as the high priest under their law, some other than the "civil high priest" appointed by Roman authority. Thus we find both Annas and Caiaphas exercising the authority of the office at the time of our Lord's arrest and later. (John 18:13, 24; Acts 4:6; compare Luke 3:2.) Farrar (p. 484, note) says: "Some have seen an open irony in the expression of St. John (11:49) that Caiaphas was high priest 'that same year,' as though the Jews had got into this contemptuous way of speaking during the rapid succession of priests—mere phantoms set up and displaced by the Roman fiat—who had in recent years succeeded each other. There must have been at least five living high priests, and exhigh priests at this council—Annas, Ismael Ben Phabi, Eleazar Ben Haman, Simon Ben Kamhith, and Caiaphas, who had gained his elevation by bribery." (JTC, p. 501.)

Caiaphas, the high priest, cut short the discussion by saying: "Ye know nothing at all." This sweeping assertion of ignorance was most likely addressed to the Pharisees of the Sanhedrin; Caiaphas was a Sadducee. His next utterance was of greater significance than he realized: "Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not." John solemnly avers that Caiaphas spake not of himself, but by the spirit of prophecy, which, in spite of his implied unworthiness, came upon him by virtue of his office, and that thus: "He prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; and not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad." But a few years after Christ had been put to death, for the salvation of the Jews and of all other nations, the very calamities which Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin had hoped to avert befell in full measure; the hierarchy was overthrown, the temple destroyed, Jerusalem demolished and the nation disrupted. (JTC, p. 498.)

11:54 See BD, "Ephraim, a city."

11:55-57 These verses show the speculation of the Jews as to whether or not Jesus would come to the feast. This information is contained only in John.

11:55 Instructions on ceremonial cleansings that should precede the celebration of the Passover are found in 2 Chronicles 30:15-20.

11:56 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the last two questions read, "What think ye of Jesus? Will he not come to the feast?" (Italics added.)

11:57 "He should shew it, that they might take him" could have been more literally translated "he should disclose it, in order that they might seize him."

In the Joseph Smith Translation, the end of this verse reads, "if any man knew where he was, he should show them, that they might take him." (Italics added.)
