12:1-11 Some of the specific information concerning these incidents in Bethany "six days before the passover" are mentioned only by John, although many scholars feel the anointing of Jesus by the woman in the house of "Simon the leper" (see Matt. 26:6-13; Mark 14:3-9) is the same as mentioned in John.

12:2-8 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 26:6-13; Mark 14:3-9.

12:6 "Had the bag, and bare what was put therein" could have been more literally translated "had the money box and used to carry off the monies put in it." Other translations are "he carried the money bag and would help himself from it"; "as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it"; and "as he had the money box he used to take what was put into it."

12:7 Then said Jesus, Let her alone; for she hath preserved this ointment until now, that she might anoint me in token of my burial. (JST; italics added.)

We are left without certain information as to whether Mary knew that within a few days her beloved Lord would be in the tomb. She may have been so informed in view of the hallowed intimacy between Jesus and the family; or she may have gathered from the remarks of Christ to the apostles that the sacrifice of His life was impending; or perhaps by inspired intuition she was impelled to render the loving tribute by which her memory has been enshrined in the hearts of all who know and love the Christ. John has preserved to us this remark of Jesus in the rebuke called forth by the grumbling Iscariot: "Let her alone; against the day of my burying hath she kept this"; and Mark's version is likewise suggestive of definite and solemn purpose on Mary's part: "She is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying." (JTC, p. 513.)

12:12-19 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 21:1-11; Mark 11:1-11; Luke 19:29-40.

12:13 This incident forms the basis of Palm Sunday, celebrated by many Christians the Sunday before Easter Sunday.

Amid shouts of praise and pleas for salvation and deliverance, we see the disciples strewing our Lord's course with palm branches in token of victory and triumph. This whole dramatic scene prefigures that yet future assembly when "a great multitude," which no man can number, "of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues," shall stand "before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands," crying with a loud voice, "Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne and unto the Lamb." (Rev. 7:9-10.) (DNTC 1:578.)

12:14 And Jesus, when he had sent two of his disciples and got a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written, . . . (JST; italics added.)

12:15 The scripture being quoted here is Zechariah 9:9. One reason Jesus permitted the people to pay him this honor was so that words of the prophets might be fulfilled. (See section 1, "Triumphant entry.")

12:16 This verse could have been more literally translated "These things his disciples took no note of at first, but when Jesus became glorified, then they called to mind that these things were written respecting him and that they did these things to him."

The full significance of the memorable events of this day could only be understood by the power of the Spirit. Thus it was not until the gift of the Holy Ghost came on the day of Pentecost that the deep meaning of King Messiah's triumphal entry into the capital-for-the-moment of his earthly kingdom became apparent. (DNTC 1:579.)

12:19 "Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?" has also been translated "You see, we are not succeeding at all!" and "See, this is getting us nowhere."

12:20-26 These teachings of Jesus to "certain Greeks" (probably Gentile proselytes to Judaism) are found only in John.

To them Jesus testified that the hour of His death was near at hand, the hour in which "the Son of man should be glorified." They were surprised and pained by the Lord's words, and possibly they inquired as to the necessity of such a sacrifice. Jesus explained by citing a striking illustration drawn from nature: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." The simile is an apt one, and at once impressively simple and beautiful. A farmer who neglects or refuses to cast his wheat into the earth, because he wants to keep it, can have no increase; but if he sow the wheat in good rich soil, each living grain may multiply itself many fold, though of necessity the seed must be sacrificed in the process. So, said the Lord, "He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal." The Master's meaning is clear; he that loves his life so well that he will not imperil it, or, if need be, give it up, in the service of God, shall forfeit his opportunity to win the bounteous increase of eternal life; while he who esteems the call of God as so greatly superior to life that his love of life is as hatred in comparison, shall find the life he freely yields or is willing to yield, though for the time being it disappear like the grain buried in the soil; and he shall rejoice in the bounty of eternal development. If such be true of every man's existence, how transcendently so was it of the life of Him who came to die that men may live? Therefore was it necessary that He die, as He had said He was about to do; but His death, far from being life lost, was to be life glorified. (JTC, pp. 518-19.)

12:23 For additional information on the sacred title "Son of Man" see text and commentary for Matthew 16:13.

12:24 "It abideth alone" could have been translated "it remains just one."

Just as one kernel ("corn") of wheat can reproduce manyfold, so the death of Jesus and his subsequent resurrection will produce "much fruit." As Paul was to exclaim later, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

12:25 Read text and commentary for Matthew 10:39.

12:26 After the testimony of the Scriptures on this point, the assurance is given by the Holy Ghost, bearing witness to those who obey Him, that Christ Himself has assuredly risen from the dead; and if He has risen from the dead, He will, by His power, bring all men to stand before Him: for if He has risen from the dead the bands of the temporal death are broken that the grave has no victory. If then, the grave has no victory, those who keep the sayings of Jesus and obey His teachings have not only a promise of a resurrection from the dead, but an assurance of being admitted into His glorious kingdom; for, He Himself says, "Where I am there also shall my servant be" (see John xii). (HC 2:19; italics added.)

This is the doctrine of exaltation. Christ our Lord overcame all things and ascended into heaven to sit on the throne of his Father. (Rev. 3:21.) Those who are to be with Christ must of necessity inherit the same glory and kingdom and indeed become "like him." (1 John 3:2.) "Ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; . . . and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:10.) What greater honor could the Father bestow upon anyone than this? (DNTC 1:629.)

12:27-36 Only John has written in detail the prayer of Jesus to his Father, the Father's response, and Jesus' subsequent teachings.

12:27-30 In the Gospel of John is related a parallel experience in the Master's ministry showing how, out of a multitude, only a few—or none—may hear God when he speaks.

Only the Master, apparently, knew that God had spoken. So often today, men and women are living so far apart from things spiritual that when the Lord is speaking to their physical hearing, to their minds with no audible sound, or to them through his authorized servants who, when directed by the Spirit, are as his own voice, they hear only a noise as did they at Jerusalem. Likewise, they received no inspired wisdom, nor inward assurance, that the mind of the Lord has spoken through his prophet leaders. (Harold B. Lee, CR, Oct. 1966, pp. 115-16.)

12:27 Jesus came into the world to bring about the Atonement, including the Resurrection; thus the significance of his statement "For this cause came I unto this hour."

12:31 "Prince" could have been more literally translated "ruler."

The "prince of this world" is clearly Satan, who will be cast out when his world is finally judged and found wanting. "Now [in the time of Jesus] is the judgment of this world" in that the world had to decide whether or not it would accept Jesus.

12:32 See 3 Nephi 27:14-15.

12:34 Of course the scriptures said Christ and his kingdom should abide forever (Isa. 9:7; Ezek. 37:25; and Dan. 7:14, among many others); and so shall it be commencing in the millennial day when "the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever." (Rev. 11:15.)

But the scriptures also said that King-Messiah "was wounded for our transgressions, . . . bruised for our iniquities," "brought as a lamb to the slaughter," and "cut off out of the land of the living." They said, "he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death" (Isa. 53); that he, "the Lord Jehovah" would "swallow up death in victory," and bring to pass the resurrection of all men. Indeed, it was the great Jehovah himself who had said to their fathers: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." (Isa. 25:8; 26:4, 19.)

There was no occasion for Jesus' captious critics either to have or to feign ignorance of the true and mortal ministry of their Messiah. (DNTC 1:631.)

12:35-36 Read text and commentaries for John 8:12-20.

12:37-43 These verses help to verify some of the great Messianic passages from Isaiah. (See Isa. 53.)

Concerning the fact the people would not receive the "report" of Jesus nor be converted through his miracles, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has observed:

Are there those today who think: "Had I seen the miracles of Jesus, I would have believed in him"? What causes men to believe? Do miracles create faith?

All things operate according to law. (D. C. 88:13, 36.) Blessings flow from obedience, curses from disobedience. (D. C. 130:20-21; 132:5.) The law of faith provides that if men do certain things, they will gain faith; otherwise, they will not. See Luke 17:5-6.

One of the terms and conditions of the law of faith is: If there is faith, there will be miracles. "These signs shall follow them that believe." (Mark 16:17.) "He that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed. He who hath faith to see shall see. He who hath faith to hear shall hear. The lame who hath faith to leap shall leap." (D. C. 42:48-51.)

But the converse is not true. There is no provision in the law of faith that miracles will create faith. Signs follow; they do not precede. It is true that someone who has seen a sign may thereafter do the things which will enable him to gain faith, but it is not the miracle as such which begets the faith; it is obedience to that law upon which its receipt is predicated. Thus Moroni writes: "Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith. . . . For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them; wherefore he showed not himself until after their faith. . . . And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith; wherefore they first believed in the Son of God." (Ether 12:6-18.) (DNTC 1:632-33.)

12:43 This verse could have been more literally translated "For they loved the glory of men more than even the glory of God."

12:44-50 Some of these summary statements by Jesus as he prepared for his final passover as a mortal are found only in John.

12:44 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has paraphrased this verse:

"He who believes I am the Son of God, believes not only in my divine mission, but also in my Father who sent me." This pronouncement is both simple logic and revealed truth. It is not possible to believe that Christ is the Son of God without believing that God is the Father of Christ. There cannot be a Father without a Son, nor a Son without a Father. Thus Jesus says, "He that receiveth me receiveth my Father" (D. C. 84:37); the two cannot be separated. They are both divine and holy beings, or neither is. (DNTC 1:634.)

12:46 "Abide" could also have been translated "remain."

12:49-50 Again, Jesus emphasized that not only had he spoken of his divinity, but also the Father, who commanded Jesus what he should say.
