13:1-17 This account of Jesus washing the apostles' feet is found only in John.

Washing of feet is a gospel ordinance; it is a holy and sacred rite, one performed by the saints in the seclusion of their temple sanctuaries. It is not done before the world or for worldly people. For his day and dispensation Jesus instituted it in the upper room at the time of the Last Supper. (DNTC 1:708.)

Our Lord did two things in the performance of this ordinance: 1. He fulfilled the old law given to Moses; and 2. He instituted a sacred ordinance which should be performed by legal administrators among his true disciples from that day forward.

As part of the restoration of all things, the ordinance of washing of feet has been restored in the dispensation of the fulness of times. In keeping with the standard pattern of revealing principles and practices line upon line and precept upon precept, the Lord revealed his will concerning the washing of feet little by little until the full knowledge of the endowment and all temple ordinances had been given. (MD, pp. 829-30.)

13:1 Jesus knew the time had come to bring about the Atonement, and he loved his fellowmen enough to endure suffering and even death. (See DC 19:16-19.)

13:2 Read text and commentary for Luke 22:3.

13:7 Jesus' statement could have been translated "What I am doing you do not understand at present, but after [later] you will understand these things."

13:8 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "Peter saith unto him, Thou needest not to wash my feet." (Italics added.)

13:10 Jesus saith to him, He that has washed his hands and his head, needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit; and ye are clean, but not all. Now this was the custom of the Jews under their law; wherefore Jesus did this that the law might be fulfilled. (JST; italics added.)

13:13-14 "Master" could have been more literally translated "Teacher." (See commentary for Luke 6:40.)

13:16 See text and commentary for Luke 6:40.

13:18-30 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 26:21-25; Luke 22:21-30. Read also Mark 14:18-21.

13:18 The scripture quoted here is Psalm 41:9:

King David, whose throne the Son of David inherited, while engaged in civil war in Israel, wrote the Forty-first Psalm. In it he declaimed his betrayal by the traitor Ahithopel in these words: "Mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." (Ps. 41:9.) Interestingly, when Absalom failed to follow Ahithopel's counsel, that traitor, as though his name were Judas, went and hanged himself. (2 Sam. 15:10-12; 17.)

Now we find Jesus quoting David's words and ascribing to them Messianic import, a meaning which was of course intended from the beginning. These words thus become a classical illustration of how Messianic prophecies were often given and of why they can be interpreted only by the power of the Holy Ghost. (DNTC 1:715.)

Judas was a spiritual pygmy from the beginning; as an unrepentant thief, he did not at any time possess apostolic stature. Yet he had his agency; he was free to choose his own course. "All mankind," and there are no exceptions, "may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (Third Article of Faith.) Judas was no different in this respect than any other man. He could have chosen the course of righteousness; he had sufficient spiritual capacity to work out his salvation with fear and trembling before the Lord. And Jesus knew both the spiritual nothingness of Judas and the elections which that poor soul would make where his own salvation was concerned. (DNTC 1:714-15.)

(See section 1, "Judas.")

13:19 In the Joseph Smith translation, the end of this verse reads, "ye may believe that I am the Christ." (Italics added.)

13:20 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 10:40-41.

13:26-27, 30 "Sop" means "morsel," "mouthful," or "crumb." (See section 1, "Sop.")

In areas of the world where table utensils are not used at mealtime, it is common practice to place both broth and meat in a dish in the center of the table. Thin pieces of bread, often shaped to make a spoon, are used to extract both meat and broth from their repository. The bread thus dipped becomes a "sop." It is a mark of great honor for two friends to dip from the same sop-dish and an even greater mark of respect for one to dip for a friend and present the sop to him. Thus it was that Judas attempted to feign his love and loyalty for Jesus at the Passover meal by dipping his hand in the same dish with him. (See Matthew 26:23.) John reports that it was Jesus who dipped the sop for Judas and then handed it to him with the words, "That thou doest, do quickly." (John 13:27.) (LTJA, p. 160.)

13:26 Jesus may have answered John in a whisper or low voice, for the other disciples apparently either did not hear or did not understand. (See vv. 28-29.)

13:27 "That thou doest, do quickly" could have been translated "What you are doing, get done more quickly." Other translations are "As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan went into him. Jesus said to him, 'Hurry and do what you must!" and "As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him."

As to whether or not Satan actually entered the body of Judas on this occasion, read text and commentaries for Luke 22:3.

13:31-35 These statements of Jesus are recorded only by John.

13:31 The prophet Joseph Smith has helped explain how the "Son of Man" is glorified "and God is glorified in him":

What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children. (TPJS, pp. 347-48; see also DC 132:29-31.)

13:34 Yes, and an old commandment too; a commandment both old and new, a commandment that commences now and yet is everlasting; a commandment that is new each time it is revealed, but is old because it has always been in force. John, who here preserves this saying of our Savior, amplified and explained it in his own writings. Speaking of the "love of God," he said: "Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment, which ye had from the beginning." And then speaking also of the same thing he says: "Again, a new commandment I write unto you." (1 John 2:1-8.)

This gospel manner of naming the same thing as being both new and old is nowhere better illustrated than in the designation, "the new and everlasting covenant." The gospel is the everlasting covenant, the covenant of salvation which God always has and always will make with men, but it is a new covenant each time it is revealed. The gospel we have today is new to the world for this era; it is old because it was had anciently; it is everlasting because it is the same from age to age and from eternity to eternity. (DNTC 1:726.)

(See section 1, "Love, gospel of.")

13:35 It has been aptly observed that while many of the world's great religious leaders taught the principle of love, Jesus is the only one who could truly say, "Follow me," for he alone not only taught the principle but exemplified it. And we are to love one another as he has loved us. "By this," he says, "shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.) (LTJA, p. 162.)

13:36-38 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 26:31-35; Mark 14:27-31; Luke 22:31-38.

13:36 "Thou shalt follow me afterwards" may have had reference not only to the fact that Peter must die but also the manner of Peter's death. According to tradition, Peter was crucified by the Romans, but unlike his Master, Peter was crucified head downward. (See also John 21:18-19.)

13:38 "Denied" could have been more literally translated "disowned." (See text and commentaries for Matt. 10:33; 26:34-35.)
