14:1-4 These far-reaching words of Jesus have been preserved only by John.

14:2 "Mansions" has also been translated "abodes," "homes," "rooms," and "dwelling places."

My text is on the resurrection of the dead, which you will find in the 14th chapter of John—"In my Father's house are many mansions." It should be—"In my Father's kingdom are many kingdoms," in order that ye may be heirs of God and joint-heirs with me. . . .

There are mansions for those who obey a celestial law, and there are other mansions for those who come short of the law, every man in his own order. (TPJS, p. 366.)

14:3 In the Joseph Smith Translation, this verse begins, "And when I go, I will prepare a place for you, and come again. . . ." (Italics added.)

14:5-11 These teachings of Jesus are recorded only in John.

14:6 "But by me" could have been translated "except through me."

No man who has ever lived—neither Jew nor Gentile, pagan nor Christian, saint nor sinner—can come unto the Father (and thereby be saved) until he accepts Christ, believes and obeys his laws, and walks in the way he has appointed. He is the Savior of all men; unto him every knee shall bow and every tongue confess; his is the only name whereby salvation comes; and his laws apply to all, both in and out of the Christian community. "I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord." (DC. 132:12.) (DNTC 1:730.)

(See BD, "Amen.")

14:7-11 The Son appears and is in all respects like his Father; and conversely, the Father looks and acts and is in all respects like the Son. Their physical appearance is the same, both possess the attributes of godliness in their fulness and perfection; each would do and say precisely the same thing under the same circumstances. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 294-295.) Hence the enigmatic and epigramatic statement: "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

Thus, God was in Christ manifesting himself to the world—a gracious and condescending thing for the Eternal Father to do, for thereby men could come to know him and to gain that eternal life which such knowledge brings. (DNTC 1:731.)

(See section 1, "Trinity, no.")

14:10 "Believest thou not that I am in the the Father, and the Father in me?" could have been more literally translated "Do you not believe that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me?"

14:11 The first part of this verse could have been more literally translated "Believe me that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me."

14:12-14 All these sayings put together give as clear an account of the state of the glorified saints as language could give—the works that Jesus had done they were to do, and greater works than those which he had done among them should they do, and that because he went to the Father. He does not say that they should do these works in time; but they should do greater works, because he went to the Father. He says in the 24th verse [of the 17th chapter of John]: "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory." These sayings, taken in connection, make it very plain that the greater works which those that believed on his name were to do were to be done in eternity, where he was going and where they should behold his glory. (Lectures on Faith, pp. 64-66.)

(See section 1, "Faith.")

14:13-14 Similar thoughts on the importance of praying in faith are found in the teachings of Jesus as recorded in the Book of Mormon, with the explanation that the thing requested should be right (3 Ne. 18:20) and good (Moro. 7:26).

Elder James E. Talmage believed this is the first time the Savior directed his disciples to pray "in his name":

For the first time the Lord directed His disciples to pray in His name to the Father, and assurance of success in righteous supplication was given in these words: "And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it." The name of Jesus Christ was to be thenceforth the divinely established talisman by which the powers of heaven could be invoked to operate in any righteous undertaking. (JTC, p. 602-3.)

14:15-26 These statements about the two Comforters climax and crown the teachings of the Son of God. We have no record of anything he ever said which can so completely withdraw the curtain of eternity and open to the faithful a vision of the glories of God. Based on love, born of obedience, Jesus promises the saints that they can have, here and now in this life, the following:

(1) The gift and constant companionship of the Holy Ghost; the comfort and peace which it is the function of that Holy Spirit to bestow; the revelation and the sanctifying power which alone will prepare men for the companionship of gods and angels hereafter;

(2) Personal visitations from the Second Comforter, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, the resurrected and perfected being who dwells with his Father in the mansions on high; and

(3) God the Father—mark it well Phillip!—shall visit man in person, take up his abode with him, as it were, and reveal to him all the hidden mysteries of his kingdom.

Joseph Smith, as the Holy Ghost poured light and revelation into his soul, said this about the two Comforters: "There are two Comforters spoken of. One is the Holy Ghost, the same as given on the day of Pentecost, and that all Saints receive after faith, repentance, and baptism. This first Comforter or Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham. That man that has none of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost. In such a case, there may be more of a powerful effect upon the body, and visible to the eye, than upon an Israelite, while the Israelite at first might be far before the Gentile in pure intelligence.

"The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses. Note the 16, 17, 18, 21, 23 verses. . . .

"Now what is this other Comforter. It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even he will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born." (Teachings, pp. 149-151.) (DNTC 1:735-36.)

(See section 1, "Holy Ghost.")

14:15 See text and commentaries for Matthew 5:43-47; 22:37-40; John 13:34.

Love of God is thus measured in terms of service and obedience. Jesus says: "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day." (3 Ne. 27:20.) Consider in this connection those who cry, Lord, Lord, professing their love for him with their lips, while remaining outside his Church—do such really love him?

He commands his saints to pay their tithes and offerings, to seek the attributes of godliness, to keep themselves morally clean, to serve in the kingdom and testify of the divinity of his great latter-day work. How great is the love of those who fail or who fall short? (DNTC 1:736-37.)

14:16 "Comforter" could have been translated "helper." The other Comforter or Helper referred to here is the Holy Ghost. (See BD, "Comforter.")

14:17 The "Spirit of truth" in this verse is the "other Comforter" mentioned in the preceding verse, or the Holy Ghost.

"The Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us. A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him." (D. C. 130:22-23.) The Holy Ghost as a personage does not inhabit the bodies of mortal men, but that member of the Godhead dwells in a man in the sense that his promptings, the whisperings of the Spirit, find lodgment in the human soul. When the Holy Spirit speaks to the spirit in man, the Holy Ghost is thereby dwelling in man, for the truths that man then gives forth are those which have come from the Holy Ghost. "Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." (Moses 6:61.) (DNTC 1:738.)

14:18 "Comfortless" could also have been translated "as orphans" or "bereaved." That Jesus Christ does indeed "come to" the faithful is verified by other scriptures. (See DC 93:1; Ether 3:19-20.)

14:20 This verse could have been more literally translated "In that day you will know that I am in union with my Father and you are in union with me and I am in union with you."

14:22 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the beginning of this verse is punctuated as follows: "Judas saith unto him, (not Iscariot,) Lord . . . "

14:26 See commentary for John 14:1-6.

The disciples of Jesus did not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost while he was with them. The reason for this, in part at least, was due to the fact that they had with them to guide and teach them the second member of the Godhead, even Jesus himself. While he was with them there was no occasion for them to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Before the Savior left them, he promised to send them the Comforter, or Holy Ghost. (AGQ 2:159.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented on "He shall teach you all things":

All things? Yes, all things; and all things means all things. "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.) The revealed word says God knows all things and has all truth, which means there is nothing he does not know and no truth he does not possess. Consequently, now or hereafter, in time or eternity, the Holy Ghost shall teach all things to deserving and eligible students. (DNTC 1:741.)

14:27 These inspiring words on peace have elicited many commentaries, including the following by Elder McConkie:

Not the salutation, "Peace be with you," which was common among the Jews; not merely the absence of war; not an enforced or voluntary armistice between armed belligerents; not worldly peace. Rather, an inner peace born of a sure conviction of the divinity of the Lord's earthly kingdom; a peace which carries an assurance of a better world to come; a peace that dwells in the souls of men though they may be in the midst of war and turmoil. (DNTC 1:742.)

14:28-29 The Savior again emphasizes to his disciples that he must go again to the Father (after his resurrection) but then he will return again to them. Thus, they indeed had cause to "rejoice."

14:29 Jesus emphasized that one of the purposes of prophecy is "that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe."

14:30-31 Hereafter I will not talk much with you; for the prince of darkness, who is of this world, cometh, but hath no power over me, but he hath power over you.

And I tell you these things, that ye may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence. (JST; italics added.)

14:30 "For the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me" could have been translated "for the ruler of the world is coming, and he has no hold on me."

So powerful was he in the Master's day that the Master referred to Satan as "the prince of this world," but he added, 'the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.' (John 14:30.) We must be able to say, though the power is evil on every side, "As for me and my house, we shall serve the God of this land." The prince of this world is coming to tempt every one of us, and the only ones who will stand through these evil days are those who have founded their houses upon the rock, as the Master said: when the storms descended and the winds blew and the rains came and beat upon the house, it fell not because it was founded upon the rock. That is what the Lord is trying to say to us today. (Harold B. Lee, British Area Conference Report, Aug. 1971, p. 135.)
