15:1-11 In superb allegory the Lord thus proceeded to illustrate the vital relationship between the apostles and himself, and between himself and the Father, by the figure of a vinegrower, a vine, and its branches. . . . A grander analogy is not to be found in the world's literature. Those ordained servants of the Lord were as helpless and useless without him as is a bough severed from the tree. As the branch is made fruitful only by virtue of the nourishing sap it receives from the rooted trunk, and if cut away or broken off withers, dries, and becomes utterly worthless except as fuel for the burning, so those men, though ordained to the Holy Apostleship, would find themselves strong and fruitful in good works, only as they remained in steadfast communion with the Lord. Without Christ what were they, but unschooled Galileans, some of them fishermen, one a publican, the rest of undistinguished attainments, and all of them weak mortals? As branches of the Vine they were at that hour clean and healthful, through the instructions and authoritative ordinances with which they had been blessed, and by the reverent obedience they had manifested. (JTC, pp. 604-6.)

Members of the Church are like the branches and leaves on a great tree. They are on the tree, but that alone does not save them. If they do not receive the nourishment and sustaining power that comes from Christ, who is the trunk (whose sustaining power is carried to them by the Holy Ghost only as they make themselves worthy to receive it), then they wither and fall away like dry leaves. Of this, President John Taylor said: "As a Saint you say, 'I think I understand my duty, and I am doing very well.' That may be so. You see the little twig: it is green; it flourishes and is the very picture of life. It bears its part and proportion in the tree, and is connected with the stem, branches, and root. But could the tree live without it? Yes, it could. It need not boast itself and get uplifted and say, 'How green I am! and how I flourish! and what a healthy position I am in! How well I am doing! and I am in my proper place and am doing right.' But could you do without the root? No: you bear your proper part and position in the tree. Just so with this people. When they are doing their part—when they are magnifying their calling, living their religion, and walking in obedience to the Spirit of the Lord, they have a portion of his Spirit given to them to profit withal. And while they are humble, faithful, diligent, and observe the laws and commandments of God, they stand in their proper position on the tree: they are flourishing; the buds, blossoms, leaves, and everything about them are all right, and they form a part and parcel of the tree." (John Taylor in JD 6:108.) (LTJA, p. 167.)

15:4 "Abide in me" could have been translated "Remain in union with me."

15:8 Jesus amplified, to three of the Nephite Twelve, the promise here given to his Old World special witnesses: "Ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand," he said unto them. "And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yes, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:9-10.)

This promise, in principle, is available to all saints, for "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25), and that God who is no respecter of persons desires to reward all his children with the choicest blessings of time and eternity. (DNTC 1:747.)

15:12-17 These teachings of Jesus to his "friends," the disciples, are found only in John.

15:12-13 See text and commentaries for Matthew 5:43-47; 22:37-40; John 13:34.

15:14 Friends of the Lord, what a salutation this is! Our Lord's friends are those who, having overcome all things, having kept his commandments to the full, having made their callings and elections sure, are the ones he will call to dwell and associate with him in glorious exaltation.

This same gladsome salutation has been given to men in this dispensation also. To selected elders of his latter-day kingdom came these words from his mouth: "As I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me; ye are my friends, . . . for from henceforth I shall call you friends." (D. C. 84:63, 77.) Also: "Verily, I say unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., or in other words, I will call you friends, for you are my friends, and ye shall have an inheritance with me—I called you servants for the world's sake, and ye are their servants for my sake." (D. C. 93:45-46.) (DNTC 1:747-48.)

15:15 Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented on "All things that I have heard of my Father I have made known to you":

This statement, undoubtedly part of a digested and summarized account of Jesus' statements to his friends, must be interpreted and understood along with the statement he was shortly to make about saying many additional things to them. (John 16:12-15.) The meaning is: "I have told you and will tell you all things I have heard from my Father which you are able to bear at this time. When you receive the enlightening power of the Holy Ghost, then, through him as my revealer and witness, I shall have many more things to teach you." (DNTC 1:748.)

15:16 God's ministers are ordained. They have the holy priesthood conferred upon them and are ordained by the laying on of hands to officiate in specific offices and callings. Priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men; it is divided into two orders—Aaronic and Melchizedek. These apostles had been chosen by revelation and ordained by Jesus to their high and holy ministry in the Melchizedek Order. And as it is with them, so it is with all true representatives of the Lord, for Paul said: "No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) Unless the Lord's ministers actually have this authority from the Lord they cannot cast out devils, heal the sick, confer the Holy Ghost, perform a baptism that will be recognized in heaven, or do any of the host of things reserved for performance by legal administrators in the Lord's earthly kingdom. (DNTC 1:748-49.)

(See section 1, "Ordained.")

15:18-27 Opposition of the world is one of the chief identifying characteristics of true religion. Worldly people always resent and resist the higher way of life manifest through the gospel. "Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like" are of the world. (Gal. 5:19-21.) Those who live after the manner of the world follow after these things. When true Christians seek to ban alcoholic beverages, to prohibit gambling, to curtail recreation and commercialism on the Sabbath, to prevent the publication of lewd and pornographic materials, to abolish war, or to do any of a host of things which run counter to the appetites and passions of carnal people, then the battles break out anew. (DNTC 1:750.)

15:18-19 "World" as used in these verses refers to the social conditions among the people who live on the earth, not to the earth or planet itself. Thus the "end of the world" refers to "the end of worldliness" or "the destruction of the wicked." (See text and commentaries for Matt. 13:39-43, 49; 24:3-5, 23-27, 51. See also Mosiah 3:19; Alma 42:10; 1 John 2:15-17; James 4:4; JS-M 1:24.)

15:20-21 See DC 122:5-8.

15:22-25 The Jews to whom Jesus taught the gospel had "no cloke for their sin" because they had rejected the added light and truth he had brought to them. (See DC 82:3-4; read text and commentaries for John 9:39-41.)

15:22 "Cloke" could also have been translated "pretext" or "excuse."

15:25 The scripture quoted here is 69:4. This is another example of a Messianic prophecy that can be interpreted only through the power of the Holy Ghost. (Read text and commentaries for John 13:18.)

15:26 One of the major functions of the Holy Ghost is to testify of both the Father and the Son. (Read also 3 Ne. 11:32-36.)
