16:1-4 Jesus' observation that "the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service" has elicited the following comment from Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

Sincerity has almost nothing to do with gaining salvation. Men who slay the saints can be just as sincere as those who thus become martyrs. Men can believe so devoutly in falsehood that they will even lay down their own lives for it. What does it matter that those who killed the prophets, either ancient or modern, thought they did God service? The thing that counts is truth, pure God-given truth. (DNTC 1:752.)

16:5 "None of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?" seems almost an invitation for the disciples to ask for further information. The promise is that we should "ask, seek, knock" to learn additional truths, and when we fail to follow these simple admonitions we may fail to obtain the additional truths. (Read also 3 Ne. 15:16-24.)

16:5-15 This information about Jesus leaving and then sending the Comforter is found only in John.

16:7-8 These verses could have been more literally translated "Nevertheless, I am telling you the truth. It is for your benefit I am going away. For if I do not go away, the helper will by no means come to you; but if I do go my way, I will send him to you. And when that one arrives he will give the world convincing evidence concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment."

Just as Jesus and the Father are so much alike in appearance, and so completely united in doctrine and in all the attributes of godliness, that he who has seen one has in effect seen the other, so there is a similar unity between Jesus and the Holy Ghost. They are one in that they both would say and do the same thing under the same circumstances. Hence, as long as Jesus was with the disciples in person, there was not the full need for them to have the constant companionship of the Spirit that there would be after Jesus left. The disciples had on occassions felt the promptings of the Spirit. Peter, for one, had received a revelation from the Father, given by the power of the Holy Ghost, certifying that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.) But the enjoyment of the gift of the Holy Ghost, that is the actual and continuing companionship of that holy being, was yet future.

Earlier Jesus had said he would ask the Father to send the Holy Ghost. (John 14:16, 26.) Now he says he will do it himself. Both statements are descriptive of the fact. The Holy Ghost is the third member of the Godhead and as such does the bidding of both the Father and the Son. (DNTC 1:753-54.)

(See section 1, "Holy Ghost.")

16:8 "Reprove" has also been translated "convince," "prove," and "show." The meaning is to prove that a person is wrong, or to convict him.

16:9-11 These are difficult verses which have come to us in such a condensed and abridged form as to make interpretation difficult. The seeming meaning is: "When you receive the companionship of the Spirit, so that you speak forth what he reveals to you, then your teachings will convict the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. The world will be convicted of sin for rejecting me, for not believing your Spirit-inspired testimony that I am the Son of God through whom salvation comes. They will be convicted for rejecting your testimony of my righteousness—for supposing I am a blasphemer, a deceiver, and an imposter—when in fact I have gone to my Father, a thing I could not do unless my works were true and righteous altogether. They will be convicted of false judgment for rejecting your testimony against the religions of the day, and for choosing instead to follow Satan, the prince of this world, who himself, with all his religious philosophies, will be judged and found wanting." (DNTC 1:754.)

16:10 The Joseph Smith Translation changes "ye" to "they," referring to those who will be reproved because of their sins.

16:12 The things of God cannot be fully understood without the Holy Ghost, and the disciples did not receive the right of the permanent companionship of the Holy Ghost until the day of Pentecost. (See Acts 2:1-4; 1 Cor. 2:11-16.)

16:13 This promise is made to the saints, not to the world. Jesus had just told them that the world could not receive the Holy Ghost, meaning the gift or the companionship of that member of the Godhead. (John 14:17.) Now our Lord is saying that the saints can have that companionship, and through it can come to a knowledge of all things. People outside the Church can and do receive revelation from the Holy Ghost telling them of the divinity of the Lord's work. It is in this way that sincere investigators get to know that the Book of Mormon is true, for instance. And if they, then, come into the Church and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, they have made available to them the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit. Then the promise of Moroni can be fulfilled: "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:4-5.) (DNTC 1:754-55.)

16:14 Read text and commentaries for John 13:31.

16:15 That men can be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ is also taught in DC 84:38.

16:16-33 During these closing hours of his mortal life, Jesus gently and with increasing plainness renews his teachings that he shall die and be resurrected. He is approaching the high point of his ministry, the hour when he shall take upon himself the sins of the world, when he shall suffer himself to be crucified, when he shall come forth in glorious immortality to minister briefly among mortal men, and shall ascend to everlasting exaltation at the right hand of his Father.

Jesus' coming separation from his beloved disciples is to be brief. They shall witness his death; place his body in the tomb; be absent while he visits the spirits in paradise; and then the third day he shall rise again to appear and minister once more to them. They shall sorrow because of the separation, rejoice at the reunion; they shall lament at his death, feel exultation at his resurrection—all of which is a type and shadow of how, for all men, the sorrow and separation of death is swallowed up in the joy of the resurrection. (DNTC 1:758.)

16:18 "We cannot tell what he saith" could have been translated "we do not know what he is talking about."

16:21 The first part of this verse could have been translated "A woman, when she is giving birth, has grief, because her hour has arrived."

16:23 In the Joseph Smith Translation, the first sentence of this verse is expanded: "And in that day ye shall ask me nothing but it shall be done unto you." (Italics added.)

16:24 Since the divine law in all ages called for men to pray to the Father in the name of Christ, why had Jesus awaited this hour to institute the age-old system among his disciples? Perhaps it is a situation similar to that which is involved in receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost; as long as Jesus was with the disciples they did not enjoy the full manifestations of the Holy Ghost. (John 16:7.) Perhaps as long as Jesus was personally with them many of their petitions were addressed directly to him rather than to the Father. Such was the course followed by the Nephites when the resurrected and glorified Lord ministered among them. They prayed directly to him and not to the Father. (DNTC 1:758.)

16:25 "Proverbs" has also been translated "parables," "figures," and "metaphors." (See text and commentaries for Matt. 13:1-3, 10-17, 34-35; Mark 4:1-2, 10-13, 33-34. Read also Luke 8:4, 9-10.)

16:28 This is one of many verses that show that Jesus and the Father are separate and distinct beings. (Read text and commentaries for Matt. 3:16-17; Luke 10:22; John 14:7-11.)

16:30 Other translations of this verse are:

Now we know that you know all things, and need none to question you; by this we believe that you came from God. (RSV.)

Now we can see that you know all things and that you do not even need to have anyone ask you questions. This makes us believe that you came from God. (NIV.)

The basic idea is that Jesus knew the thoughts of the people.

16:33 There is a great difference between the kind of peace that Jesus spoke of and the world around us. We live in a wicked world, a world gone crazy with wanton indulgence and crime. Each day the news bears tragic record of wars, natural disasters, terror, and the frustrated efforts of mankind to avert or respond intelligently to the disasters. In spite of all this, Jesus has promised his followers that they may have peace in this world. Read John 16:33. Compare Philippians 4:7.

And Jesus' promise is real, for those who obey his commandments do feel his influence and comfort in their hearts, and they are not afraid. In the face of every threatening peril, they can pray to God and he will answer them by the "still small voice" of the Holy Spirit, and speak peace to their souls. (LTJA, p. 168.)
