17:1-26 This magnificent "high priestly" or "intercessory" prayer is found only in John.

With a perfect understanding of his mission and that the time of his atonement was "at hand," Jesus concluded the teaching portion of his ministry with a prayer-a prayer which has sometimes been referred to as the high-priestly or great intercessory prayer. (See John 17.) These designations are not inappropriate, for, as we shall see, Jesus, our Great High Priest, first offered himself as an offering; then, as Mediator, he interceded on behalf of worthy members of his kingdom. The pattern for this had been established in ancient Israel.

Once each year, the presiding high priest in ancient Israel entered into the holy of holies, the most sacred place within the tabernacle. There he would perform certain rites in connection with the Day of Atonement, a day set aside for national humiliation and contrition. Having bathed himself and dressed in white linen, he would present before the lord a young bullock and two young goats as sin offerings, and a ram as a burnt offering in behalf of his sins and those of the people. The high priest's role was that of a mediator, or one who interceded with the Lord in behalf of the people. His role, of course, was but a type of the type of the great mediating role of the Savior in our behalf. Thus, when Jesus pleaded to the Father for all those who believed on him, he did so as our Intercessor, or Great High Priest.

The prayer he offered on this occasion had three distinct parts: In the first part (see John 17:1-3), Jesus offered himself as the great sacrifice. His hour had come. The next part of the prayer (see John 17:4-19) was a reverent report to the Father of his mortal mission. In the last part (see John 17:20-26) of his prayer, Jesus interceded not only for the eleven apostles present, but for all who shall believe on Jesus "through their word," in order that all would come to a perfect unity, which unity invested Christ in them as Christ is in the Father. Thus all would be perfect in unity, and the world would believe that the Father had sent his Son. (LTJA, p. 171.)

17:3 As used in the scriptures, eternal life is the name given to the kind of life that our Eternal Father lives. The word eternal, as used in the name eternal life, is a noun and not an adjective. It is one of the formal names of Deity (Moses 1:3; 7:35; D. C. 19:11) and has been chosen by him as the particular name to identify the kind of life that he lives. He being God, the life he lives is God's life; and his name (in the noun sense) being Eternal, the kind of life he lives is eternal life. Thus: God's life is eternal life; eternal life is God's life—the expressions are synonymous.

Accordingly, eternal life is not a name that has reference only to the unending duration of a future life; immortality is to live forever in the resurrected state, and by the grace of God all men will gain this unending continuance of life. But only those who obey the fulness of the gospel law will inherit eternal life. (D. C. 29:43-44.) It is "the greatest of all the gifts of God" (D. C. 14:7), for it is the kind, status, type, and quality of life that God himself enjoys. Thus those who gain eternal life receive exaltation; they are sons of God, joint-heirs with Christ, members of the Church of the Firstborn; they overcome all things, have all power, and receive the fulness of the Father. They are gods. (MD, p. 237.)

It is one thing to know about God and another to know him. We know about him when we learn that he is a personal being in whose image man is created; when we learn that the Son is in the express image of his Father's person; when we learn that both the Father and the Son possess certain specified attributes and powers. But we know them, in the sense of gaining eternal life, when we enjoy and experience the same things they do. To know God is to think what he thinks, to feel what he feels, to have the power he possesses, to comprehend the truths he understands, and to do what he does. Those who know God become like him, and have his kind of life, which is eternal life. (DNTC 1:762.)

(See section 1, "Eternal life, what to gain.")

17:6-8 For similar lofty thoughts by Jesus pertaining to those whom he has called out of the world and who have been faithful to him, see 3 Nephi 19:20-22.

17:9-10 The resurrected Jesus Christ used similar phraseology in praying for his chosen disciples among the righteous Lehites. (See 3 Ne. 19:28-29.)

17:11 If the disciples are to become one, even as the Father and the Son are one, the oneness referred to could not refer to a oneness of substance as claimed in the apostate creeds of some so-called Christian churches. (See text and commentaries for Matt. 3:16-17; Luke 10:22; John 14:7-11.)

17:12 Judas . . . was probably not a son of perdition in the sense of one who is damned forever, but in the sense that he was a son or follower of Satan in this life. See Matt. 26:21-25. (DNTC 1:765.)

(See section 1, "Judas: Son of perdition?")

17:13 "That they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves" could have been translated "that they may have my joy in themselves to the full."

17:20-26 "Be one!" Such is God's eternal command to his people. "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D. C. 38:27.) If and when perfect unity exists among the saints, they accomplish the Lord's purposes on the earth and gain their own exaltation in the life to come. . . .

Those who live the perfect law of unity "become the sons of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in me, that we may be one." (D. C. 35:2.) To Adam the Lord said: "Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons." (Moses 6:68.) (DNTC 1:766-67.)

17:21 This verse could have been more literally translated "In order that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, in order that the world may believe that you sent me forth."
