19:1-16 For additional information on the trial of Jesus before Pilate, read text and commentaries for Matthew 27:27-32; Mark 15:15-21; Luke 23:26.

19:4 Jesus is innocent. Pilate knew it; Herod knew it; Caiaphas knew it; the Sanhedrin knew it; the mob-multitude knew it—and Satan knew it. Yet he is to be pronounced guilty and sentenced to death. (DNTC 1:809.)

19:5 Pilate seems to have counted on the pitiful sight of the scourged and bleeding Christ to soften the hearts of the maddened Jews. But the effect failed. Think of the awful fact—a heathen, a pagan, who knew not God, pleading with the priests and people of Israel for the life of their Lord and King! (JTC, p. 639.)

19:7-11 Jesus' sentence by the Sanhedrin was for blasphemy, a Jewish crime; Pilate's sentence was for sedition, a Roman offense. Now that our Lord's death has been ordered, the Jews seek to make it appear that Pilate has endorsed their Jewish death decree. Their mention of "the Son of God" increases Pilate's fears for having ordered an unjust execution. He asks, "Are you a man or a demigod?" Jesus disdains to answer. Pilate is piqued and boasts of his power to save or destroy Jesus. Then our Lord becomes the Judge and places Pilate before the judgment bar: "Against me you have only such power as Divine Providence permits; your sentence is unjust, but Caiaphas who delivered me to thee has the greater sin for as a Jew he knows of my divine origin." (DNTC 1:809.)

19:9 "Whence art thou?" could have been translated "Where are you from?"

19:12 This clinched the matter. Any complaint to Caesar that Pontius Pilate was anything but ruthless in destroying claimants to kingly office was the last thing the Roman procurator wanted. The Jews had given Pilate a selfish interest in the death of the Man whose life they sought. Pilate was prepared, reluctantly, to let his prior death decree be enforced. (DNTC 1:809-10.)

19:13 "Gabbatha" means more literally "the stone pavement."

19:15 Even so was it and was to be. The people who had by covenant accepted Jehovah as their King, now rejected Him in Person, and acknowledged no sovereign but Caesar. Caesar's subjects and serfs have they been through all the centuries since. Pitiable is the state of man or nation who in heart and spirit will have no king but Caesar! (JTC, p. 641.)

19:17 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "skull" with "burial." (Read text and commentaries for Matt. 27:33; Mark 15:22. Read also Luke 23:33.)

19:18 Read text and commentaries for Mark 15:27-28; Luke 23:32-33. Read also Matthew 27:38.

19:19-22 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 27:36-37; Mark 15:26. Read also Luke 23:38.

Pilate's action in so wording the title, and his blunt refusal to permit an alteration, may have been an intended rebuff to the Jewish officials who had forced him against his judgment and will to condemn Jesus; possibly, however, the demeanor of the submissive Prisoner, and His avowal of Kingship above all royalty of earth had impressed the mind if not the heart of the pagan governor with a conviction of Christ's unique superiority and of His inherent right of dominion; but, whatever the purpose behind the writing, the inscription stands in history as testimony of a heathen's consideration in contrast with Israel's ruthless rejection of Israel's King. (JTC, p. 657.)

In Hebrew, Greek, and Latin—as though to symbolize the fact that here was a message for all nations and tongues—Pilate bore a written testimony of the divine Sonship of our Lord, a testimony which he obdurately refused to change, a testimony which is true and so stands everlastingly. (DNTC 1:817.)

19:23-24 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 27:35; Luke 23:34; Read also Mark 15:24.

19:23 "Made four parts" means "divided them into four parts [or shares]."

19:24 "Vesture" could have been translated "apparel."

19:25-27 With supreme solicitude, and though he himself was in agony on the cross, Jesus places his mother in the care and keeping of John. From the choice of John to perform this Christian service, we may infer several things:

(1) Mary, probably now about sixty years of age, needed a home and temporal sustenance. While Jesus had been among them, he would have been watchful to see that his mother had what she needed temporally and spiritually; with his leaving John was to assume this responsibility.

(2) Joseph, her husband, is obviously dead and her other sons, not yet converted to the Church, would not have provided the household of faith in which to care for the tender feelings of one who had conversed with Gabriel, borne God's Son in her womb, and seen him crucified by wicked men.

(3) John, beloved and chosen among the disciples, had the facilities and means to care for her. From his acquaintance with the high priest (John 18:15), and his detailed knowledge of Jesus' ministry in Jerusalem, it appears John had a home there. Such could have been the place where Jesus himself stayed when in that city. (DNTC 1:826.)

19:28-29 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 27:46-49; Mark 15:34-36. The scripture fulfilled here is Psalm 69:21.

19:29 "Upon hyssop" could have been more literally translated "upon a hyssop stalk."

Now there was a vessel full of vinegar, mingled with gall, and they filled a sponge with it, and put upon hyssop, and put to his mouth. (JST; italics added.)

(See BD, "Hyssop," "Myrrh.")

19:30 Read text and commentaries for Matthew 27:50-51; Mark 15:37-38; Luke 23:45-46.

19:31-33 It was now late in the afternoon; at sunset the Sabbath would begin. That approaching Sabbath was held to be more than ordinarily sacred for it was a high day, in that it was the weekly Sabbath and a paschal holy day. The Jewish officials, who had not hesitated to slay their Lord, were horrified at the thought of men left hanging on crosses on such a day, for thereby the land would be defiled; so these scrupulous rulers went to Pilate and begged that Jesus and the two malefactors be summarily dispatched by the brutal Roman method of breaking their legs, the shock of which violent treatment had been found to be promptly fatal to the crucified. The governor gave his consent, and the soldiers broke the limbs of the two thieves with cudgels. Jesus, however, was found to be already dead, so they broke not His bones. Christ, the great Passover sacrifice, of whom all altar victims had been but suggestive prototypes, died through violence yet without a bone of His body being broken, as was a prescribed condition of the slain paschal lambs. (JTC, pp. 663-64.)

19:34-37 Several prophecies concerning the Messiah are fulfilled in these verses; as examples, read Exodus 12:46, Numbers 9:12, Psalm 34:20.

In speaking of his Second Coming, Christ said through the mouth of Zechariah, "They shall look upon me whom they have pierced." (Zech. 12:10.) This Messianic utterance shall find fulfillment in the appearance of the resurrected Lord to the descendants of his ancient covenant people when he returns in glory. They will then say: "What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?" His reply: "These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God." (D. C. 45:51-52; Zech. 13:6.)

That the spear wound was of major proportion, one that would have slain him had he not already voluntarily given up his life, is evident from his statement made to the Nephites after his resurrection, "Thrust your hands into my side." (3 Ne. 11:14.) (DNTC 1:835.)

(See section 1, "Pierced by spear.")

19:34 John, who was eye witness to the water and blood gushing from Jesus' side after his spirit had left his body, later wrote of being "born of God" through the atonement in these words: "Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world. . . . Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? This is he that came by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth. . . . And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood." (1 John 5:1-8.) (DNTC 1:835; see Moses 6:59.)

While, as stated in the text, the yielding up of life was voluntary on the part of Jesus Christ, for He had life in Himself and no man could take His life except as He willed to allow it to be taken, (John 1:4; 5:26; 10:15-18) there was of necessity a direct physical cause of dissolution. As stated also the crucified sometimes lived for days upon the cross, and death resulted, not from the infliction of mortal wounds, but from internal congestion, inflammations, organic disturbances, and consequent exhaustion of vital energy. Jesus, though weakened by long torture during the preceding night and early morning, by the shock of the crucifixion itself, as also by intense mental agony, and particularly through spiritual suffering such as no other man has ever endured, manifested surprising vigor, both of mind and body, to the last. The strong, loud utterance, immediately following which He bowed His head and "gave up the ghost," when considered in connection with other recorded details, points to a physical rupture of the heart as the direct cause of death. If the soldier's spear was thrust into the left side of the Lord's body and actually penetrated the heart, the outrush of "blood and water" observed by John is further evidence of a cardiac rupture; for it is known that in rare instances of death resulting from a breaking of any part of the wall of the heart, blood accumulates within the pericardium, and there undergoes a change by which the corpuscles separate as a partially clotted mass from the almost colorless, watery serum. Similar accumulations of clotted corpuscles and serum occur within the pleura. Dr. Abercrombie of Edinburgh, as cited by Deems (Light of the Nations, p. 682), "gives a case of the sudden death of a man aged seventy-seven years, owing to a rupture of the heart. In his case 'the cavities of the pleura contained about three pounds of fluid, but the lungs were sound.'" Deems also cites the following instance: "Dr. Elliotson relates the case of a woman who died suddenly. 'On opening the body the pericardium was found distended with clear serum, and a very large coagulum of blood, which had escaped through a spontaneous rupture of the aorta near its origin, without any other morbid appearance.' Many cases might be cited, but these suffice." For detailed treatment of the subject the student may be referred to Dr. Wm. Stroud's work On the Physical Cause of the Death of Christ. Great mental stress, poignant emotion either of grief or joy, and intense spiritual struggle are among the recognized causes of heart rupture.

The present writer believes that the Lord Jesus died of a broken heart. The psalmist sang in dolorous measure according to his inspired prevision of the Lord's passion: "Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." (Psalm 69:20, 21; see also 22:14.) (JTC, pp. 668-69.)

19:38-42 Additional information on the claiming of Jesus' body by Joseph of Arimathaea and of the burial in the tomb is found in the text and commentaries for Matthew 27:57-60; Mark 15:42-46; Luke 23:50-54.

19:38 "Pilate gave him leave" has also been translated "Pilate gave permission" and "Pilate told him he could have the body."
