20:1-10 (Read Luke 24:12.) Portions of these accounts of early appearances of the resurrected Jesus Christ are also found in the other gospels. However, the account of the visit of Peter and "the other disciple" to the empty tomb is given in much greater detail by John, lending credence to the belief that John was that "other disciple."

20:1 The Joseph Smith Translation adds to the end of this verse "and two angels sitting thereon."

That "it was yet dark" when Mary Magdalene visited the tomb and found it empty indicates that the resurrection took place sometime before sunrise on "the first day of the week."

Because Jesus came forth from the grave on the first day of the week, to commemorate that day and to keep in remembrance the glorious reality of the resurrection, the ancient apostles, as guided by the Spirit, changed the Sabbath to Sunday. That this change had divine approval we know from latter-day revelation, in which Deity speaks of "the Lord's day" as such and sets forth what should and should not be done on that day. (D. C. 59:9-17.) (DNTC 1:841.)

(See section 1, "Three days will rise.")

20:11-18 Mark gave an abbreviated account of this meeting of Mary Magdalene with the resurrected Jesus Christ. (See Mark 16:9-11.)

20:14 "Knew not that it was Jesus" could have been translated "did not discern that it was Jesus."

20:17 "Touch" has frequently been translated "hold." This usage is substantiated by the Joseph Smith Translation, which reads "Hold me not."

One may wonder why Jesus had forbidden Mary Magdalene to touch Him, and then, so soon after, had permitted other women to hold Him by the feet as they bowed in reverence. We may assume that Mary's emotional approach had been prompted more by a feeling of personal yet holy affection than by an impulse of devotional worship such as the other women evinced. Though the resurrected Christ manifested the same friendly and intimate regard as He had shown in the mortal state toward those with whom He had been closely associated, He was no longer one of them in the literal sense. There was about Him a divine dignity that forbade close personal familiarity. To Mary Magdalene Christ had said: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." If the second clause was spoken in explanation of the first, we have to infer that no human hand was to be permitted to touch the Lord's resurrected and immortalized body until after He had presented Himself to the Father. It appears reasonable and probable that between Mary's impulsive attempt to touch the Lord, and the action of the other women who held Him by the feet as they bowed in worshipful reverence, Christ did ascend to the Father, and that later He returned to earth to continue His ministry in the resurrected state. (JTC, p. 682.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie sees significance in the careful wording of Jesus on this occasion: "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (Italics added.)

Such careful choice of words was in keeping with his invarying custom of maintaining a distinction between himself and other men. He was the Son of God, literally; other men had mortal fathers. Thus, for instance, he was careful to say. "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God and your God" (John 20:17), not unto our Father and our God." (DNTC 1:413.)

20:19-23 Other accounts of this visit of the resurrected Jesus Christ to ten of the apostles are Mark 16:14 and Luke 24:36-44. Portions of these accounts may also pertain to his appearance a week later when Thomas was also present.

20:19 "The doors were shut" means "the doors were locked." (See v. 26.)

20:22 Baptism divides into two parts—immersion in water and immersion in the Spirit. "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance," proclaimed John, the Lord's forerunner, "but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." (Matt. 3:11.)

From the time of John to his hour when the resurrected Lord stood before his apostolic witnesses, the only legally performed baptisms had been in water, with the promise in each instance of a future baptism of fire. Now the time was at hand to perform the ordinance which would entitle the saints to receive the baptism of fire. And so Jesus "breathed on them," which probably means that he laid his hands upon them as he uttered the decree: "Receive the Holy Ghost." (DNTC 1:856-57.)

(See section 1, "Baptism: of Spirit.")

20:23 God only can forgive sins; Jesus exercised this power during his ministry to show he was God. Priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. And so we now find Jesus authorizing the apostles to use their priesthood, which is the power of God, to retain and remit sins. Obviously they cannot do so except in those cases where Christ himself would have so acted had he been present performing this ministerial service.

Revelation from the Lord is always required to retain or remit sins. Since God is the one who must cleanse and purify a human soul, the use of his priestly powers to do so must be authorized and approved by him, and this approval comes by revelation from his Holy Spirit. In many cases in this dispensation the Lord by revelation announced that the sins of certain persons were forgiven. (D. C. 60:7; 61:2; 62:3; 64:3.) Accordingly, if by revelation he should tell his apostles to act for him, using his power which is priesthood, and to thus retain or remit sins, they would do so, and their acts would in effect be his. See Matt. 16:13-20; 17:1-9; 18:18.

This same apostolic power is always found in the true Church, and hence we find the Lord saying to Joseph Smith: "I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, . . . and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven." (D. C. 132:45-46.) (DNTC 1:857-58.)

(See section 1, "Forgiveness.")

20:24-29 Thomas apparently did not understand or believe that Jesus had come forth with a literal, tangible body of flesh and bones, one that could be felt and handled, one that bore the nail marks and carried the spear wound, one that ate food and outwardly was almost akin to a mortal body. Obviously he had heard the testimony of Mary Magdalene and the other women, of Peter, and of all the apostles. It is not to be supposed that he doubted the resurrection as such, but rather the literal and corporeal nature of it. Hence his rash assertion about feeling the nail prints and thrusting his hand into the Lord's side.

His skepticism is almost the perfect pattern for even the religiously inclined of modern Christendom, people who profess belief in Christ's resurrection and yet suppose he has become some kind of spiritual person or essence who does not continue to live as a corporeal entity. The case of Thomas shows why the Lord went to such great lengths on the Emmaus road and in the upper room to show beyond peradventure of doubt exactly what his body was like. And so rather than point the finger of scorn at Thomas we might do well to look carefully at the modern disbelief in that holy being who with his Father reigns as a Holy Man in the heavens above. (DNTC 1:860.)

20:26 Elder James E. Talmage has commented on the construction "after eight days":

A week later, for so the Jewish designation, "after eight days," is to be understood, therefore on the next Sunday, which day of the week afterward came to be known to the Church as the "Lord's Day" and to be observed as the Sabbath in place of Saturday, the Mosaic Sabbath, the disciples were again assembled, and Thomas was with them. The meeting was held within closed and, presumably, guarded doors, for there was danger of interference by the Jewish officers. (JTC, p. 690.)

20:30-31 (Read text and commentaries for John 21:25.) John's intent in writing his gospel is explained beautifully in verse 31: "that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God."
