21:1-14 The account of the resurrected Christ to seven apostles on the shore of the "sea of Tiberias" is found only in John. (Read text and commentaries for Matt. 4:18; Luke 5:1.)

21:5-7 The incident of following the command to cast their net on the other side, which resulted immediately in a large catch of fish, must have triggered the memories of John and Peter of an earlier experience with Jesus that now assisted them to recognize the resurrected Lord. (Read Luke 5:1-11.)

21:8 "Two hundred cubits" is the about three hundred feet.

21:11 "And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken" could have been translated "although there were so many the net did not burst."

21:14 This is the third time they have seen him as a group. It is his seventh, perhaps eighth, known appearance. He came first to Mary Magdalene; then to the other women; then to Cleopas and his companion on the Emmaus road; thereafter to Peter alone; perhaps somewhere during this time to James, his brother; and twice to the apostles in the upper room. He has yet to appear on the Mount in Galilee, which probably is the occasion when he came to "above five hundred brethren at once'" (1 Cor. 15:5-7); he has yet to spend the balance of the first forty days of his resurrected life ministering to and teaching them (Acts 1:3); and finally in their presence he has yet to ascend to eternal glory. And of course there may have been appearances without number of which there is no New Testament record. He of course ministered among the Nephites on the American continent and among the Lost Tribes of Israel in an unspecified land. (3 Ne.) (DNTC 1:862.)

(See section 1, "Resurrected being: Appearances of Jesus as.")

21:15-19 The Greek text adds considerably to an understanding of these verses. The English texts indicate that the Savior asked Peter essentially the same question three times. However, the Greek verb of the third question asks for a higher degree of commitment than the verb used earlier. Also, although the English texts use "feed" all three times in the response of the Savior, the Greek text uses the word for "shepherding" in verse 16. Thus, the Savior was not asking the same question each time, nor were his responses identical.

This is a very important question for each one of us. May I ask each of you, "Do you love the Lord?" The answer almost without exception would be, "Yes.". . .

We show and prove our love by feeding the lambs and the sheep. There are over three billion people on the earth today, and at the present rate of teaching, over two and a half billion of God's children will never be taught the gospel of Jesus Christ. What if you were to live on this earth and never had a chance to hear and be taught the true way of life?

Our task is great. Teachers are needed. Every member of this Church that has a testimony and is converted is urgently needed. The lambs and the sheep are hungry for the bread of life, for the gospel of Jesus Christ. We can show our love by following the prophet of God, "by every member being a missionary" to bring one or more souls into the Church each year. (Bernard P. Brockbank, CR, Oct. 1963, pp. 66.)

Now Peter, still not fully converted, for such must await the Spirit's descent on Pentecost, is called upon to erase the three averrals that he knew not the Man, by thrice asserting his love for the risen Lord. That he was singled out from the seven apostles there assembled is an added evidence that he was chief among them. The question, "Lovest thou me more than these?" was one of deep import, for Peter, the senior apostle of God on earth, had gone fishing; that is, instead of devoting himself, with all his means and energy to the ministry, he had gone off after temporal things. Our Lord now calls him back and asks: "Lovest thou me more than these one hundred and fifty-three fish, more than the things of this world?" And the commands, "Feed my lambs. . . . Feed my sheep," are announced as tests for Peter and for all Christ's ministers, tests which measure how much the elders of the kingdom love their Lord. (DNTC 1:863.)

21:18 This verse could have been more literally translated "Most truly I say to you, When you were younger, you used to gird yourself and walk about where you wanted. But when you grow old you will stretch out your hands and another [man] will gird you and bear you where you do not wish."

21:19 "Thou shalt follow me," our Lord said to Peter on that recent day when the chief apostle pledged, "I will lay down my life for thy sake," (John 13:36-38.) How literally the Master then spoke, and how fully Peter is to do as he offered, he now learns. He is to be crucified, a thing which John in this passage assumes to be known to his readers. Peter's arms are to be stretched forth upon the cross, the executioner shall gird him with the loin-cloth which criminals wear when crucified, and he shall be carried where he would not, that is to his execution. (2 Pet. 1:14-15.) (DNTC 1:863-64.)

21:20-24 These revealing words of the resurrected Jesus Christ concerning the future of John the Beloved have been preserved only by John, and have been greatly misunderstood by many New Testament students and scholars.

"There be some standing here," Jesus said about the time Peter gave his famous testimony of our Lord's divine Sonship, "which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom." (Matt. 16:28.) John is the only one of these of whom we have any knowledge. On this present occasion, Peter having learned of his own future martyrdom, desires to know what awaits John. The answer: "He is to tarry in the flesh until I come in my glory at the end of the world."

John's own account of his translation was revealed anew in this day in these words: [Read DC 7:1-8.]

It is interesting to note that in the gospel account John specifies that he was promised that he should tarry until the Second Coming and not that he should escape death. From the account of the translation of the Three Nephite disciples we learn that this is exactly what takes place. A change is wrought in their bodies so they cannot die at this time, but when the Lord comes again they "shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality," and thus they "shall never taste of death." (3 Ne. 28:1-10, 36-40.) They will be like a person who lives during the millennium. Of such the revelation says: "It is appointed to him to die at the age of man. Wherefore, children shall grow up until they become old; old men shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye." (D. C. 63:50-51.) Thus they shall die, in the sense indicated, but they shall not "taste of death." In this respect it is profitable to note the language used by the Lord with reference to the death of the righteous: "And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D. C. 42:46.) (DNTC 1:864-65.)

(See section 1, "Translated.")

21:25 The expression that "even the world itself could not contain the books" should not be interpreted to mean that the earth would not be large enough to hold the books. Rather, the "worldliness" of the people is such that they ("the world") could not understand nor appreciate fully the additional words of Jesus, even if they should be written.

Elder James E. Talmage saw the closing testimony of John as esentially the close of the apostolic period during the meridian of time:

The final ministry of John marked the close of the apostolic administration in the Primitive Church. His fellow apostles had gone to their rest, most of them having entered through the gates of martyrdom, and although it was his special privilege to tarry in the flesh until the Lord's advent in glory, he was not to continue his service as an acknowledged minister, known to and accepted by the Church. Even while many of the apostles lived and labored, the seed of apostasy had taken root in the Church and had grown with the rankness of pernicious weeds. This condition had been predicted, both by Old Testament prophets and by the Lord Jesus. The apostles also spake in plain prediction of the growth of the apostasy all too grievously apparent to them as then in progress. Personal manifestations of the Lord Jesus to mortals appear to have ceased with the passing of the apostles of old, and were not again witnessed until the dawn of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. (JTC, pp. 717-18.)
