Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

ixPreface

ixOn a wall in St. Oswald's Parish Church in the Lake District village of Grasmere, England, is a brief memorial to Laetitia Pritchard, who died in 1827: "Her life was devoted to the offices of Charity, the claims of Friendship, and the duties of Religion." When I read this inscription, I was struck by its familiarity. Not only did it describe the virtues of Laetitia Pritchard of Grasmere, England; it also identified personal qualities and patterns of relationship evident in the personal narratives of Mormon women in nineteenth-century Nauvoo. Friends, community, and Church were the binding force of their Nauvoo experience. Their writings are their testament to the strength of these attachments.

ixBut only in such broad sweeps of characterization can we discern a "model" of Mormon womanhood. As their writings attest, there is no single image. Their individuality is one of the most compelling features of their writings. Not only do they exhibit varying levels of literary competency and style; they also reflect a variety of responses to the dynamic events that made up their life in Nauvoo. They all, however, shared a need to write, to transpose their life into language. Their personal accounts are literary self-portraits, representations of the inner and outer reality of their author's lives, realities that together formed their conscious worlds. The reader will find them always emotionally articulate if not always grammatically so, but they all valued their experiences to the point of permanently inscribing them.

My dilemma in preparing this volume was deciding which documents to select from the plethora of materials available. Nauvoo was pivotal in the lives of early Mormon women, and many chose to memorialize that period in some written form. I chose the documents for this volume primarily for the range of experience they reflected and the different perspectives from which they were written. I believe that somewhere within that range of experience and perception can be heard the silent voices of those who, for their own reasons, did not leave a written record. Moreover, as individual as each account is, there are commonalities that enable us to generalize about women's Nauvoo and to sketch at least an outline of what it was like to be a Latter-day Saint woman at that time. While some of the accounts suggest the spiritual tensions that ultimately divided the Church in Nauvoo, the focus of this volume is on those women who maintained their faith in the mission of Joseph Smith and willingly transferred it to the calling of Brigham Young as his successor. Those who followed other paths have different stories to tell.

xUnderstandably, these women were selective in what they recorded, and the reader (and the historian) must always recognize the historical limitations of personal discourse. We discover as we read of their lives, however, that their humility was not always self-generated, but that surviving the physical and spiritual challenges of Nauvoo and retaining their faith in a beleaguered religion were occasions for gratitude, not pride. Because of their strong community identity, their sense of collective spiritual destiny, and their participation in a movement of universal claim, their writings escape the narrow egocentrism of many personal narratives.

xThe twenty-five women whose writings comprise this volume found their lives transformed by conversion to Mormonism and shaped by their experiences thereafter. The voices we hear as we read these documents are clearly their own, expressing patterns of living from their own perspectives and in their own vernacular. Their narratives serve as analytical categories through which we can better understand a past wherein gender boundaries were both fixed and fluid, and their relationships both autonomous and affiliative. They write of a female world given cohesiveness by the common female rituals of birthing, nurturing, caring for, and supporting those "others" who came within their circle of attachment. But they were not immune to their social matrix. The private and the public continually intersect. The rhythm of their private worlds was inescapably measured by the cadence of the religious community in which they lived.

xiTheir texts interweave many strands of experience and thought: family and friends, religion, material struggles, sorrow, self-appraisal, and faith, the generative power that fueled and directed their lives. The design that emerges is unique to each writer as she gives greater or lesser prominence to each thread of experience. Religion, however, is the current that runs through them all. To study their writings is to discover the meaning of religion and the power of faith in the lives of women. Faith in divine providence was the lens through which the whole of life was viewed, dictating their thought and behavior as well as belief. Mary Ann Stearns, for example, clearly distinguished between becoming a Mormon—that is, accepting membership in the Church—and becoming a Latter-day Saint, or allowing her religion to transform her very nature and her way of relating not only to deity but to the world about her.

xiThough I cannot claim family kinship with these women or with any of the women of Nauvoo, I recognize them as spiritual kin and can claim my own place in the community of faith that nourished and guided them. They were women who lived life fully, whose clarity of vision infused the uncertainties and challenges with a transcendent meaning. "Our wounds were seared over with wisdom," Bathsheba W. Smith affirmed, as she reflected on her early Church experiences. "Pain gave birth to patience, and our martyred Saints rose, peradventure our best petitioners in the courts above." [^1] These are words not casually chosen. They came from her soul's deepest resources and reflect truths that only experience can confirm.

xiIn bringing these narratives together, I hope they will speak to the reader as they have to me. The disclosure of these women's lives, as they perceived them to be, brings woman's experiences in from the edges of history and enables us to bridge the silence that has separated us, as women, from our past. Perhaps anticipating that chasm of separation, several women agreed to write their life histories in 1880 as a "memorial" to the jubilee anniversary of the Church, designating them to be read at the one-hundredth anniversary of the Church. [^2] An interesting provision to which all of them agreed was included at the end of Mercy Fielding Thompson's life story: "This is designed for my oldest female Descendant, if such should be living at the time this will be brought forth. If no such individual can be found, I design it to be handed to the oldest Female descendant of Martha Ann Smith Harris, my Sister's Daughter, Daughter of Hyrum and Mary [Fielding] Smith." [^3]

xiiiWhat prompted these women to write their histories and then leave them specifically to their female descendants? Were they afraid that their accounts and their lives, left to the vagaries of time or chance, would travel only the byways of history, their experiences lost or ignored by a later generation? Or did they somehow want to link their lives with the lives of those who could most knowingly understand and share their stories, thereby preserving the chain of experience that connects one generation to another? Perhaps they understood that women ofttimes hear their own voices in the voices of other women, and hoped they would be heard across the generations. This volume is an attempt to reflect the spirit of their desire and to reaffirm the reality of our spiritual heritage. How better to claim that legacy than to allow these women to speak to us in their own words?

xiiiA note about the documents: As far as possible, the spelling and sentence structure of the original documents have been preserved, changes made only to facilitate reading and comprehension. Occasionally square brackets have been used to designate words completed or added for the sake of clarity. For those documents taken directly from typescripts, spelling and grammar have been standardized, leaving intact any peculiarity of word choice or expression. An awareness that nuances of personality can be lost if too much standardization is applied has guided the decisions in altering the texts in any way.

---
Notas:
[^1] Woman's Exponent 34 (January 1906): 41.
[^2] Mary Jane Mount Tanner, "Autobiography" (1837-1880), photocopy of typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Mercy Thompson Papers, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers Collection, LDS Church Archives.
