Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

Introduction

Faith and Community

3After the Latter-day Saints were driven from Missouri in 1839, [^1] the new gathering place, or "cornerstone of Zion," the Prophet Joseph Smith declared, was to be established on a promontory of Illinois land, then known as Commerce, that jutted out from the eastern banks of the Mississippi River. The swampy land on the river's edge—the flats, as they were called—gave rise to a plague of disease and death that struck almost every family on arrival, and yet they streamed into the new city from all directions, believers who, Eliza R. Snow affirmed, "seemed to have been held in reserve to meet the occasion, for none but Saints full of faith, and trusting in the power of God could have established that city." [^2]

3For those escaping the trials of Missouri, Nauvoo was a city of hope, a place to regroup and start again. To religious seekers, drawn to Nauvoo from the eastern and southern states and Canada by the pull of the gospel, Nauvoo was to be their "city on a hill," the fulfillment of a long religious quest. And for those who gathered from abroad, Nauvoo was their city of promise, offering hope and relief from their economic and spiritual impoverishment. But above all, Nauvoo was the City of Joseph, named for the prophet whose latter-day revelations drew these disparate people together and united them as Latter-day Saints. "I [will] gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth," the Lord revealed through Joseph Smith in 1830, "even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice." (D&C 33:6.) They came to Nauvoo to prove the strength of their belief in the Lord and of their conviction that he had indeed called them from out of the world through a living prophet. "I was willing to come and gather," declared Jane Manning James, because "I was certain he [Joseph] was a prophet. . . . I saw him back in old Connecticut in a vision, saw him plain and knew he was a prophet." [^3]

4Unlike many frontiers, Nauvoo reflected a family settlement pattern, the ratio of women and men nearly at parity. [^4] It could not have developed so rapidly without the presence and commitment of the women who settled there. Yet possibly only three women of this period could claim instant name recognition among Latter-day Saints today: Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, and Sarah M. Kimball. These three constituted a nascent corps of "leading sisters," respected as such because of either their relationship to a Church leader, like Emma Smith's, their economic or social position, like Sarah Kimball's, or their talent, like Eliza R. Snow's.

4However, thousands of other women were also engaged in the process of kingdom-building during the seven-year period that marked the Church's presence in Nauvoo. [^5] They too had heard the voice that called them out of the world. One of them, whose name is little known, was Nancy Tracy. "You knew the voice of the good shepherd," she was reminded in her patriarchal blessing, ". . . and when He came to gather His sheep, you recognized His message and received it with joy and gladness." [^6] Thousands of other women committed themselves at conversion, as did Priscilla Staines, to lay their "idols all upon the altar" and "set out for the reward of everlasting life, trusting in God." [^7]

4The hardships they encountered did not seem to offset that commitment. Mary Field Garner's mother was typical. She lost her husband and two daughters after reaching Nauvoo but entertained no thought of abandoning her resolve to be numbered among the Saints. "We did not complain," Mary wrote. "We were too thankful to be at Nauvoo with the other Saints of God, and to be associated with our prophet and leader, Joseph Smith, and listen to his teachings." [^8]

4Though these women were seemingly preoccupied with the continuous challenges of housing shortages, scarcity of commodities, and ubiquitous disease, they wrote predominantly religious narratives, recorded accounts of lives mandated and justified by the spiritual epiphany that brought them to Nauvoo. It is as though in the recital of their daily struggles they gave testimony to the greater truth that informed their lives, the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ and their part in that important movement. Thus it is that in the presence of so much adversity, their accounts are remarkably free of self-pity or regret. "I did not put my hand to the Plough to look backward," Electa Williams responded when her husband's parents offered a home and security if they would return to Michigan. [^9] For her, the time of decision had passed.

5Faith in the reality of the restoration and Joseph Smith's prophetic calling had brought them to this gathering place despite its inhospitable environment. But adversity seemed to nurture faith and create a tightly woven society, interdependent and self-defined. These new Latter-day Saints were building more than a city. They were establishing the cornerstone of Zion to be ready to receive all who would gather to Joseph's city, willing to confront the challenges that would make them saints in deed as well as in name. Mary Ann Stearns Winters was under no illusion that "sainthood" came with baptism. "I am a 'Mormon' in every fibre of my being," she insisted, but "I have never yet claimed to be a Latter-day Saint. . . . I am trying to live to that end." [^10]

Daily Life in NauvooHC5The initial contrast between Commerce and the cities they had left was startling to many newcomers. The swampy flatlands, forested bluffs, and sparse settlement were not inviting. "Nauvoo the Beautiful" was little more than a hope in the beginning. [^11] Nor were the prospects of finding shelter and food any more encouraging. Sharing became the law of survival. There were few self-sufficient families. Cooperation and neighborliness were not just amenities; they were essentials. From necessity, families shared the shanties and small log cabins that started to rise among the few existing houses.

Daily Life in NauvooHC5And there was no distinction between the "leading families" and the others. Material challenges faced them all equally. Bathsheba Smith remembered that after her marriage to George A. Smith, they lived with his parents on the Iowa side of the Mississippi, living in three different small log cabins, all with leaky roofs and smoking chimneys, before renting a room from some friends. Finally they acquired a lot in Nauvoo with a small log house on it. Despite George's home improvements, Bathsheba claimed it to be "the worst looking place" they had lived in, but it had the inestimable advantages of possessing neither a leaky roof nor a smoking chimney. [^12]

6 View of Nauvoo from the Nauvoo Militia parade grounds.

Daily Life in NauvooHC6 Some of the other Missouri outcasts, including the families of several of the apostles, found temporary shelter across the river in Montrose, Iowa, and other small settlements nearby. While their husbands served missions to Great Britain, the apostles' wives attempted to maintain life in the deserted ruins of the old Fort Des Moines, each family occupying a single barracks room. When addition of a new baby increased Mary Ann Young's need for space, Leonora Taylor and her children gave up their room and moved in with Sarah Pratt. Phebe Woodruff lived with the Smoot family until she and Leonora decided to share quarters. Better housing always seemed to remain just out of reach.

Daily Life in NauvooHC6In the meantime, the fort at least provided shelter, though sickness, loneliness, and shortages left the women physically and emotionally on edge. "I never needed more grace, patience or your prayers than I do at present," Leonora wrote to her husband, John Taylor. [^13] The women's resilience and inner resources, as well as their material and emotional support of each other, carried them through the worst of their circumstances. Eventually, Leonora Taylor and Mary Ann Young were able to move across the river to a little better housing in Nauvoo, while Phebe Woodruff decided to go to stay with relatives in the East.

Daily Life in NauvooHC6Despite a frenzy of building in Nauvoo, housing could not keep up with the flood of newcomers, mainly converts from Great Britain. British immigrant Ellen Douglas might have wondered about the wisdom of bringing her family to Nauvoo when she first arrived in 1842, but she was delighted to find a small house to rent, especially since she had prayed "that we might have one to ourselves for there is 3 or 4 families in one room, and many have to pitch their tents in the woods or anywhere they can for it is impossible for all to get houses when they come in for they are coming in daily." [^14]

Daily Life in NauvooHC7The stream of immigrants continued to swell the population even after the Prophet's death in 1844, stretching the building limits of the burgeoning city. In a letter to fellow apostle Wilford Woodruff in April 1845, George A. Smith reported the lack of housing, "even a room to rent," unhappy news for "the immense Emigration coming in the Spring." [^15]

Daily Life in NauvooHC7Hannah Pitt Kington and Jane Benbow and their husbands were among the British Saints who found the pull of the gospel compelling enough to uproot their ordered English lives and gather with the Church in Nauvoo. Better off than many of their fellow emigrants, they found that Nauvoo did not offer the material resources to create the comfortable circumstances they had left behind. Nevertheless, they had cast their lot with the Saints and were determined to stay with them. [^16]

Daily Life in NauvooHC7The Crookstons also found Nauvoo materially disappointing. Their house was "very poor with a leaky roof," and Robert Crookston, an artisan, had to settle for work in an adobe yard to support his family. Soon afterwards, however, like so many of his fellow immigrants, he caught the dreaded malaria and died, followed by his two young sons. Left to fare for themselves, his wife and daughter found it difficult to continue on alone "in that hovel on the Mississippi shore." "It was very hard to accustom ourselves to conditions," wrote young Ann Crookston, "after having been used to a comfortable home in England." [^17]

Daily Life in NauvooHC7As "deputy husbands," some women took up tasks for which they were often little prepared, when death, sickness, or Church duties prevented their husbands from assuming their usual familial roles. Drusilla Hendricks enlisted the help of her friend Melinda Lewis to chink and plaster her new log house, which had been hastily "throwed together by the Brethren" because of her husband's disabling injury in the skirmish at Crooked River in Missouri. [^18] Lydia Partridge had to finish her house herself when her husband, Bishop Edward Partridge, died suddenly before completing it. [^19] And Louisa Pratt, whose husband, Addison, had purchased lumber for a frame house before he was called to serve a mission to the Society Islands, was left "to get it put up and covered." Her account of constructing and furnishing the house shows a resourceful and competent woman at work eagerly preparing a home for a husband who would never live in it. [^20]

Daily Life in NauvooHC8As a missionary "widow," Bathsheba Smith managed alone by working out an exchange with her in-laws. She did housework and sewing for her husband's family and recorded blessings for her father-in-law, Patriarch John Smith, while they in turn plastered her half-finished house, supplied her with meal and flour, and tended to her other needs. She earned sufficient means during her husband's absence to furnish her house comfortably in preparation for his return.

Daily Life in NauvooHC8If making a home of a hovel or building a home themselves was one daunting challenge women faced in the early years of Nauvoo, feeding their families was another. While some families had the means to secure enough land to plant gardens or pasture livestock, many did not. Moreover, flour was always in short supply, and so cornmeal became the staple of most diets. Stretching a cupful of cornmeal or a small bunch of greens to feed a family of hungry children required ingenuity. Mary Garner's mother managed to feed her six children for several weeks with only a pint of cornmeal a day, while Mary Rollins Lightner gave painting lessons to Julia Murdock, Sarah Ann Whitney, and others in exchange for some needed household commodities. [^21] Cooperation minimized the household deficiencies so many women faced.

Daily Life in NauvooHC8Since few women had access to kitchen gardens, many of those who did shared both their garden space and their produce. New immigrants, like Ann Pitchforth, often brought to Nauvoo precious seeds and plant cuttings, which they shared or exchanged for the household necessities they lacked. [^22] Such reciprocal arrangements not only created strong networks among the women of Nauvoo, but also helped to bolster the city's faltering economy.

Daily Life in NauvooHC8The traditional household division of labor dissolved under the tremendous economic challenges and high mortality of Nauvoo. Women became instant providers when sickness and death struck down the traditional breadwinners. Historically they turned to their domestic skills to support themselves and their families. Sarah Southworth learned to braid straw hats in a boarding school in Nauvoo, and after her marriage she supplemented the family income by making and selling them for a dollar each to passengers on the steamships that came in and out of Nauvoo. [^23] Hannah Ells used the Times and Seasons to advertise her millinery business, which she operated in Samuel Bennett's home, where she also lived. [^24] Drusilla Hendricks took in sewing and washing and reluctantly went out "on public days" to sell her homemade gingerbread, "this showing," she wrote, "that necessity is the mother of invention." [^25]

Daily Life in NauvooHC9When Ann Crookston lost her father and two brothers, she and her mother had to become self-sufficient. Ann traveled to Chicago to find work, returning to Nauvoo just as the Saints were preparing to leave in 1846. She and her mother lacked sufficient provisions for the long trek, so both took what work they could find. "She [mother] could do very fine hand sewing and I was able to get a little housework," Ann remembered, "but there was no choice in the matter and we were glad to get anything we could to help make an outfit for the journey which we expected to make." [^26]

Daily Life in NauvooHC9Taking in boarders helped Mary Ives to make ends meet for a while, but when business dropped off, she came under the "painful necessity of going from this place to work where ever I can find I can work for provisions but it is verry hard to get clothing more particular Flannel unless one has the money." [^27]

Daily Life in NauvooHC9Women developed other economic strategies, such as trading networks—exchanging a spool of fine cotton thread for a piece of pork, a blanket for a sack of flour, or a son's labor for a cow. The unequal possession of common household goods and the lack of money elevated bartering and trading to the primary means of commercial exchange in frontier communities. Through this informal, domestic mercantile operation, women demonstrated their expertise and value in the economic life of the community. These interdependent family clusters characterized the cooperative spirit that sustained Nauvoo's rapid growth.

Daily Life in NauvooHC10Prized heirlooms and family memorabilia were reluctantly included in the pool of possessions to be sold or exchanged. Only when no other options appeared did Louisa Pratt give up her silver teaspoons to acquire a bushel of apples. [^28] And fifteen-year-old Ann Crookston and her mother reached desperation before they were willing to part with their family silverware. Sent out to sell the spoons, Ann was delighted when the first person she offered them to accepted and pressed a dollar bill into her hand. But she was even happier when he told her to "buy what she needed with the dollar and take the spoons back home to her mother." Her benefactor turned out to be Joseph Young, Brigham's brother. [^29]

Daily Life in NauvooHC10Lack of provisions prompted Matilda Streeper to advise her brother to stock up before making the journey to Nauvoo. "It is a hard place to get things," she wrote, "and don't depend on getting dry goods or housing goods on the rode for you can get them beter at home and haf plenty of provisin when you start and lay in your grocries at saint luis." [^30]

Daily Life in NauvooHC10Along with sewing, housekeeping, and boarding guests, teaching provided an income for several self-dependent Nauvoo women. It required a degree of literacy not possessed by all of Nauvoo's adults. Eliza R. Snow, Zina D. H. Young, Louisa Barnes Pratt, and Emmeline B. Wells were among Nauvoo's teachers, all having had varying degrees of education. Their schools were informal, generally small, and irregular, but the schools helped educate the growing populace even as they provided a living for the teachers. These occupations not only enabled women to meet their own economic needs, but also provided necessary services to the community before such services were institutionalized. Economic necessity blurred the distinction between the private and the public as women worked both in and out of their homes, performing both paid and unpaid labor for their families' welfare.

Daily Life in NauvooHC10Throughout American history, settling new communities always disrupted traditional patterns of family work and relationships. This social dislocation was exacerbated by the heavy physical toll inherent in the harsh environment of early Nauvoo. Moreover, building both a temporal and a spiritual community imposed extraordinary personal demands. The influx of European converts, along with converts from the United States and Canada, provided a numerical and psychological boost to the new community, but it taxed Nauvoo's resources to provide work, food, and homes for the new settlers. [^31] Old skills had to be abandoned when they proved useless in a new setting, and new ways of supporting families had to be employed. Men, women, and children were all engaged in finding ways to sustain themselves and their community even as they were adjusting to a new way of life as Latter-day Saints.

Daily Life in NauvooHC11Unfortunately, because of the swampy conditions in Nauvoo, sickness became a rite of passage for settlers. Each week the Nauvoo Neighbor published the names of those who had succumbed to the deadly malaria, along with a litany of other ailments that attacked the populace. [^32] As traditional caregivers, women carried much of the burden of these debilitating diseases, often while suffering from their symptoms themselves. "We were now a family of invalids," Sarah Allen exclaimed when she followed her husband and children into the sickbed, her body shaken with chills and fever. "It was very difficult to hire a nurse," she wrote, "and as difficult to keep one on account of so much sickness, so I had to be my own nurse." [^33]

Daily Life in NauvooHC11When the entire Woolley family were bedridden with chills and fever, they paid money "for every pail of water brought into the house," more than a few pails needed to quench the thirst of a family of eight. When Rachel Woolley felt the chills coming back some time later she "stamped her feet and said most emphatically, three times[,] I won't have another chill, and I didn't nor haven't had one of that kind up to the present time [1881]." Perhaps others should have tried her remedy. [^34]

Daily Life in NauvooHC11Women nursed their neighbors as well as their families. Little Margaret Judd remembered going with her mother "around among [our] sick neighbors nursing and helping them," fully expecting the neighbors would do the same for them if needed. [^35] Elizabeth Kirby, a young widow from Canada, found nursing financially disappointing but dependable employment. [^36] Immigrant Mary Ann Maughan scarcely had time to unload her luggage before she was called to nurse William and Caroline Pitt, fellow Saints from England, who were suffering from the ague. When her husband was bedridden from the complaint for a year, Mary Ann claimed that it "was the hardest one of my life, as I had to provide for a family of eight in the best way I could." [^37] Even Charlotte Haven, a highly critical non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo, acknowledged the selfless service of two Mormon midwives who attended the birth of her nephew. "A kind heart in this place," she observed, "can always be active." [^38]

Daily Life in NauvooHC12If life in Nauvoo was often physically and emotionally draining, it also offered camaraderie and social exchange. Like other community builders, Nauvoo residents brought their own forms of amusement, and games, sports, musicals, dramas, and dances reflected southern, eastern, New England, Canadian, and British customs and traditions. Homes were the first social centers, but after Joseph Smith completed the Mansion House, it became the setting for many spirited social gatherings. [^39] Outdoor events such as visiting circuses and other amusements attracted thousands to the grove, situated just below the temple hill, where Latter-day Saints gathered in the summer months for religious meetings. In the style of the revivalist camps, they sat on makeshift benches, on the ground, on their horses, and in their wagons, listening to two- and three-hour sermons by the Prophet Joseph and other leaders. When the Prophet spoke, time passed quickly for listeners like Elizabeth Howe, who vividly recalled that his words "thrilled my whole being." [^40]

Daily Life in NauvooHC12But for style and pageantry, nothing could match the mustering of the Nauvoo militia and its parades. Performed on the prairies near Joseph Smith's farm east of the city, the troops gathered for inspection to the accompaniment of at least one and often two bands. Emma Smith rode beside her husband, who was smartly outfitted in a uniform befitting his position as lieutenant general, their horses colorfully decorated and plumed. "The Prophet was a very dignified looking man," Mary Field Garner recalled, "and in his uniform of General of the Nauvoo Legion he was noble and kingly looking. His voice was clear and distinct and he could take command of his men in a very intelligent way. We were proud to call him our leader at all times." [^41] Emily Partridge thought the Prophet looked "grand on his big black horse 'Charley' and dressed in his uniform as Lieutenant General." She remembered Emma accompanying him either on horseback or in a carriage. "Emma looked well on a horse," she recalled. "She was a large and noble looking woman. She generally rode the chestnut horse, 'Joe Duncan.'" [^42]

13 Joseph Smith mustering the Nauvoo Legion, from a C. C. A. Christiansen painting.

Daily Life in NauvooHC13Cruising the Mississippi on the Church-owned steamship Maid of Iowa, ordinarily used to bring immigrants to the city, offered respite on a hot, muggy summer evening. Dancing parties on deck and picnics aboard were a feature of the summer itinerary for many Nauvoo residents. But the river was more than a scene of summer excursions and winter skating. For many, it was the heartbeat of the city, bringing the steamships to Nauvoo with goods, mail, and passengers and then carrying the ships away loaded with cargo and travelers destined for other ports. The freight they deposited was sustenance for the growing city, but their human cargo was its life.

Daily Life in NauvooHC13The river landings were the most important social centers of Nauvoo. The arrival of new converts, the return of long-absent missionaries, and the reunion of families and friends long separated made the landings, one at the south end of Main Street near the Nauvoo House and the other at the north end of town, scenes of excitement and expectation. Mary Bennett's joy at reaching Nauvoo mirrored the feelings of most of the new converts. After six hard weeks on the Atlantic, the Bennetts and the other immigrants traveling with them finally reached New Orleans, only to find the Maid of Iowa embargoed and lashed to the wharf. Mary, a woman of wealth in England, provided the money to lift the embargo, outfit the steamer, and secure a crew to enable the travelers to continue their journey. During the five-week passage upriver, they encountered insults and persecutions, a furious gale, loss of steam power, mob threats at several ports, and a nearly fatal fire on board. Word of their difficulties preceded them, and a large welcoming crowd gathered at the dock in anticipation of their arrival, Joseph Smith among the number. When the boat finally docked, Joseph made his way to Mary Bennett and blessed her for "so materially aiding the saints." [^43]

13 Nauvoo dock, one of the steamboat landings in Nauvoo, located at the south end of Main Street.

Daily Life in NauvooHC14Seeing the Prophet for the first time was a notable experience recorded by many immigrants. New convert Mary Alice Lambert was thrilled to recognize him without introduction as the steamboat arrived at the Nauvoo landing. "I knew him the instant my eyes rested upon him, and at that moment I received my testimony that he was a Prophet of God," she wrote. [^44] Priscilla Staines was certain she would recognize him at first glance and was gratified that her intuition was verified when the man she had settled upon instantly boarded the boat and made himself known to the travelers as the Prophet. [^45]

Daily Life in NauvooHC15Returning to the city after a period away from it was almost as moving an experience as seeing Nauvoo for the first time. Several days before reaching the city, on her return from a visit to relatives in Maine, Louisa Follett expressed her longing "to gaze on[c]e more on the beloved City of the Saints . . . and to meete in the assembly of the Saints and again be privileged with hearing the words of eternal life." After arriving safely "at the Stone House [a hotel near the ferry landing] where we met with a most cordial welcome from our friends and relatives," she traveled to the temple site where she viewed with "wonder and amazement the magnificence of that beautiful Structure." She had visited "Babylon" for the last time, she said, hoping never to return. [^46]

Daily Life in NauvooHC15But even as the Nauvoo landings heralded seasons of joy and reunion, they also initiated periods of loneliness, the partings, some permanent, engraving their images on saddened hearts. The landing at the end of Water Street was inked in the memory of Emmeline Harris when she said good-bye to her husband of little more than a year as he boarded a boat to go "downriver" to find work. She little dreamt she was bidding him good-bye forever. "Here I was brought to this great city by one to whom I ever expected to look for protection," she wrote a few months later, "and left dependent on the mercy and friendship of strangers." [^47] Louisa Pratt also viewed the river as a scene of sorrow. With unrestrained weeping, she and her four young daughters stood on one of Nauvoo's landings to bid farewell to their husband and father, leaving to fulfill a Church mission to Tahiti. They would not meet again until they were all in Utah, five long years later. [^48] Lucy and Jane Walker and their eight siblings, whose mother had died soon after they arrived in Nauvoo, also watched their father travel out of their lives in answer to a mission call. [^49] Like Emmeline Harris, these and the many other divided families looked to their own resources and the compassion of others in the absence of their traditional providers.

Daily Life in NauvooHC16In such instances, women's emotional needs became as great an incentive as their material requirements for developing friendship networks. Their faith and conviction were contagious, buoying up lagging spirits while testifying of their commitment to the work of the restoration, whatever the sacrifice. Women's traditional ritual of visiting served as a powerful agent of female community in Nauvoo. Their personal writings map the territory of this female world in all its dimensions. Sarah Kimball and Rachel Ivins formed a lifelong friendship in Nauvoo that survived Rachel's temporary disaffection and return to New Jersey in 1844. Jane Richards recounted her friendship with Julia Farnsworth, the kind, helpful, motherly way of Mrs. Leavitt, the intelligence and kindness of Jenetta Richards, "respected by everybody." She treasured her special relationship with other apostles' wives—Vilate Kimball, Leonora Taylor, and Phebe Woodruff.

Daily Life in NauvooHC16Visiting linked not only individuals but also families in ever-widening spheres of association and affiliation. The Riches, Hubbards, and Kimballs, for instance, found themselves neighbors in Nauvoo and immediately created a small community of their own. On one side of the Riches were the Hubbards, who had aided Charles and Sarah Rich upon their arrival in Nauvoo. On the other side lived Vilate Kimball, in the small log cabin her husband had hastily built for her before leaving for England with the other apostles. "We soon became strong friends to each other," Sarah wrote, "and we felt for each others interest." If the Riches "had any nice things to eat that [Vilate] did not have we shared it with her," Sarah remembered, "and she did the same by us." They all experienced "many trying circumstances together," taking "solid comfort together." Vilate opened her small home for meetings in which her family, the Riches, Hubbards, and other neighbors worshipped together. "We then, as a people were united and were more like one family than like strangers," Sarah wrote. [^50]

Daily Life in NauvooHC16Midwives, such as Patty Sessions and Zina Young, visited others almost daily, entering into the lives of many families in their round of duties. They served as a common point of connection among Nauvoo families. They also found time to visit solely for sociability. Scarcely a day passed that Zina Young did not visit or receive someone—women friends or family members who came together just to visit. Patty Sessions and Lucy Mack Smith became great friends, exchanging visits regularly. Mother Smith often stayed with Patty while Patty's husband served a mission in the eastern states.

Daily Life in NauvooHC17Elizabeth Ann Whitney recounted another kind of kinship that developed among some Nauvoo women. Only a minority of women encountered the principle of plural marriage in Nauvoo, some immediately rejecting it, while others were converted to the doctrine. One of the earliest women to engage in plural marriage, Elizabeth Ann found it to be a positive experience and learned much about her sister Saints that she had not known. "Instead of my opinion of women being unfavorable or my feelings unkindly," she wrote, "I am more favorably disposed to women as a class, learning more of the true nature of woman-kind than I ever could without this peculiar experience." [^51]

Daily Life in NauvooHC17As if their compassionate service, social visits, and Relief Society meetings were not enough, women also gathered in informal groups for prayer and spiritual uplift. [^52] Their reciprocal visits and spiritual gatherings interwove many strands of the social fabric of Nauvoo, binding and unifying the community in an informal social structure based on women's traditional modes of relating to each other and to their communities. Their writings indicate that family and friends often blended into a single "kinship" network, binding women together in ties of mutual support and companionship. A common faith and shared experience strengthened those bonds. "Behold how lovely it is for Friends to dwell together in unity," Zina Young effused. "O God," she prayed, "ever let union Prevail." [^53]

Daily Life in NauvooHC17Visiting did more than link women together in social networks and create a strong collective identity, however. The webs of relationships that developed among women also helped to shape the society in which they lived. [^54] Before the institutionalization of such services, women provided health and welfare assistance, instituted and maintained cultural and educational programs, and created social and recreational activities. Often, the success of their domestic economy determined the survival of a settlement and, certainly, that of their own families. The extent to which women were willing and able to render such service determined the quality of life in the community.

Daily Life in NauvooHC18Small, informal alliances of women frequently burgeoned into citywide collectives, extending the reach of their service. In Nauvoo, for instance, the Relief Society began with a small group of women who were all connected as neighbors, relatives, or fellow boarders with Emma Smith or with other founding members. Soon membership grew to reflect a broad section of the Mormon community, expanding the reach of their affiliative ties in a mutual aim to improve Nauvoo's material and moral welfare. Similarly, from the women who received the temple ordinances from Joseph Smith in Nauvoo came a small sisterhood of temple workers that expanded with the building of each new temple in the West. Upon reaching the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, Eliza R. Snow sent back to her sister temple workers who waited in Winter Quarters a short poem that anticipated the continuation of their temple service, concluding with the lines: "Come along, you holy women, / And your blessings here impart." [^55]

Daily Life in NauvooHC18Because of the dramatic impact of temple worship on that first generation of Latter-day Saints, the women who were authorized to minister to their sisters in the temple were esteemed as holy women and formed the heart of the growing network of women endowed in the House of the Lord. Such religious service, along with their visiting and task-oriented groups, involved women in both the material and the spiritual life of the community, their overlapping networks proving to be an important cohesive element.

Daily Life in NauvooHC18The features that most distinguished the religious experiences of Nauvoo women from those of other women of their time were the unique principles and practices of Mormonism. More compelling than the demanding rituals of daily living, and often serving as an antidote to them, was their immersion in the life of the spirit. The spiritual meetings that gathered families and neighbors together in each other's homes intertwined the religious with the familial. "I never missed a meeting when it was in my power to go," Elizabeth Kirby recalled, remembering especially the prayer meeting when "Sister Wheeler sang in tongues and the gift of interpretation was given to me." [^56] Non-Mormon Charlotte Haven attended several of these Sunday evening cottage meetings and found each time "the room well filled" and the meetings "orderly" though unstructured, everyone "at liberty to speak." [^57]

Daily Life in NauvooHC19The merging of their everyday and religious lives developed among the women strong spiritual as well as social kinships. Manifestations of the Spirit, as experienced by Elizabeth Kirby, were quiet demonstrations of a unity of faith, expressed within the sanctuary of friendship. Spiritual gifts gave witness to the true gospel, and its restoration brought an inevitable renewal of these spiritual entitlements. Dependence on faith endowed the most homely act with a supernal significance, and in the presence of untreatable illness, many turned to this restorative power.

Daily Life in NauvooHC19Elizabeth Ann Whitney was one of several women set apart by Joseph Smith "to administer to the sick and comfort the sorrowful" through the power of faith, a service that she provided throughout her long life and that won her the honored title "Mother Whitney." [^58] Always steadfast and wise from experience, she was often sought after for counsel and guidance. Drusilla Hendricks turned to Mother Whitney when she was undecided about how best to provide for her family. Feeling that Mother Whitney had special spiritual insight because she "had had her endowments," Drusilla asked for direction and received spiritual confirmation from Elizabeth Ann of her desire to go to St. Louis to earn money for needed supplies. [^59] Abigail Leonard also drew on this reserve force of spiritual power when she called in the sisters to administer to a young British convert with whom she shared her home. "They came, washed, anointed, and administered to her," Abigail wrote, noting that the young woman's health speedily returned. [^60]

Daily Life in NauvooHC19The slowly rising temple merged the temporal and the spiritual. Not only was it becoming a visual focal point of the flourishing city, as it rose high on the bluffs overlooking the river, but even more—it was the spiritual focus of the people.

Construction of Nauvoo TempleHC19The laying of the cornerstones on April 6, 1841, was a grand affair since it also marked the anniversary of the organization of the Church. The celebration began with an early review of all the companies of the Nauvoo Legion. When Joseph Smith arrived in his full regalia as lieutenant general, the women of Nauvoo presented him with a "beautiful silk National flag," the ceremony duly hailed by the firing of cannon. The procession then continued on to the temple ground, where a large crowd awaited the service. [^61] There could be no doubting the commingling of the worldly and the heavenly in such an event, the pomp and ceremony of the secular world evoked to underscore this significant occasion of the spiritual.

19 Sketch of the Nauvoo Temple by Amelia Stevens Tronslot (ca. 1848)

Construction of Nauvoo TempleHC20Everyone had a stake in completing the temple and found ways to be included in its construction. As men took their turns building it, setting every tenth day aside to work on it in the beginning, women contributed clothing for the workers and their families, shared their homes with the builders, and offered tithes and other contributions. [^62] Many women, Louisa Decker remembered, "sold things that they could scarcely spare" to get money toward its construction, her mother selling her best china dishes and fine bed quilt "to donate her part." [^63] Widow Elizabeth Kirby gave the only possession she had with which, she said, she would grieve to part: her husband's watch. "I gave it," she explained, "to help build the Nauvoo Temple and everything else I could possibly spare and the last few dollars that I had in the world, which altogether amounted to nearly $50." [^64]

Construction of Nauvoo TempleHC21By November 1841 the temple baptismal font was in use, but another four years passed before any other rooms were in service. Rather than diminishing enthusiasm, the death of Joseph Smith before the temple was finished inspired the Saints to press for its full completion. Finally, in October 1845, it was far enough along to house a church conference, and by the next month the attic story was ready to be dedicated. [^65]

Endowment IntroducedHC21Their assistance in building a holy edifice was not unique to LDS women, but what was to transpire within temples was a distinctive expression of their religious belief. Unlike the sacred rituals of other religious groups, the temple ordinances, the most sacred of Mormonism's religious rites, required women's participation to receive the ordinances for themselves and to act as officiators and as proxies for others. The restoration of temple worship meant that they would experience the sealing powers of the priesthood, linking husbands and wives in eternal marriage and binding families together from generation to generation; [^66] it meant that they would enter into the covenants and receive the keys that would lead them to exaltation; and it also meant that they would themselves perform their portion of those saving ordinances, officiating at the temple alongside their brethren. [^67]

Endowment IntroducedHC21Emma Smith was the first woman to receive the ordinances. She, in turn, administered the initiatory rites to other women, including Bathsheba W. Smith, who felt privileged to receive them from the Prophet's wife and "to be led and taught . . . by the prophet himself who explained and enlarged wonderfully upon every point." [^68] Bathsheba later became a lifelong temple worker and served as matron of the Salt Lake Temple.

Endowment IntroducedHC21Another early participant was Mary Ellen Kimball, who, when she saw the temple for the first time, admired its beauty both within and without, feeling "a reverential awe knowing [it] to be the temple of God built by revelation." Deeply moved by the physically and spiritually empowering promises of the initiatory ordinances administered to her by her sister wife, Vilate, she was overwhelmed by a sense of "love and admiration" for her. "I know her to be a Saint," Mary Ellen wrote. "No one could fill that position so well without the spirit of our Saviour to assist them to do it." [^69]

22Louisa Barnes Pratt also found the temple and its ordinances to be an important spiritual addition to her life. After receiving her own endowment, she longed to stay in the temple throughout the day to keep hold of the spirit she felt there, but the press of numbers prevented her. Many visits followed, however, and she was delighted to go through "the stately edifice and examine the varied apartments, the architecture of which was dictated by the wisdom of God." [^70]

22It was through their ministrations in these holy places that many women most felt their connection to the sacred work of the restoration and experienced the spiritual power and holy calling of religious service. In receiving and administering the saving ordinances of the gospel, they found new ways to show their discipleship to the Savior. Noting the devoted temple service of Eliza R. Snow, Emmeline Wells recalled that she was one of the first women who "ministered in the [Nauvoo] Temple in the holy rites that pertain to the house of the Lord as priestess and Mother in Israel to hundreds of her sex." [^71]

22Eliza R. Snow and Vilate Kimball were only two of thirty-six women who have been identified as ordinance workers in the Nauvoo Temple, working around the clock during the winter of 1845-46 to administer the rites to as many women as possible before the exodus. "I worked in the Temple every day without cessation until it was closed," recalled Elizabeth Ann Whitney, another one of the thirty-six. "I gave myself, my time and attention to that mission." [^72] Dozens of other women washed the clothing and prepared the food that physically sustained the workers. [^73]

22Elizabeth Ann Whitney's pleasure in temple service was exceeded only by the joy she felt in giving birth to the child who, she explained, was the first to be "born heir to the Holy Priesthood and in the New and Everlasting Covenant in this dispensation." Having been sealed to her husband by the Prophet Joseph just a few months before, Elizabeth Ann treasured the knowledge that her daughter was the first child to receive that cherished birthright in this dispensation. [^74]

23The purpose of the gathering, Joseph Smith explained, was to build a temple wherein one could learn the way and receive the ordinances leading to exaltation. Thus, the temple has always been the focal point of LDS worship. Before the Mormon exodus from Nauvoo in 1846, more than five thousand men and women were able to receive their endowments and other blessings in the Nauvoo Temple. Yet many who had left homes and loved ones to gather with the Saints were unable to receive these ordinances in Nauvoo, having to postpone that experience until temples were built in the West. [^75]

23For members of the Jolly family, the temple formed their primary experience in Nauvoo. Sarah Pippen Jolly's husband and sons answered the call to give all of their time to building the temple, the family surviving on little more than corn bread and water for long periods of time. "But it was good," Sarah recalled. "I don't complain. I had the privilege of going through the temple with my husband so I am paid for all of my trouble." [^76]

23This same spirit guided the Saints' decision to formally dedicate the temple even though they had abandoned Nauvoo before it was totally completed. A private dedication occurred the evening of April 30, 1846, and the public dedicatory services took place during the following three days. Few of those already on the trail to Winter Quarters returned for the dedication, but one who did was fourteen-year-old Elvira Stevens. Orphaned in Nauvoo and traveling west with her sister and brother-in-law, Elvira crossed the Mississippi three times to attend the services, the only member of her wagon company to do so. "The heavenly power was so great," she wrote, "I then crossed and recrossed to be benefitted by it, as young as I was." [^77] Elvira had not yet received the temple ordinances, but the spiritual power of the edifice itself and the circumstances of its dedication remained prominent memories of her brief and troubled life in Nauvoo.

23Adding to the rich spiritual dimension of the lives of these Nauvoo women were their patriarchal blessings. Though personal and individualized, the blessings were also universal in their spiritual investment, declaring to women their royal lineage in the house of Israel and assigning them specific spiritual tasks and privileges. Along with the temple endowment, patriarchal blessings revealed additional ways for women to express their faith in the Savior and their service to his church. The blessings confirmed the women's place "within the grace of the covenant," and their participation in the blessings of Abraham. Many were promised wisdom, inspiration, knowledge, and spiritual power to influence and bless the lives of their families and associates.

24Like the revelation given to Emma Smith in 1830 (D&C 25), [^78] these blessings charged women to "teach, instruct, and counsel." The women were also admonished to use their faith to bless the sick, rebuke the adversary, and discern evil for the benefit of their families. [^79] Consider the promises given to Elizabeth Barlow Thompson. The patriarch told her she would receive all of the "blessings of mother Sarah of old." These included "a renewed gift of wisdom, knowledge, light and understanding" and, she was told, "many will come to thee for counsel and advice and they shall go away happy and contented." The patriarch, recognizing that she was a woman close to the Spirit and willing to extend the reach of her nurturing, further said to her: "You will have great influence with thy sex for good . . . the young and rising generation [shall] come to thee for advice and instructions and thou shalt bless them and they shall bless thee."

24Such promises were not confined to the Nauvoo period. In 1876 Martha Riggs, like many others, was blessed that she would "become mighty in the midst of thy sisters . . . and thou shall have a knowledge by which thou shall teach the Daughters of Zion how to live, for it shall be required unto thee from the heavens." These promised experiences of spiritual reciprocity characterized women's relationships within the Church, and such exchanges of support, instruction, and blessing not only strengthened their sense of sisterhood but also bound them together in shared testimony of God's ruling hand in their lives.

24Besides receiving gifts of "wisdom, knowledge, and light" to benefit the community of Saints, women whose family ties had been severed at their conversion found solace in the knowledge that they would "stand as a savior in the midst of [their] father and mother's house." A salve to many aching hearts was the promise that because the women chose to embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ, they would be instruments in reuniting their families in an eternal union through the ordinances of the temple. [^80]

Relief Society OrganizedHC25The bonds of spiritual kinship that embraced the women of Nauvoo were strengthened and expanded on March 17, 1842, when Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society. "I have desired to organize the Sisters in the order of the Priesthood," Sarah Kimball remembered his saying when she presented her proposal for a charitable society. "I now have the key by which I can do it," he said. "The organization of the Church of Christ was never perfect until the women were organized." [^81] The Relief Society was thus perceived as more than a facility for charity or a commission of moral stewardship. It was to be an integral part of the Church, giving women a distinct ecclesiastical identity.

Relief Society OrganizedHC25Like a spiritual magnet, the new organization drew women into membership in ever-increasing numbers, some even ferrying across the river from Montrose to attend its meetings. [^82] Before its final session in Nauvoo in 1844, it numbered nearly thirteen hundred members. In looking after the material and spiritual needs of the community, it provided an institutional seal to the solicitude that already informed the relationships of the women of Nauvoo. [^83] Its rapid growth bespeaks their strong desire to preserve those relationships and to give definition to the strong female community of shared belief and commitment.

Relief Society OrganizedHC25Joseph Smith's spiritually charged sermons to the members of the Relief Society instilled in them a powerful sense of their worth as women as well as Latter-day Saints. He had a broad vision of woman's role in the restoration and desired to teach them how they "would come in possession of the privileges & blessings & gifts of the priesthood" that accompanied the restoration of the gospel. [^84] The Nauvoo minutes, which inspired and guided the women of the Church for several generations, indicated his hope to make "of the Society a 'kingdom of priest[esses]' as in Enoch's day, as in Paul's day," affirming its connection with the ordinances of the temple. [^85] The minutes tell of his delivering to the sisters the keys of knowledge and intelligence, interpreted as both temporal and spiritual, and his encouragement of their expression of the gifts of the Spirit, all of which gave them a sense of full citizenship in the restored church. [^86]

25 "Benevolence, the Spirit of Relief Society," photo of a bronze plaque by Avard Fairbanks for the Relief Society centennial memorial campanile in Salt Lake City.

26Nancy Tracy recalled the power of those sermons: "He was so full of the Spirit of the Holy Ghost that his frame shook and his face shone and looked almost transparent." [^87] Temple worship, their patriarchal blessings, and the lofty mission of the Relief Society transformed the physical and emotional claims on their lives into a transcendent vision of their part and potential in the great work of restoration.

26The Prophet Joseph's death, like his life, emerged as a rallying point for the faithful. Stunned by the news from Carthage, Joseph's followers were at first transfixed in disbelief. The recorded memories of the tragedy distill the confusion and anxiety that followed into one dominant emotion, an overwhelming sense of irretrievable loss. "The mourning of the saints . . . baffles description," recalled Elizabeth Howe Hyde. [^88] "Every heart is filled with sorrow, and the very streets of Nauvoo seam to morn," agreed Vilate Kimball, in a letter to her absent husband, Heber. [^89] Zina Young noted the enormity of the loss to the Saints of their leaders: "In one day . . . fell the Prophet and Patr[i]arch of the church of the Lat[t]erday Saints," she wrote, "the kind husbands, the affectionate Father, the venerable statesman, the Friends of man kinde, by the hand of a ruthless Mob mixed with desenters." [^90]

27Joseph's death imposed a strange request upon young Elizabeth Jane Bybee of Carthage. The townspeople had tried unsuccessfully to remove the bloodstains from the room in Carthage jail where the murders had occurred. "They thought that if a Mormon girl came and scrubbed the floor," Elizabeth recalled, "the stains would come out. They came for me, but neither I, or any of the other girls would go." [^91]

27Memorialized in verse by some of Mormonism's finest poets, the tragedy evoked private poetic expression, such as Louisa Follett's simple but moving stanza: "Oh Illinois," she wrote, "thy soul has drunk the blood, / Of prophets martyred for the Cause of God. / Now Zion mourns—she mourns an earthly head. / The prophet and the Patriarch are dead." [^92]

27The events leading to and following the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith have been rehearsed in every Mormon history book. But only those who experienced them can fully express their meaning in human, rather than institutional, terms. Joseph Smith was the source of authority and symbol of authenticity for the Church. As its Prophet he was also Christ's representative on earth and his people's spiritual center. His death thus became another time of decision for some. But the sifting process left a strong corps of believers in the principles he had taught in Nauvoo, followers who were "more united than ever before," Zina Young observed. "The faithful are determined to keep the law of God," she affirmed, " . . . to finish the temple . . . and claim the blessings that had ben promised to us as a people by Joseph, A Man of God, and I believe after Gods own hart." [^93]

27Zina Young knew that the temple would be the focus of the Church's last years in Nauvoo. It was central to the faith and represented the culmination of Joseph Smith's ministry. Dedicating themselves to its completion was affirmation of their faith in the slain Prophet and their testimony to the divinity of his mission. Work on it continued despite the growing rumblings of anti-Mormons.

28Those who lived outside Nauvoo were the first to note the discontent when the murder of Joseph failed to decimate the Church. Harassment turned to violence as houses and crops were burned and lives threatened. "Days of watching and nights of terror" dominated the lives of Mormons in the settlements, wrote Mary Jane Mount Tanner, and many began to move into Nauvoo. As non-Mormons took over the vacated houses, she lamented that the homes of the neighbors with whose children she had played were filled with strangers. [^94]

28Mary Field Garner was only a child when the Prophet died, but the events that followed remained deeply etched in her memory. Because the six Field children and their widowed mother were among those too poor to begin the long westward journey when the Church left Nauvoo in February 1846, they felt the full force of mob violence the following summer. They watched the mobbers desecrate the temple, ransack and burn homes, and hold mock baptisms in the river. Finally driven from the city, the Fields decided to remain on Nickerson Island across from Nauvoo for the winter, returning to the city the next spring when peace was finally restored. "We were glad to be back in our beloved Nauvoo where we could have food and shelter," Mary wrote. But it was not the same. "We were lonely for the other Saints and our leaders, and the place seemed so quiet and deserted, for the spirit of love and unity had gone with the Saints." [^95]

28It was three years before the Fields were able to leave, Mary's mother having remarried while Mary worked for a friend in a neighboring village to help raise sufficient money. When all was ready, Mary's stepfather suddenly died, leaving her mother once again the sole caretaker of her children. Harnessing all of their resources, material and emotional, the family finally made their way to the Salt Lake Valley. Her faith was clearly the driving force in the life of Mary Garner's mother, compensating her for the tremendous personal loss and physical struggle she experienced after becoming a Latter-day Saint.

28The "battle of Nauvoo," recounted in many of the reminiscences in this volume, left other widows and orphans in its wake, most of them bereft of personal goods as well. The Saints were leaving Illinois much as they had arrived seven years earlier, taking with them little more than their faith. That faith would take them to another gathering place, another "cornerstone of Zion," another region to regroup and build again. But it would be different from Nauvoo. The seven years spent by the Saints in Nauvoo, wrote Eliza R. Snow, "is a history that never will, and never can 'repeat itself.'" [^96]

29How can such steadfastness be explained? There were always alternatives, and there were those who opted for them. But the women in this study stayed the course. Maybe Phebe Chase best expressed the conviction that sustained them. In a letter to her unconverted children she wrote: "The Lord has blest us in obeying his command in gathering with the saints and helping on the work of the latter-day w[h]ich you think is not the work of the lord[,] but my children it is the work of the lord for no man ever could bring about so great and so marvelous a work." [^97]

29The inexplicable power of faith perplexes reason. It neither invites nor warrants intellectual understanding, for it functions in a realm that cannot be reached by empirical means. The study of the soul, as one historian wryly noted, has not yet become the subject of historical inquiry. But whether as believers or unbelievers, historians cannot fully come to terms with the experience of women of the past without acknowledging the dominant place of religion in their lives. It has defined them as women and structured their social and familial roles. The quality of faith, however, is less yielding to analysis. Deeply embedded in one's psyche, it is elusive and resistant to the scholar's inquiry. But its effect is clearly discernible. As a powerful motivation in the lives of individuals, it cannot be relegated to the periphery of the human story, however indefinable it may be to the scholar.

29No intellectual exercise is necessary to recognize that faith was the impelling force that brought the women of this volume to the Church and bound them to it. None of them doubted God's overruling power, and heaven, to them, held this life's unfulfilled promises and the rewards of the faithful. This volume is a testament to the compelling power of faith.

29It was inevitable that their collective faith would create strong bonds of community among them, especially when their "faith and their work were so in tune with [their] every day lives," as one woman remembered. [^98] Bonded by a shared stewardship and enfolded and linked by the covenant of the gospel, they found that their sisterhood, the sense of community that unified and embraced them, was not an end in itself. Rather, it became the means to maintaining a collective identity and toward creating a base of support and strength from which they would meet the demands and challenges of establishing the Church and living the restored gospel.

30Zina Young, a natural agent of female community, resonated with the power of this solidarity. "It is a blessing to meet together," she wrote after one of the many women's gatherings she attended. "The Spirit of God is here, and when we speak to one another, it is like oil going from vessel to vessel." [^99] Perhaps we too can experience the blessing and uniting power invoked by that image and feel their deep sense of shared faith and loving community as these women speak to us from out of their own writings.

---
Notas:
[^1] With the intention of making Independence, Missouri, its central headquarters, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormon) had moved, from its beginnings in 1830 in New York, to Ohio and thence to Missouri. Conflict between the Mormons and the Missourians led Governor Lilburn W. Boggs to formally order the expulsion of the Mormons, who were forced to find refuge in Quincy, Illinois, in 1838-39 before settling the river town of Commerce, which they renamed Nauvoo.
[^2] Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," 12, microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Original in Bancroft Library.
[^3] "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16 (December 1905): 553.
[^4] James E. Smith, "Frontier Nauvoo, Building a Picture from Statistics," Ensign (September 1979): 17-19. See also Susan Easton Black, "New Insights Replace Old Traditions: Membership of the Church in Nauvoo, 1839-1846," 8-9, unpublished paper in possession of author.
[^5] Two recent publications have begun to rectify the omission of such women from history. See Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), and Richard Neitzel and Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1992).
[^6] Patriarchal blessing given to Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy by O. N. Liljenquist, June 27, 1891, found in "Life History of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy Written by Herself," 74-75, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^7] Quoted in Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall, 1877), 288.
[^8] Mary Field Garner, "Autobiography," typescript, LDS Church Archives; also in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. A variant account is in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1964), 7:406-14.
[^9] "Autobiography of Electa C. Williams," in the papers of Emily Stevenson, microfilm of typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^10] "Reminiscences of Mary Ann Stearns Winters," typescript, LDS Church Archives, original in private possession.
[^11] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 10 (July 15, 1881): 26.
[^12] Bathsheba Smith, "Reminiscence," holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Leonora Cannon Taylor to John Taylor, September 9, 1839, original in John Taylor Collection, LDS Church Archives; also edited by Ronald K. Esplin and published under "Sickness and Faith: Nauvoo Letters," in BYU Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 425-34.
[^14] Ellen Douglas to Father and Mother, June 2, 1842, Nauvoo, Illinois, typescript, in Martha Deseret Grant Boyle Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^15] George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845, Nauvoo, Illinois, holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^16] John Benbow and Thomas Kington, with their wives, were among the 999 United Brethren who converted almost en masse to Mormonism. Both were substantial yeoman farmers and leaders in their church and community. Both contributed to the emigration of many Latter-day Saints in the 1840s. Their wives had each received small legacies from their fathers, which they contributed toward the publication of the Book of Mormon, Millennial Star, and a British hymnbook. See James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, and David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841: The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 124, 151, 248.
[^17] "A History of Ann Welch Crookston," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^18] Drusilla Dorris Hendricks, "Historical Sketch of James Hendricks and Drusilla Hendricks," 24, typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^19] Emily Dow Partridge Young, "Incidents in the Life of a Mormon Girl," 50-51, typescript, LDS Church Archives. See also "Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman," and "Emily Dow Partridge Young" in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 19:255-58, 262-64.
[^20] "Journal of Louisa Barnes Pratt," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Heart Throbs of the West, 13 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, 1947), 8:228-29.
[^21] "Autobiography of Mary Rollins Lightner," typescript, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^22] Ann Pitchforth provided seeds for Leonora Cannon's small garden, in exchange for which Leonora willingly shared the mature produce. Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to her parents, May 1845, Nauvoo, Illinois, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^23] "A Sketch of the Life of Mrs. Sarah Burbank," from Pioneer Journals, typescript, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^24] Times and Seasons 2 (October 1, 1841): 566.
[^25] Drusilla Hendricks, "Historical Sketch," 24.
[^26] "A History of Ann Welch Crookston."
[^27] Mary Ives to Parents and Friends, c. 1840, in Amos L. Underwood Correspondence, 1831-1853, photocopy, LDS Church Archives.
[^28] "Louisa Barnes Pratt," in Carter, Heart Throbs of the West 8:228.
[^29] "A History of Ann Welch Crookston."
[^30] Matilda Streeper to her brother, March 28, 1844, photocopy of holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^31] For data on British immigrants see Richard L. Jensen, "Transplanted to Zion: The Impact of British Latter-day Saint Immigration upon Nauvoo," BYU Studies 31 (Winter 1991): 76-87.
[^32] For a detailed analysis of the subject of death and disease in Nauvoo, see M. Guy Bishop, Vincent Lacey, and Richard Wixon, "Death at Mormon Nauvoo, 1843-1845," Western Illinois Regional Studies 19 (Fall 1986): 70-83.
[^33] "Sarah Beriah Fiske Allen Ricks," in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 11:138.
[^34] Rachel Emma Woolley Simmons, "Reminiscences and Journals, 1881-1891," holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^35] Margaret Gay Judd Clawson, "Rambling Reminiscences of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^36] Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward, "A Sketch of the Life of Elizabeth Terry Heward," typescript, 13, 15, LDS Church Archives.
[^37] "Journal of Mary Ann Weston Maughan," in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 2:363, 370.
[^38] Charlotte Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," February 19, 1843, Nauvoo, Illinois, as printed in The Overland Monthly (San Francisco), December 1890, 622-24.
[^39] Helen Mar Whitney gives a detailed account of some of the social activities of Nauvoo in "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 11 (November 15, 1882): 90.
[^40] Elizabeth Howe Hyde, in Myrtle Stevens Hyde Collection, microfilm, LDS Church Archives.
[^41] Mary Field Garner, "Autobiography."
[^42] Emily Dow Partridge Young, "Diary and Reminiscence," February 1874-November 1899, typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^43] This incident is recounted in at least three sources: Jannetta Platts Rigby, "Biographical Sketch of Mary Ann Bennett Kay Burrup," microfilm, LDS Church Archives; "Priscilla Mogridge Staines," in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 289-91; Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," 90.
[^44] Young Woman's Journal 16 (December 1905): 554.
[^45] "Priscilla Mogridge Staines," in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 291.
[^46] Louisa Follett, Diary, September 7, 1845, typescript, LDS Church Archives. The original manuscript is located at the State Historical Society of Iowa.
[^47] Emmeline B. Wells, Diary, February 20, 1845, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^48] Journal of Louisa Barnes Pratt as quoted in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), 13-14.
[^49] Lucy Walker Smith Kimball, "Autobiography," photocopy of holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^50] "Journal of Sarah Pea Rich," typescript, 18-19, copy in possession of author.
[^51] Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7 (January 1, 1879): 115.
[^52] "Patty Sessions," Woman's Exponent 13 (November 15, 1884): 94-95.
[^53] Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs, Nauvoo Diary, March 10, 1845, and November 17, 1844, as quoted in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "'All Things Move in Order in the City': The Nauvoo Diary of Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs," BYU Studies 19 (Spring 1979): 313. The original diary is in the LDS Church Archives. See also pages 69-87 in this volume.
[^54] An extended discussion of the community value of female visiting among Quaker women is Nancy Tomes, "The Quaker Connection: Visiting Patterns among Women in the Philadelphia Society of Friends, 1750-1800," in Michael Zuckerman, ed., Friends and Neighbors: Group Life in America's First Plural Society (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982), 174-95. The parallels with Mormon women's religiously based community life are striking.
[^55] Eliza R. Snow, "Come to the Valley," Poems: Religious, Historical, and Political, 2 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1856), 1:188.
[^56] Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward, "A Sketch," September 6, 1843, 13.
[^57] Charlotte Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," 627.
[^58] Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7 (November 15, 1878): 91.
[^59] Drusilla Hendricks, "Historical Sketch," 25.
[^60] As quoted in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 169. The ritual of washing and anointing was frequently utilized by women in early days for healing, for childbirth, and in temple worship. Because of its association with the temple, it came to be performed exclusively within temples. See Derr, Cannon, and Beecher, Women of Covenant, 220-21.
[^61] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1949), 4:326-29.
[^62] "Nauvoo Temple," Woman's Exponent 10 (September 1, 1881): 53. See also "Boston Female Penny and Sewing Society," Times and Seasons 6 (March 1, 1845): 820, and 6 (March 15, 1845): 847, which notes that one thousand dollars had been collected by Mercy Thompson and Mary Fielding Smith in the penny subscription drive.
[^63] Louisa Decker, "Reminiscences of Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 37 (March 1909): 41-42.
[^64] Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward, "A Sketch," 13.
[^65] Don F. Colvin, "A Historical Study of the Mormon Temple at Nauvoo, Illinois," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1962, 141-42. See also "Nauvoo Temple," Woman's Exponent 10 (September 1, 1881): 53.
[^66] Widow Elizabeth Kirby worried that she "could not obtain her blessings as she was," since she had not been married "for time and eternity" to her first husband, so she decided that "the best thing she could do" was to marry her husband's hired hand, John Heward, who had come to Nauvoo from their native Canada to assist her after her husband died. They were married by Hyrum Smith. Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward, "A Sketch," 15.
[^67] At a Relief Society conference in Juab Stake in 1879, President John Taylor explained this partnership: "Our sisters should be prepared to take their position in Zion. Our sisters are really one with us, and when the brethren go into the Temples to officiate for the males, the sisters will go for the females; we operate together for the good of the whole, that we may be united together for time and all eternity." "Relief Society Conference, Juab Stake," Woman's Exponent 8 (June 1, 1879): 2.
[^68] "Latter-day Temples," Relief Society Magazine 4 (April 1917): 185-86.
[^69] Mary Ellen Kimball, Journal, holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^70] "Louisa Barnes Pratt," in Carter, Heart Throbs of the West 8:235.
[^71] "Pen Sketch of an Illustrious Woman," Woman's Exponent 9 (October 15, 1880): 74. In earlier days, the term "mother in Israel" was often applied to women who contributed exceptional service to the Church or through their teaching, counseling, and blessing others. The term "priestess" was commonly used in the nineteenth century to denote female temple workers.
[^72] Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf From an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7 (February 15, 1879): 191.
[^73] For more contemporary details relating to the Nauvoo Temple, see Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent 12 (June 15, 1883): 9-10. A historical account of women's relationship to the temple in the nineteenth century is Carol Cornwall Madsen, "Toward a New Understanding: Mormon Women and the Temple," in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson, Sisters in Spirit (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989), 80-110.
[^74] Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," 191. Elizabeth Ann recalls the month as January in this account, although family genealogy puts the date as February 17, 1844.
[^75] Jensen, "Transplanted to Zion," 83-84.
[^76] Sarah Pippen Jolly, "Reminiscences," LDS Church Archives.
[^77] Elvira Stevens Barney, "Ruins of the Nauvoo Temple," comments on postcard pictures of the temple sketched by her sister, LDS Church Archives.
[^78] A blessing given to Emma Smith in 1834 by her father-in-law reconfirmed the endowment of "understanding" and "power to instruct thy sex." Emma Smith Papers, Archives, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, typescript copy in possession of author.
[^79] See specifically the blessing of Abigail Hall by Isaac Morley, March 21, 1846, Nauvoo, Illinois, and the blessing of Margaret M. Martin by James Adams, July 7, 184? (not clear), Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley. See also Elizabeth Ann Whitney, "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7 (November 15, 1878): 91. A longer treatment of the value of women's patriarchal blessings in defining their spiritual roles is Carol Cornwall Madsen, "Mothers in Israel: Sarah's Legacy," in Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe, eds., Women of Wisdom and Knowledge (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 179-201.
[^80] Blessing given to Pamela Elizabeth Barlow Thompson by Patriarch Israel Barlow, n.d., LDS Church Archives; blessing given to Martha A. Riggs by Zebedee Coltrin, November 11, 1876, LDS Church Archives; blessing given to Anna Ballantyne by William Smith, Nauvoo, 1845, RLDS Church Archives, typescript copy in possession of author; blessing given to Lydia Savage by Patriarch Lorenzo Hill Hatch, Woodruff, Arizona, March 31, 1900, LDS Church Archives.
[^81] Sarah M. Kimball, "Early Relief Society Reminiscences," March 17, 1882, Relief Society Record, 1880-1892, LDS Church Archives.
[^82] "Autobiography of Electa C. Williams," in the papers of Emily Stevenson, microfilm, LDS Church Archives.
[^83] The death of her husband and thirteen weeks of illness left Ellen Douglas unable to sew clothing or provide other household necessities for her children. Encouraged by a friend to apply to the Relief Society for help, she was overwhelmed at the response. "They brought the wagon and fetched me such a present as I never received before from no place in the world. I suppose the things they sent were worth as much as 30 shillings." Ellen Douglas to Father, Mother, Sisters and Brothers, Nauvoo, Illinois, April 14, 1844, typescript, LDS Archives.
[^84] Smith, History of the Church 4:602. See also Derr, Cannon, and Beecher, Women of Covenant, especially 39-58.
[^85] In 1906, General Relief Society President Bathsheba W. Smith recalled that Joseph Smith had given the sisters in Nauvoo "instructions that they could administer to the sick and he wanted to make us, as the women were in Paul's day, 'A kingdom of priestesses.' We have the ceremony in our endowments as Joseph taught." "Relief Society Reports [Pioneer Stake]," Woman's Exponent 34 (July August 1906): 14.
[^86] History of the Church 4:602; Nauvoo Relief Society Minutes, April 28, 1842; Dean C. Jessee, The Papers of Joseph Smith, vol. 2, Journal, 1832-1842 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992): 378-79.
[^87] "Incidents, Travels and Life of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy," 24-25.
[^88] Elizabeth Howe Hyde, brief autobiographical information, in Myrtle Stevens Hyde Papers, microfilm of typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^89] Vilate Kimball to Heber C. Kimball, June 30, 1844, as quoted in Ronald K. Esplin, "Life in Nauvoo, June 1844: Vilate Kimball's Martyrdom Letters," BYU Studies 19 (Winter 1979): 238. See also pages 138-39 of this volume.
[^90] Zina Jacobs, Diary, in Beecher, "'All Things Move in Order in the City,'" 292. See also pages 69-87 in this volume.
[^91] Elizabeth Jane Bybee Smith, "Reminiscences," microfilm of typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^92] Louisa Follett, Diary, July 21, 1844, typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^93] Zina Jacobs, Diary, in Beecher, "'All Things Move in Order in the City,'" 298, 305. See also pages 69-87 in this volume.
[^94] Mary Jane Mount Tanner, Diary, typescript notes, LDS Church Archives.
[^95] Mary Field Garner, "Autobiography." Fanny Young Murray, who also remained, wrote to her sister that Nauvoo "looks like a grave yard," and she hoped to leave it soon. See "Fanny Young Murray to Vilate Young," June 3, 1846, LDS Church Archives.
[^96] Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," 12.
[^97] Phebe Chase to her children, ca. 1840-1842, in Charles Marsh Correspondence, photocopy, Nauvoo Restoration, Inc., LDS Church Archives.
[^98] Paraphrased statement of Emmeline B. Wells, from Annie Wells Cannon, "Mothers in Israel," Relief Society Magazine 3 (February 1916): 68.
[^99] Minutes of the Senior and Junior Co-operative Retrenchment Society, October 4, 1874, LDS Church Archives.
