Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

Diaries

"In the City of Saints"

36"A woman's diary," historian Judy Lensink asserts, reflects "a supersubtle design, similar to a quilt's, made up of incremental stitches that define a pattern." [^1] The pattern is always unique and may not necessarily conform exactly to the lived life, being the diarist's daily reinvention of it as she selects and arranges and weaves together the information she records. The very act of writing synthesizes the countless rituals and occurrences that comprised the author's day and gives them both permanence and significance.

36A woman and her diary. In some minds, the words might conjure up the romantic nineteenth-century image of a woman sitting alone in her room at the close of day before her writing desk, pen and diary in hand, the glow of a burning fire bathing the room in soft light and warmth. Such a picture, however, does not equate with the reality of women's lives in Nauvoo. Finding a private corner in a crowded household, a free moment in a day in which work began before dawn, or a spare piece of paper, not to mention pen and ink, challenged the most assiduous Nauvoo diarist.

36Yet they wrote. The need to record their Nauvoo experience as they were living it drove women to become "secret sharers," stealing minutes and private places to put their thoughts on paper. For them, the urge to write, to distill their experiences through the prism of their own words, was too imperative to restrain. "There always seems to be so much to write about, . . . thoughts that come crowding up in throngs," lifelong diarist Emmeline B. Wells once wrote, that "we write to be quit of them, and not let the crowd increase." Certainly Nauvoo gave even the most casual writer ample material to record.

36Some women desired to speak to their posterity, to establish an intergenerational continuity and tangibly fix their place in the family line. Other Nauvoo diarists wanted to permanently encapsulate a singular time in their lives by creating a record for future readers. Still others wrote simply because they wanted to hold on to their lives, to confirm the reality and significance of their experience by mentally recreating it and preserving it in the written word. And, of course, there were those whose diaries also played the part of confidante, an alter ego silently receiving the diarist's deepest thoughts and feelings. Their diaries were instruments of self-realization and served as tangible mementos of a doubly lived life—the outer, those events that made up a day, and the inner, the diarist's reflections on and responses to those events.

40Whatever their purpose, the diaries of Nauvoo women reclaim their authors' lives and confirm the truth that their lives did indeed count for something and that they were full participants in the events of their time and place.

40But even more than their need to assert their identity or justify their lives, the personal narratives of these early Latter-day Saint women confirmed their faith. Their decision to "cast their lot with the Saints" and accept the consequences of that leap of faith initiated a chain of personal, economic, social, and spiritual challenges. Their diaries offered a chance not only to record but also to reflect on the meaning of those challenges in their lives at the time they encountered them.

40Whatever their part was in establishing the Kingdom, it needed to be preserved in some form as a testament of the authenticity of the work in which they were engaged. The world they lived in was harsh and demanding, offering all of the exigencies of human existence, but the minds and hearts and spirits of these women were firmly focused on a better one. A sense of mission, of purpose beyond the merely temporal, permeates their writing. Conversion, especially for women, was a major act of self-assertion, and many felt an urgency to permanently inscribe how it felt and what followed that dramatic change in their lives, now viewed through the lens of the restored gospel.

40The diary excerpts that follow were written by three of early Mormonism's "leading sisters." Both Eliza R. Snow and Zina D. H. Young had been members of the Church since Kirtland days and were "old-timers" compared with the newly converted Emmeline B. Harris (later Wells). Eliza had already established her role as a leading sister in Nauvoo. She was well educated and known as a teacher, a poet, and, after 1842, secretary of the Relief Society. In Nauvoo she began her lifelong temple service and leadership in the Relief Society, two of her great contributions to early Mormonism. Already evident was her charismatic appeal, which would eventually raise her to a preeminent position as "presidentess of all Mormon women." The Nauvoo portion of her diary reveals the strength of her religious conviction, the importance of her family ties, and her absorption in the life of the Prophet. Each entry is always more than the summary of a day. Both the inner and the outer life of Eliza R. Snow are clearly evident in her daily jottings. Unfortunately, the diary ends just two months before the martyrdom of Joseph Smith.

41Zina Diantha Huntington Young—who became a companion wife to Eliza when both were married to Brigham Young, and was the closest of Eliza's co-workers in the Kingdom—had not yet secured her place among the female hierarchy of the Church, but she was rapidly becoming known and loved as a comforter and healer, a woman of extraordinary compassion and sensitivity. People fill her diary. She was tied closely not only to her kinship network but to neighbors, friends, and Relief Society sisters.

41Emmeline Harris (Wells), on the other hand, was young and largely unknown during her two years in Nauvoo, moving there too late to join the Relief Society and being too young to exhibit the qualities that would later make her a leader among Latter-day Saint women. But she already possessed the literary talents and intellectual resources that would eventually carry her to prominence in Utah, where she would use her abilities in behalf of the women of the Church. Unlike the diaries of Eliza or Zina, Emmeline's entries in her brief Nauvoo record, which begin this section, are entirely introspective. They give no evidence of what comprised her days in Nauvoo, only her tangled thoughts during a brief, intensely emotional period. Her diary served as a secret friend with whom she shared the yearnings and heartbreak that dominated her Nauvoo experience. It does not resemble the detailed account of her daily life that characterized her later diaries.

42In these diaries can be heard three diverse voices speaking from widely differing perspectives of the Nauvoo experience. Distinctive in style and content, each one clearly signals a different personality drawn by their common faith to become one with the community of Saints in Nauvoo.

---
Notas:
[^1] Original is in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
