Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

43Emmeline B. Harris Wells

43Few Latter-day Saint women have left a larger literary legacy than Emmeline B. Harris Wells. A diarist from early youth, she also wrote several letters nearly every day of her adult life, compiled a volume of her poetry, wrote numerous short stories, kept the minutes of the Relief Society general board for twenty years, and served as editor of the Woman's Exponent for thirty-seven years, contributing editorials, articles, stories, and poems to its semimonthly issues. From them all, one can trace the life and thought of a remarkable Latter-day Saint woman.

43 Emmeline B. Harris Wells

43 Emmeline began her writing as a young girl in her native Massachusetts when, going through some papers in the attic of her home, she discovered that "women sometimes put their thoughts upon paper." She began writing simple verses, which convinced her widowed mother to provide her the schooling she needed to develop her latent talents. Privileged to study at the New Salem Academy near her hometown, Emmeline followed her training there with a stint of school teaching before joining the Church in 1842. The next year, at age fifteen, she married James Harris, the son of the New Salem branch president, and the following spring she moved with James and his parents to Nauvoo. Within the next six months Emmeline's world crumbled around her. The Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum were murdered, the Harrises abandoned Nauvoo and the Church, Emmeline's newborn son died, and James went downriver to find work but instead chose the life of a seaman. Emmeline never saw him again.

44Not knowing his whereabouts and desperately hoping for his return, Emmeline wrote the following passages, which constitute her entire Nauvoo diary. They are the anguished outpourings of a broken teenage heart, a young woman bereft of husband and child with neither family nor friends near at hand. The death of the Prophet occasioned more than the loss of a leader to Emmeline. It robbed her of her lifeline.

44The entries begin four days before she was married to Newel K. Whitney as a plural wife, only a few months after James's departure. The marriage seems only to have intensified her grief and longing. In time, however, her relationship to the Whitneys proved to be her salvation, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Newel's first wife, became a cherished mentor and friend as well as a companion wife. Emmeline cared for Elizabeth Ann's crippled infant, born in Winter Quarters, on their journey to Utah.

44Emmeline was to suffer another blow with the death of Newel in 1850, but two years later she married Daniel H. Wells in what proved to be a more enduring marriage. Five daughters were born to Emmeline in these two unions. As her children reached maturity, she took her literary talents into the public realm, first contributing to and then editing the Woman's Exponent, an LDS women's publication lasting from 1872 to 1914. She also became active in general Relief Society leadership, serving as corresponding and then general secretary from 1888 until her call as general president in 1910, when she was eighty-two. She served in that position for eleven years.

44Besides journalism and poetry, Emmeline was interested in women's affairs, becoming an active suffragist and an enthusiastic representative to the National and International Councils of Women. She organized literary clubs to promote the writings of Utah women and throughout her life attempted to bridge the misunderstandings and differences between LDS and non-LDS women, both in Utah and throughout the country. Her efforts were recognized posthumously in the form of a marble bust, placed in the rotunda of the Utah State Capitol by the women of Utah, inscribed simply "A Fine Soul Who Served Us."

45The focus of the following diary entries is entirely personal and could have been written in any setting. Emmeline's expressive words embrace the reader in her overwhelming grief and loneliness. Even at sixteen, she seemed aware that her life would not follow a conventional path but would indeed become "a romance."

Nauvoo Diary of Emmeline B. Harris (Wells) [^1]

Aaron Johnson Home (foreground), one-time residence of Emmeline B. Harris Wells.

45 Feb 20 1845: When will sorrow leave my bosom all my days have I experienced it oppression has been my lot when O when shall I escape the bondage is not my life a romance indeed it is a novel strange and marvellous here am I brought to this great city by one to whom I ever expected to look for protection and left dependent on the mercy and friendship of strangers Merciful Providence wilt thou long suffer this must I forever be unhappy wilt the time never come when happiness and enjoyment will be the lot of this lump of clay when thralldom and oppression will be cast off my life has been one continual round of troubles and afflictions it seems sometimes as if death would be a comfort & then again when I think of the Gospel I feel resigned to the lot God has assigned me but what has life ever been to me from the day of my childhood almost ever since I left my mothers arms I have been afflicted and troubled yes in school I had enjoyment to be sure but how often was I crossed were not some of the scholars persecuting me because Susa [?] and I were friends and as soon as Mormonism began to flourish were they not harassing me on every side did they not tear me from my beloved home and the arms of a tender parent to keep me from Mormonism and then the Good Spirit interposed and provided a way for me to be released from the hands of a cruel guardian who pretended so much respect for me that he did not wish me to associate with my own mother and sister because they were Saints of the Most High God or as he called them Mormons I adopted this method of escape not merely for escape but he with whom I was to be connected was my lover in truth I loved him and I believed his professions to be true [^2] Then I thought all danger would be past but alas misery presses me heavier and more heavy can I go farther O God my Heavenly Father assist me do not let it always be thus thou hast promised me days of joy and gladness and O Lord send not more affliction than I can bear before it O Lord impart thy spirit I grow sick at heart in vain dos the sun shine bright my heart is faint my soul longs. . . .

46Feb. 24, 1845: This day like all others is full of trouble sorrow and affliction are my attendants O my God how long will Thou suffer this once I could have filled this book with expressions of happiness but Alas sorrow is my portion I behold those around me enjoying the society of their dearest friends while I am cut short and why is it is it because of my sin and wickedness or is it a trial of my patience Heavenly Parent in the name of thy Holy Son Jesus do I beseech thee to pity and send comfort and consolation to an afflicted soul have mercy and forgive and grant me the desire of my heart and I will forever praise thee O that I had a mother or sister to advise me but I was cut short of all these blessings I have friends dare I unbosom my heart to them no no I know them not but those I have tried and proved I am not afraid to trust Great Father of mercies be pleased to grant me the request of my heart.

47Feb. 28, 1845: Last night there came a steamboat up the river O how my youthful heart fluttered with hope with anxiety my limbs were affected to that degree I was obliged to lay aside my work I rely upon the promises he has made me and not all that has yet been said can shake my confidence in the only man I ever loved but to return hope revived in my bosom I watched the boat I looked out at the door I walked a few steps out of the yard I saw a person approaching my heart beat with fond anticipation it walked like James I came nearer and just as I was about to speak his name he spoke and I found I was deceived by the darkness last night I dreamed he came home O that it were reality Heavenly Father again bring us together. Today I am alone and I have time for reflection memory brings the past before me in all its joyous light life seems like a dream am I awake would that this were a dream and that I could awake and find myself at the side of him my h----- Boats are coming two have past today and where is James can he have forgot all his promises all his vows no never they must sting him to the very soul and I pray God that they may and that remorse of conscience will bring him back to the path of duty had I been treacherous I might have expected as much but God knows I have ever been true to him and if he would be as true to me I could not complain O God grant that he may soon return for my heart is braking for him and O God if he is situated so that he cannot return allow him to write to me that I can know something about his whereabouts

47March 24, 1845: O God I bless thee that in Thy mercy Thou hast this day permitted me to hear news from a distant shore and that thou art kind and tender O God forgive my unbelief and save him from the wave give him dreams and visions of the night that he may know Thy will O Lord and do it and grant that he may return to me and not forget his firstlove. [^3]

48June 6th, 1845: Again have my friends in a distant country at the home of my child hood remembered me and him whom I love they know not he is far away on the stormy ocean perhaps sleeping in the bottom of the sea and perhaps tossed on his vessel by the furious winds that blow across the sea this though is almost to much for human nature to bear my heart aches my brain is dizzy at the idea It brings the past before me in all its various lights and shades with all its labyrinths and in some places I see happiness pictured in its most vivid colors in others I see joy and sorrow intermingled and in others I see dark places where I could hardly distinguish the Hand of Providence where I could barely cope with life where sorrow got a foot hold in my bosom which can never be driven away save by one whose power over my mind has ever been sufficient to soothe me in affliction to calm me in distress to make me happy in his society and I hope soon very soon (May God grant it) to see him and hear words of love and affection wilt Thou O God forever seperate me from one to whom I gave my whole and undivided affection in all the honesty and truthfulness of my heart and with all the simplicity and virtue of a youthful girl I knew nothing of the world then and I know but little now but I find it full of deceit and wickedness when those we consider our best friends deceive us what are we to expect from others? no mercy is the answer I feel it daily the world looks upon me perhaps as though I had driven him away by my cruelty but never no never can he rise up and say I neglected him or reproached him no even now when he has left me to the mercy of a cold unfeeling world am I ready to receive him to my heart again whenever he returns and I want O how much I desire to have him come O James where art thou O that thou couldst hear my voice and thou wouldst return O come to her who gave and forsook all others for thee My heart is wrung with sorrow And I cannot retaliate or . . . Once more My very soul is tried Beyond the limits nature has assigned

49Love And what is love I know not and let me bend the knee and kiss the rod As every Christian in affliction should Come Holy Spirit heal my wounded heart And help me that I may Thy spirit keep It['s] all the comfort we poor mortals have O comfort me and teach me while I sleep O cruel wrong most bitter to endure Today has pierced me to my inmost soul And must I suffer and be patient still Because I have no power these burdens to control Will there come a day when I shall meet One lost and gone who will my cause defend He loved me and his friend ship was most true Will he not in vision be my friend Teach me O Lord the wisest course to take Though I should suffer let it be for good

---
Notas:
[^1] Original is in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^2] Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," 12, microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah. Original in Bancroft Library.
[^3] "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 16 (December 1905): 553.
