Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

Letters

"Yours, in the Bands of the Covenant"

93"I do not intend to relate particulars and senes I have been called to pass through," wrote Mary Ives to her parents in 1840 from Nauvoo; "it would require types instead of a pen. I shall only mention verry few." Mary was true to her word. But in her brief letter she was able to convey the trials of leaving Missouri, the misery of trudging over and sleeping on frozen ground, the heartbreak in watching her husband die of dysentery, and her efforts to earn enough money to support her children by herself.

93Nauvoo letter writers discovered that much could be conveyed in few words. With little time and fewer materials, they found ways to write their impressions and convey the enormity of the changes in their lives since they had become Mormons. The strength of their conversion, the difficulties of Kirtland and Missouri or the voyage across an ocean, and the challenges of Nauvoo all had to be explained, or at least described, to absent loved ones.

93As they struggled to make their readers understand, the letter writers did not fall into a self-pitying mode. Their compelling need was to convey the truth of their experience, both their trials and their triumphs, to communicate the commonplace, which their readers would quickly understand, and explain the extraordinary, which they might not. As readers from a later generation, we are as dependent on their written accounts for understanding as were those in their own time who were geographically distanced.

93But sending a letter was not an easy process in the nineteenth century. Pen, ink, and paper were usually in short supply. As a result, some writers wrote both vertically and horizontally across the sheet, crisscrossing the paper like a multi-lined "tic-tac-toe." [^1] Moreover, postage was expensive, the amount determined by the weight of the paper used and the distance the letter was to travel. If the sender didn't pay the postage, the receiver had to in order to retrieve the letter. Thus, mail was often sent along with missionaries or other travelers. Someone could usually be found who was traveling in the same direction as the letter. Correspondents often found their letter writing extending over several weeks while they waited for a missionary to leave. Sometimes they hastily jotted down only a few sentiments in order to catch an unexpected departure. Despite the long weeks and even months that passed between letters, they are surprisingly intimate, immediate, and conversational. Unlike most other personal writings, they were tailored to fit a specific reader.

94The letters that follow not only convey the immediate thoughts and experiences of individual women, but also offer each woman's response to the times and circumstances that gave her life context. They range in style from the highly polished, like Charlotte Haven's and Mary Fielding Smith's, which were eventually published, to the expressive but untutored efforts of Mary Ann Young and Bathsheba Smith. Like most personal narratives, they are unstructured and flow almost haphazardly from the writer's pen, guided only by the author's random thoughts, the dramatic moments merging with the commonplace. "I have no news to write," Susan Jolly informed her son in 1845, adding as if in an afterthought, "accept [sic] we have been surrounded by mobs for three or four weeks just what the result will be God only knows." [^2] After an impassioned, "O Mother I often think of you and although we are separated from each other you are not forgotten by me," Eliza Cheney perfunctorily continued, "I have a girl spinning for me, we shall make about fifty yards of flannel this fall. Please give my respects to all inquiring friends." [^3] This seemingly desultory style did not signify a leveling of experience or feeling. It simply reflected the writer's mind, flooded with images and thoughts allowed to escape in the indiscriminate order in which they occurred.

94While the Nauvoo letters expressed the conventions of letter writing—reports of the weather, state of health, family data, social activities—they were created against an extraordinary historical backdrop. How to convey such historical and spiritual drama, especially to unbelievers? Nothing short of their personal witness would suffice.

95Ellen Douglas (Parker) expressed gratitude for receiving the gift of the gospel: "I for one feel to rejoice and to praise my God that he ever sent the Elders of Israel to England and that he ever gave me a heart to believe them." [^4] Eliza Cheney reconfirmed her decision to convert: "I did not embrace this work hastily," she reassured her parents. "I came into it understandingly, I weighed the subject, I counted the cost, I know the consequences of every step I took. I have not been disappointed in the least." [^5] And even while suffering the terrible effects of the Missouri expulsion, Mary Fielding Smith affirmed to her brother Joseph Fielding her joy that she "was ever made acquainted with the everlasting covenant!" [^6]

95Uncommon people in an uncommon cause. Life for them was an experience of the soul as well as the body. Their letters expressed not only the challenges of their world but also the awakening of their spirits.

95Eight of the letters that follow were written by women to member relatives and friends and reflect the intimacy of shared conviction and understanding. The four letters written to nonmember families exhibit the urgency of their writers to reaffirm commitment to the gospel and their momentous decision to gather with the Saints. Charlotte Haven, a non-Mormon resident of Nauvoo, adds an outsider's perspective, admiring but sometimes mocking. And, finally, one collective letter, a petition to Governor Carlin signed by a thousand women, demonstrates the Relief Society's support of its president, Emma Smith, by adding their voices to her numerous appeals to the governor in behalf of the Prophet.

95Though each letter tells the tale of one writer, together they create a story of Nauvoo that institutional records alone cannot relate. The reader will discover that these personal, intimate missives are not mere ornaments to the official histories. They are the flesh and blood of those histories, the vitalizing element that gives them life.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This is a reference to her arranged marriage to James Harris.
[^3] External evidence suggests that Emmeline learned indirectly that James had gone to sea, though she received no letters from him.
[^4] The day was Eliza's wedding day, when she was married as a plural wife to Joseph Smith.
[^5] In her "Sketch of My Life" (microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives), Eliza wrote, "But alas! soon after our return, we learned that at the time of our visit, and while making protestations of friendship, the wily Governor was secretly conniving with the basest of men to destroy our leaders."
[^6] Hinkle had earlier persuaded Church leaders to negotiate with Missouri officials who, instead of negotiating, imprisoned them.
