Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

96Mary Fielding Smith

96When Mary Fielding followed her brother and sister from England to Eastern Canada in 1834, she hardly anticipated the dramatic events that would mark her life during the next eighteen years. She had left England only to assist her sister during a prolonged illness, but neither Mary nor her siblings would make England their home again.

96 Mary Fielding Smith.

96Two years after Mary's arrival in Canada, the Fieldings accepted the gospel at the hands of Parley P. Pratt and joined the Church in company with John Taylor, Leonora Cannon, and other British emigrants living in the vicinity of Toronto and upper York. The next year the Fieldings migrated to Kirtland, where, in December 1837, Mary Fielding married Hyrum Smith, instantly becoming a mother to the six children left motherless by the death of Hyrum's first wife, Jerusha Barden. One of the great experiences of Mary's life was her witness of numerous manifestations of the Spirit during the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. She joyfully described in a letter the love and unity expressed by "some of the sisters while engaged in conversing in tongues, their countenances beaming with joy," as they "clasped each other's hands . . . in the most affectionate manner." [^1]

96Moving with the body of Saints to Missouri, Mary learned just how precarious her life as Hyrum Smith's wife would be. She gave birth to her first child, Joseph F. Smith, in November 1838, just twelve days after her husband was arrested and incarcerated with the Prophet Joseph in Liberty jail. Mary saw her husband only once before leaving Missouri, when she accompanied Emma Smith on a short visit to the jail, though Mary was nearly bedridden. After she moved to Nauvoo and was reunited with her husband, her anxieties about him only intensified, with good cause. She experienced all of the uncertainties and fears that Emma knew in connection with Joseph, since their husbands' lives were tightly entwined. Yet she was not the Prophet's wife, and history has not always recognized how deeply she shared with Emma the trauma of the last years in Nauvoo. The martyrdom heaped just as tragic a burden on Mary Smith and her children as on Emma and hers.

97Their shared sorrows and common experiences did not bind their futures together, however. While Emma elected to remain in Nauvoo among familiar, if unhappy, memories, Mary, with her sister Mercy and brother Joseph, chose to follow Brigham Young to the Great Salt Lake Valley.

97With Mercy's help, Mary took on the task of directing the westward move of her own little band of pioneers, consisting of eight children, including Mercy's young daughter, and several elderly adults. Destined to move every time she called a place home, Mary hoped the valley would be an exception. Indeed it was. Only four years after arriving there, Mary Fielding Smith died at the age of fifty-one. Salt Lake City was her final resting place.

97From the day of their conversion in Canada, the Fieldings were steadfast in their faithfulness to the Church, always hoping their relatives in England would join them in accepting the gospel. Mary wrote the letter that follows to her brother Joseph, who was one of the first missionaries to introduce the gospel in the British Isles. Their brother James opened his church to the missionaries' preaching but quickly became hostile when many of his congregation were baptized. When Mary wrote this letter to her missionary brother, she had just arrived in Nauvoo after fleeing the mobs in Missouri.

Mary Fielding Smith to Joseph Fielding [^2]

Commerce, Ill., North America

98 June 1839

98My very Dear Brother:

98As the elders are expecting shortly to take their leave of us again to preach the gospel in my native land, I feel as though I would not let the opportunity of writing you pass unimproved. I believe it will give you pleasure to hear from us by our own hand; notwithstanding you will see the brethren face to face, and have an opportunity of hearing all particulars respecting us and our families.

98As it respects myself, it is now so long since I wrote to you, and so many important things have transpired, and so great have been my affliction, etc., that I know not where to begin; but I can say, hitherto has the Lord preserved me, and I am still among the living to praise him, as I do today. I have, to be sure, been called to drink deep of the bitter cup; but you know, my beloved brother, this makes the sweet sweeter.

98You have, I suppose, heard of the imprisonment of my dear husband, with his brother Joseph, Elder Rigdon, and others, who were kept from us nearly six months; and I suppose no one felt the painful effects of their confinement more than myself. I was left in a way that called for the exercise of all the courage and grace I possessed. My husband was taken from me by an armed force, at a time when I needed, in a particular manner, the kindest care and attention of such a friend, instead of which, the care of a large family was suddenly and unexpectedly left upon myself, and, in a few days after, my dear little Joseph F. was added to the number. Shortly after his birth I took a severe cold, which brought on chills and fever; this, together with the anxiety of mind I had to endure, threatened to bring me to the gates of death. I was at least four months entirely unable to take any care either of myself or child; but the Lord was merciful in so ordering things that my dear sister could be with me. Her child was five months old when mine was born; so she had strength given her to nurse them both.

99You will also have heard of our being driven, as a people, from the State, and from our homes; this happened during my sickness, and I had to be removed more than two hundred miles, chiefly on my bed. I suffered much on my journey; but in three or four weeks after we arrived in Illinois, I began to amend, and my health is now as good as ever. It is now little more than a month since the Lord, in his marvelous power, returned my dear husband, with the rest of the brethren, to their families, in tolerable health. We are now living in Commerce, on the bank of the great Mississippi river. The situation is very pleasant; you would be much pleased to see it. How long we may be permitted to enjoy it I know not; but the Lord knows what is best for us. I feel but little concerned about where I am, if I can keep my mind staid upon God; for, you know in this there is perfect peace. I believe the Lord is overruling all things for our good. I suppose our enemies look upon us with astonishment and disappointment.

99I greatly desire to see you, and I think you would be pleased to see our little ones; will you pray for us, that we may have grace to train them up in the way they should go, so that they may be a blessing to us and the world? I have a hope that our brothers and sisters will also embrace the fullness of the gospel, and come into the new and everlasting covenant; I trust their prejudices will give way to the power of truth. I would gladly have them with us here, even though they might have to endure all kind of tribulation and affliction with us and the rest of the children of God, in these last days, so that they might share in the glories of the celestial kingdom. As to myself, I can truly say, that I would not give up the prospect of the latter-day glory for all that glitters in this world. O, my dear brother, I must tell you, for your comfort, that my hope is full, and it is a glorious hope; and though I have been left for near six months in widowhood, in the time of great affliction, and was called to take, joyfully or otherwise, the spoiling of almost all our goods, in the absence of my husband, and all unlawfully, just for the gospel's sake (for the judge himself declared that he was kept in prison for no other reason than because he was a friend to his brother), yet I do not feel in the least discouraged; no, though my sister and I are here together in a strange land, we have been enabled to rejoice, in the midst of our privations and persecutions, that we were counted worthy to suffer these things, so that we may, with the ancient saints who suffered in like manner, inherit the same glorious reward. If it had not been for this hope, I should have sunk before this; but, blessed be the God and rock of my salvation, here I am, and am perfectly satisfied and happy, having not the smallest desire to go one step backward.

100Your last letter to Elder Kimball gave us great pleasure; we thank you for your expression of kindness, and pray God to bless you according to your desires for us.

100The more I see of the dealings of our Heavenly Father with us as a people, the more I am constrained to rejoice that I was ever made acquainted with the everlasting covenant. O may the Lord keep me faithful till my change comes! O, my dear brother, why is it that our friends should stand out against the truth, and look on those that would show it to them as enemies? The work here is prospering much; several men of respectability and intelligence, who have been acquainted with all our difficulties, are coming into the work.

100My husband joins me in love to you. I remain, my dear brother and sister, your affectionate sister,

100Mary Smith

Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), 255-58.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
