Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

101Leonora Cannon Taylor

101Leonora Cannon, a native of the Isle of Man, emigrated to Toronto, Ontario, Canada, to be the household companion of the wife of the newly appointed private secretary to the Governor General of Canada. Soon after arriving she met John Taylor, also a British emigrant, and the two were married in 1833. The Taylors, with Joseph Fielding and his sisters, also from England and living near them in Canada, found their lives dramatically changed when they heard the gospel preached by Parley P. Pratt and accepted baptism in 1836. John and Leonora traveled to Kirtland, Ohio, to be with the Church and followed it to Missouri and then to Nauvoo.

101 Leonora Cannon Taylor.

101After the flight from Missouri, Leonora Taylor settled with her three children—George, five; Mary Ann, three; and Joseph, one—in a single room of an abandoned barracks building in Montrose, Iowa, while her husband served as a missionary in England. The ordeal was long and difficult, and on her husband's return she confessed, "I had gone through all but death during his absence. [I] lived in an old barrack room twenty feet square with one small window the back door . . . of the hinges and walls so open that a skunk came in every Night one Winter." [^1]

101In Nauvoo Leonora joined the Relief Society, and later, she and her husband received their endowments from Joseph Smith in the upper room of his store before the Nauvoo Temple was completed. The Taylors left Nauvoo in 1846. After settling in the Salt Lake Valley, Leonora devoted herself to her family, accepting the many personal and domestic disruptions to which her membership in the Church and her husband's callings subjected her. The gospel had fulfilled her religious yearnings, but at a high personal cost. "The Lord often led me by a way that I knew not," she wrote in her diary, "and in a path that I naturally did not wish to go, every sweet has had its bitter . . . to whom shall I go or look for succor but unto thee my Father and only Friend." [^2] Leonora lived quietly in Salt Lake City, never seeking a public role or prominence. She died of pneumonia in 1868.

102More than four years separate the two letters that follow. The first, one of several she wrote to her husband while living in Montrose, describes her own and the Church's circumstances after John's departure for England several months earlier. It also expresses the depth of her conviction of the work in which he was so fully engaged. The other letter, written from Nauvoo under more pleasant circumstances to her friend Phebe Woodruff, shows a lighthearted, more comfortably situated Leonora, sharing news about Phebe's son.

Leonora Cannon Taylor to John Taylor [^3]

Montrose

102 2 January 1840

102I wish my John a Happy New Year and many of them. I have just come from meeting in Brother Cathrens. This is the first Prayer Meeting in this place. After this they are to be regular once a week and preaching on [undecipherable]. I must write so as to tell you all the news in a few words. I hope my dear you are well in your body as

102you seem in yours of the 19th. of Nov. to be in your mind. I so pray the Lord to continue to bless and comfort you. I do praise Him for what He has done for you all ready. I wish you could see George and Mary Ann, as fat and rosy as ever they were. Joseph is better and can run alone again, but teeth are still coming and I have to nurse him a great deal. I feel better able than I was when I last wrote. I have been sick but am better; he is still to be the baby. [^4] The Lord knows what is best for us. I live in Sister [Phebe] Woodruff's house. Brother Pratt has gone over the river to live. He is well. Sister Woodruff has gone to live to [undecipherable] is well and so is Sarah [Phebe Woodruff's daughter]. She got two letters and a paper from New York lately. Brother Joseph is likely to get a hearing. I heard a letter read from him—very incouraging indeed. He wants all to pray for him. [^5] He sent Brother Manholm over hear some time since with papers relative to the lots on the other side. He came to me and said you had bespoke and I must sign the papers for you. I thought them very dear. He said that he could sell it for you and perhaps get 25 dollars more for it. He died suddenly soon after poor man. Edward Lawrence is dead. Brother Daniels is also dead; heard the school masters wife and many others also and some families are still sick. Many are well. I have cause to be thankfull. I have suffered little compared with others. I am well supplied with fire wood by Dr. Patten. That has been some trouble to me since you left me. But I hope the worst is past. Sister Young and family are well and expect to leave this for Kirtland as soon as the boats come along, with Father Granger who is here still. I went across to see him after I got you[r] letter. He was away from home. I told his daughter my business and next day wrote the letter you wished to Brother [Hiram] Kimball and enclosed it open to Bro Granger telling him what you said. (I have seen Bro Granger who says he will do all in his power for you he is going as soon as the River opens) [^6] I asked him to send Bro Humphry his Letter. I have heard nothing from him since but shall go over the River if all is well very soon it is frosen over now very hard. People walk over.

103Bro Law and Family are on the other side. [^7] I have not seen them yet he sent me four Dollars at Christmas by Brother Ripley—I wish you would write to him as soon as you have anny thing interesting to write and thank him for me I do want to know how you got Money to pay your way at the Tavern and to travel—if you should go to England or anny where else write as soon as possible and tell me where to direct. we have got a House Boat on the River and a House [?] Mill on each side the River—I have not heard anny thing from your Father's People lately I wrote to them but have had no answer—there is a conference out in Father Hauley's neibourhood to day where he us'd to live rather he has removed to Quincy

104I spent new Years day in Brother Rosers with some Friends in the Evining I had three Indian Women a papuce and an Elderly Man all very clean to supper with me the[y] sat around the Fire and talked away quite comfortable little Joseph kisst the little papuce and was delighted with it the Children all send there love and a hundred kisses to Father Joseph gives me one evry day for you and points to your Old Hat when shall we see dear Father again is my cry and the Childrens, but I do not want to hinder the work of the Lord my comfort is not to be compard with the worth of one Soul and I do pray that many may hear & believe the truth with whome we shall yet rejoice in the presence of the Lord.

104My dear John, Br Law has been to see me His Brother & Br Snider walked over the River. He is a kind man askd if I wanted anny thing (I said no) and to remember I had a Friend over the River whenever I did I got your Letter of the 17th Dec & two papers I fear you will feel disappointed on receiving this you know my dear what you have often said to me that every thing is ordered for the best. I fully believe so in this instance. Joseph is the most affectionate little thing if I look serious he holds up his mouth to kiss he dont speak anny yet to signify. George and Mary Anne go to Sunday School to Mrs. Booth I teach them evry day at home. Geo & M. Ann often dream of father as well as poor Mother. Sister Young Amelia Rodgers, and I walkd over the River the way we had to walk was three Miles (there were a great number of our bretherin Lamanites going before us amongst them was Black Hawks Son and two Sons in law his Son can speak english if I had not been alone I should have likd them to have come in one day the[y] stood outside the Door to have some thing to eat the[y] were drest very fine, Bells on there legs Feathers on there heads, we went to take a Letter to J.O. Prat who lives now with Sister Patten that was [when] we saw Sister [Vilate ?] Kimball and Sister [Frances] Turley the[y] were all well Brother Snider went with us and returnd to Springfield the next day, he intends to move here in Summer. Br Laws new Store is open—there has been so many reports about how our bussiness got on at Washington that I have been waiting to have some certainty for you. Brother Joseph, the last acount we have had was in Philadelphia with Br Higby [Higbee] visiting the Church and left Pre'nt Rigdon at Washington who is to send for them when they are wanted Br Joseph wrote to new York to say all that had not saild of the twelve were to go to Washington to his assistance many belive nothing favourable will be done you had just saild when the Letter went I want to hear from you very much my Health is not good I pray the Lord to spare me to see you once more I feel thankfull to the Lord that I am able to do what is needfull for my dear Children I bought them warm and Wollen frocks and had long wollen stockings knit for myself and them and all had new Shoes on at Xmas I have made my Bed wide G and M. sleep at one end and Joseph and I at the other, the House is so cold never been plastered we have had steady cold weather I have a Screen round the Fire and burn plenty of wood and shall have to pay for it [undecipherable] D[octor] Patten began to find it at Christmas & he agreed to bring it in from the country half the time I had to beg it and cary it home the week before Xmas it stormd and Snowd. I had no wood for five days but what I beggd and caryed home in my arms B Ripley came I told him I felt discouraged and could not stand it long he then ingaged my wood of Doctor Patten.

105You must excuse my bad writing, I have a bad pen and no Father to mend it. [^8] I hope my dear that you had a good passage; if favorably you were there before I got your letter. Sister Woodruff is well and comfortable. Elder Curtis in New York wrote to Brother Mace that you had sailed and that there are nearly fifty members in Philadelphia, in New York and vicinity nearly five hundred. The work is going on. I hope that you found my friends well and favorable to the truth. Give my love to them all, write soon and often, I don't know how to wait for a letter from you now but hope for the best. The children and I send our love and kisses to a loving Father. Sisters Smith and Thompson are well. Give my best wishes to Brother and Sister Fielding. If you should go to the Isle of Man be sure to stop at Mister Higgins in Peel and try to lead him into the truth. Give my love to all that ask after me in the Isle of Man. May the Lord bless my dear John and bring him safe back is the prayer of your affectionate wife,

105 Leonora Taylor

105 Montrose, Feb. 2, 1840

Leonora Cannon Taylor to Phebe Carter Woodruff [^9]

Sunday

106My Dear Sister Woodruff

106we are all well I just returned from meeting there was a Sherif there from Springfield with a few writs for the Bretherin as usual Wm Taylor spoke and gave them and all mobs, there blessing, the Peoples Amen made the [undecipherable] ring we should get used to persecution and think nothing about it like the Womans [undecipherable] by and by, the Sisters and there Familys are well generally I long to see you and yours Sister Benbow is poorly. [^10] I went there with Mr T and stayed a few days, little Willy [Phebe's five-year-old son] is one of the best boys ever was content and happy he heard a Song and remembered one verse /twas there my Sisters play'd, my Mother kis'd me there, my Father shook my hand, forgive this foolish Tear, but let that Old Oak stand: it made an impression on him he often repeats it, another he sang for us was I am a happy farmers boy and live upon my Farm I work all day and sleep all night and so keep free from harm. Miss [Hannah] Ells lives there I shall go out again shortly please give my love to all that will accept of it in the Church and I should like my Sister to know I got her letter and I want a long one from her and you if you have time very soon may the Lord bless and keep you and yours forever in great haste L. T. if not too much trouble I should like to have some Drawing Paper and pencils for George when you send S[ister Bathsheba] Smiths the[y] cannot be got here ever yours L. Taylor

Leonora Cannon Taylor to John Taylor, January 2, 1840, Leonora Cannon Taylor Papers, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] External evidence suggests that Emmeline learned indirectly that James had gone to sea, though she received no letters from him.
[^4] The day was Eliza's wedding day, when she was married as a plural wife to Joseph Smith.
[^5] In her "Sketch of My Life" (microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives), Eliza wrote, "But alas! soon after our return, we learned that at the time of our visit, and while making protestations of friendship, the wily Governor was secretly conniving with the basest of men to destroy our leaders."
[^6] Hinkle had earlier persuaded Church leaders to negotiate with Missouri officials who, instead of negotiating, imprisoned them.
[^7] Eliza's older sister Leonora, married to but separated from Enoch Virgil Leavitt, lived in Morley Settlement, about thirty miles south of Nauvoo.
[^8] Eliza's sister Amanda Percy Snow married Eli McConoughey shortly before the Snows left Ohio.
[^9] The Smiths had a special interest in the school, since four of their children attended.
[^10] The visit resulted in Joseph's capture at Dixon, Lee County, Illinois. See History of the Church 5:431-75, 481-88.
