Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

120Sarah Marietta Cleveland

120A fleeting presence in the Nauvoo story is Sarah Marietta Cleveland. Her name appears only briefly but significantly in the historical record. She was born October 20, 1788, in Becket, Berkshire County, Massachusetts, which was the birthplace of her dear friend Eliza R. Snow sixteen years later. Sometime after their marriage, Sarah and her husband, Judge John Cleveland, moved west to Quincy, Illinois.

120 Sarah Marietta Cleveland.

120Like her biblical namesake, Sarah opened her home to strangers during the Mormon exodus from Missouri. It was in her home that Emma Smith and her four children found respite from the indignities and depredations they had suffered in Missouri. Sarah offered companionship and support during the trying months that Emma's husband, the Prophet Joseph, languished in Liberty jail. The tragedy that brought these two women together engendered deep affection between them. Though John Cleveland did not convert to the Church, Sarah became a member, and the Clevelands eventually followed the Smiths to Nauvoo. One need not wonder why Emma chose Sarah Cleveland to be her counselor in the Nauvoo Relief Society.

120Sarah had served with Emma only a year when her husband decided to leave Nauvoo. Her poignant farewell to her Relief Society sisters shows her respect and expectations for the organization she had so devotedly served and her joy in the strong ties that had bound the women together in so brief a time.

Sarah M. Cleveland to the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo [^1]

Joseph Smith Store, site of the organization of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, March 17, 1842.

121TO THE PRESIDENCY, AND LADIES OF THE FEMALE RELIEF SOCIETY OF NAUVOO.

121Beloved sisters and friends—As I shall necessarily be absent from your pleasant society, for a season, my husband not having succeeded in business in Nauvoo as he anticipated, I could not take my leave without soliciting your kind wishes and prayers for the time being, that we find it necessary to locate ourselves elsewhere, until a more favorable door is opened, for our residence with the church.

121I wish also to acknowledge my grateful sense, of the much kindness, and good feelings, which has been manifested toward me, during my visit amongst you; and in return you have my sincere prayers, that the best of heaven's blessings may rest upon you: and may the cause of humanity, benevolence, and mercy, flourish in your midst, under the benign auspices of an approving heaven, and the smiles of the Holy one of Israel. And may the heart of the widow, the fatherless, the poor, and the destitute, for whose benefit the society was organized, be made to rejoice through the means of your benevolent exertions. And feel assured, that while this is made the grand rallying point, for the active energies of your minds, no power, however desirous it may be to vilify, and call in question your good name, will be able to tarnish the lustre of your good deeds, or pluck from your standard, the laurels which will be woven by the hand of gratitude as a shining trophy to your name, to all eternity.

122With respect and affection, I am yours in the bands of the gospel,

122 SARAH M. CLEVELAND.

Printed in Times and Seasons 4 (May 1, 1843): 187.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
