Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

123Charlotte Haven

123Charlotte Haven, a lively and perceptive writer, brought a Gentile's perspective to her observations of Nauvoo. In a series of nine letters written from January to September 1843 to her relatives in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, she described her life among the Mormons in colorful, if sometimes prejudiced, detail. The letters were published fifty years later in The Overland, a San Francisco publication. The following letter is from that source.

123Charlotte visited Nauvoo as a guest of her brother and his wife, Elizabeth. In November 1842 her brother, always designated as "H." in her letters, moved to Nauvoo to try his hand at business in the thriving city. After securing a house, he sent to Quincy for his wife and sister, who were visiting friends there, to join him. The Havens immediately made friends with some of the resident Gentiles in Nauvoo and their associates, especially Judge Sylvester Emmons, a city councilman who became editor of the infamous Expositor; Onias C. Skinner, an attorney who was involved in several of Joseph Smith's litigations and also defended those accused of Joseph's and his brother's murders; Dr. Charles Higbee; and Dr. J. F. Weld. Charlotte enjoyed the frequent outings around the city and its environs with Dr. Higbee in his horse and sleigh. He was the one "most at leisure," having few patients since the Mormons, Charlotte noted, "performed wonderful cure by the laying on of hands."

123The Havens were surprised to find that the John Haven family, who were also from Maine, claimed a common ancestry. Though the John Havens were Mormons and eager to convert the resistant Charlotte, she enjoyed their friendliness and the company of their daughter Maria. In colorful, conversational style, Charlotte's letters also describe various LDS meetings and other events that she attended, as well as some of the Mormons she met. She wrote impressive descriptions of the city and the land surrounding it, in which she found much beauty and pleasure.

124Just a year after their arrival, Charlotte and her family members began making plans to leave Nauvoo. Her brother hoped to sell his inventory to his friend Dr. Weld and move his family and business to St. Louis. Charlotte made arrangements to visit friends and relatives in other parts of Missouri before returning to her family in Portsmouth. Their brief Nauvoo sojourn was coming to an end.

124Charlotte's letters are reminiscent of another volume of published observations of Mormon life written by Elizabeth Kane, the wife of Brigham Young's friend Thomas L. Kane. In letters to family members in the East describing her 1874 trip to Southern Utah as one of the group accompanying Brigham Young on his annual pilgrimage, Elizabeth Kane, like Charlotte Haven, presented a lively, sometimes mocking, but often admiring account of the people she met during the journey. In both Elizabeth's and Charlotte's accounts, the letters were likely edited for publication and, like other published travelers' accounts, intended to entertain as well as inform the reader. Reflecting the author's imaginative eye for detail, Charlotte's description of the Rigdon party gives an enticing glimpse of some of the social activities of Nauvoo.

Charlotte Haven to Family [^1]

VENUS, alias COMMERCE, alias NAUVOO.

124 March 5, 1843.

124My dear brother and sister:

124Friday I had the pleasure of receiving your very welcome letters, also letters from Mother and Isa. We have but two mails a week and twice I had come away disappointed, therefore was overjoyed when so many letters and papers were smilingly handed me by Elder Sidney Rigdon, P.M. [postmaster]. I hastened home and read them again and again,—indeed, the smaller the incident mentioned, the greater seemed the interest.

125This Sunday morning Elizabeth breakfasted with us for the first time since the birth of her infant, and H. is at home for the day in a state of perfect happiness, and wishes Sunday would come twice a week. He has the boy on his knee, talking all kinds of nonsense to him and teaching him to smile and recognize his father. E. is quite well and the boy thrives, gaining one ounce a week. He is to be named for his grandfather, Samuel Cushman. I tell E. I hope he will not be a Democrat.

125This winter has been extremely cold; I almost despair of sunny, warm weather in the West. We had quite a fall of snow last night, and the river has been ice-bound since the middle of November. I used to think we had high winds in New England, but I look back to them now as gentle breezes compared to the violent ones we have here. Every few days we have here a perfect hurricane, lasting for forty-eight hours. Occasionally we have had a thaw, and then—oh, the mud! it seems bottomless. The soil is a black, sticky loam, and when your foot is once in, it is almost impossible to get it out. Crossing the road one day last week, my feet went down, down, and in all probability would have reached my antipodes had it not been for the assistance of the Judge [Emmons], who helped me out; but both rubbers were left far below and there remain to be fossilized as footprints of the primeval man.

125Notwithstanding cold and mud, we have passed a pleasant winter, our society being mostly confined to our little Gentile band. A few other acquaintances we have made, Hiram Kimball's family, who lived here when it was Commerce,—Mrs K's mother has become a Mormon and Mrs. K. is leaning that way, [^2]—then, at the post-office, the Rigdon family. We enter a side door leading into the kitchen, and in a corner near the door is a wide shelf or table, on which against the wall is a sort of cupboard with pigeon-holes or boxes—this is the post-office. In this room, with the great cooking stove at one end, the family eat and sit. Mrs. R. when I go for the mail always invites me to stop and rest, which after a cold, long walk I am glad to do, thus opening an acquaintance with Elder Sidney Rigdon, the most learned man among the Latter Day Saints. He is past fifty and is somewhat bald and his dark hair slightly gray. He has an intelligent countenance, a courteous manner, and speaks grammatically. He talks very pleasantly about his travels in this country and Europe, but is very reticent about his religion. I have heard it stated that he was Smith's chief aid in getting up the Book of Mormon and creed. He is so far above Smith in intellect, education, and secretiveness, that there is scarcely a doubt that he is at the head in compiling it. I looked over his library—on some book-shelves in the kitchen. It was a very good student's collection,—Hebrew, Greek, and Latin lexicons and readers, stray volumes of Shakespeare, Scott, Irving's works, and a number of other valuable books. He studied for the ministry in his youth, then was employed in a newspaper office. His wife is always busy with domestic labor. They have five daughters.

126The only party I have attended in this Holy City was at their house. Here is a copy of the invitation. You will observe the date was a year ago. However, we concluded it was a slight mistake, as the Judge received an invitation somehow with this year's date.

126 Nauvoo Feb 20 1842

126The company of Mr Mrs and Miss Haven is Solicited to attend a party at the house of Mr Rigdon on Thursday the 24 inst at three oclock P M

126 Sarah Rigdon

126 Eliza Rigdon

126The Judge called me, and we trudged off. We were met at the P. O. door by Miss Sarah; her mother, who was paring potatoes near the stove, came forward, the venerable Elder stood behind the cook stove (which was in full operation) dressed in his Sunday best suit, the highest and stiffest shirt collar, and a white neckerchief with ends flowing over his shoulders. By his side was a very fine, stylish gentleman with gold spectacles whom he introduced to me as Mr. Marr—"A descendant of the Earl of Mar," occurred to me. He is a native of Portland, Me., and a last year's graduate of the Cambridge Law School.

126 Nauvoo, from a painting by Frederick Piercy, ca. 1857.

127Leaving my escort in the kitchen, I was ushered into the next room—where lo! there was a large quilting frame, around which sat eight of the belles of Nauvoo, to each of whom I was introduced, then a seat was assigned me near the head of the frame, and equipped with needle, thread, and thimble, I quilted with the rest. But not a word was said, and fearing my presence had checked hilarity, I offered a few kindly remarks, only to be answered with "Yes, Marm," or "No, Marm." It was quite embarrassing, when my next neighbor timidly whispered, "We talk in the evening."

127So I was stilled and put all my energy on the quilt, which was finished and taken out of the frame by six o'clock. The door to the kitchen or living room was then thrown open and we were ushered in. The scene, how changed! Through the whole length of the room, from the post-office to the stove, a table extended, loaded with a substantial supper, turkey, chicken, beef, vegetables, pies, cake, etc. To this we did silent justice.

127Leaving the family to clear away, we young people returned to the other room and placed ourselves like wall-flowers. Gentlemen soon came in in groups, and when all were assembled, Mr. Rigdon came in, shook hands with the gentlemen, then placed himself in the middle of the room, and taking a gentleman by his side, commenced introductions, "Mr. Monroe,—Miss Burnett, my daughter, Miss Marks, Miss Ives, my daughter, Miss Ivens, Miss Bemis, my daughter from La Harpe, Miss Haven, my daughter."

128Mr. Monroe retires and another gentleman is called up and the ceremony repeated, until all the strangers had been introduced. Then Mr. R. says, "Is there any other gentleman who has not been introduced?" when a Mr. Ives came forward and pointing with his finger, "I have not been introduced to that lady (Miss Haven) and that (Miss Bemis)."

128This ceremony over, all seemed more joyous; songs were sung, concluding with the two little girls singing several verses of the Battle of Michigan, deaconed out to them line by line by their elder sister, Miss Nancy. Then followed an original dance without music, commencing with marching and ending with kissing! Merry games were then introduced, The Miller, Grab, etc., not at all of an intellectual order; so I suggested Fox and Geese, which was in vogue with us ten years ago. It took well. Brother says he called at the office during the evening, and the Elder was urging his wife to look in upon the young people. He heard him say that he had been half over the world but never had seen anything equal to this in enjoyment. At nine o'clock we went out to a second edition of supper, and then the games were renewed with vigor. We left about ten. The Miss Rigdons, who called on us the next day, said the party did not break up till twelve.

128Kiss little Louise and Sarah and baby for me, and tell them I am glad they learn so fast. I will write them a letter bye and bye. I wish they could hug and kiss their little baby cousin.

128This evening with the Judge I shall go either to Mrs. H. Kimball's, or to a prayer meeting, for you must know the saints take an interest in our spiritual welfare, by sending us to read the Book of Mormon, The Voice of Warning, and the Book of Covenants, and invite us to attend prayer meetings.

128We are having beautiful sunsets these days, and from our parlor window we have an extensive western view; and later on in the night the heavens are all aglow with light from the prairie fires. Between the river and the Iowa bluffs eight or ten miles west, ten to twenty fires are started burning the refuse grass and straw preparatory to putting in spring crops. Often I sit up a long time after going to my room, watching these long lines of fire as they seem to meet all along the horizon. The sun is down and darkness is fast gathering, so I must close with much love from

128 Your sister

128 Charlotte.

This letter is taken from "A Girl's Letter from Nauvoo," published in The Overland Monthly, December 1890, 616-38.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
