Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

130Petition to Governor Carlin

130When the Saints straggled into Quincy from Missouri, Rebecca and Thomas Carlin were among the families that offered help and relief. Carlin, the governor of Illinois, promised permanent protection for the Mormons in Illinois and supported their protest to Congress for the harsh treatment they had received in Missouri. He even joined other governors in writing letters carried to Congress and President Martin Van Buren by Joseph Smith, asking that the depredations against the Mormons in Missouri be redressed. Ere long, however, Governor Carlin's sympathy waned, and even though he had supported the Mormon claim against Missouri, he honored Missouri's request to arrest Joseph Smith and extradite him to Missouri as a fugitive from justice. Angered when the extradition order was dismissed after a hearing before Illinois Judge Stephen L. Douglas, the governor continued to press Missouri's claims against the Prophet, quickly losing the trust of the Saints whom he had once befriended.

131 Relief Society centennial memorial plate, illustrated with painting taken from an old etching representing the organization of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.

131The attempted murder of Missouri Governor Lilburn W. Boggs by an unknown assailant further strengthened Governor Carlin's resolve to extradite Joseph Smith. During this stressful period Emma Smith wrote several letters of appeal to Governor Carlin in behalf of her husband. Though he respectfully responded to them, he continually asserted his duty to abide the law and return all "fugitives from justice," including her husband.

131Finally, in September 1842 a thousand women, "members of the Relief Society and Ladies of Nauvoo," signed a letter to the governor, recounting their grief and misery in Missouri and pleading for his intervention in the effort to return the Prophet to Missouri. The letter was hand delivered by Emma Smith and Eliza R. Snow. Within a few months, Governor Carlin was succeeded by Thomas Ford without a resolution of the matter. Joseph Smith remained in hiding throughout these months until he was finally discharged at a hearing in Springfield in January 1843.

The Nauvoo Relief Society to Governor Thomas Carlin [^1]

Nauvoo

131 5 September 1842

131To his Excellency Thomas Carlin, Governor of the State of Illinois:—

131We the undersigned members of the Nauvoo Relief Society, and Ladies of Nauvoo hearing many reports concerning mobs, threats of extermination, and other excitement, set on foot by John C. Bennett, calculated to disturb the peace, happiness and well being of this community, have taken the liberty to petition your Excellency for protection.

132It may be considered irrelevant for Ladies to petition your Excellency on the above named subject, and may be thought by you Sir, to be officious, and that it would be more becoming for our husbands, fathers, brothers, and sons to engage in this work, and in our defence. This, Sir, we will admit in ordinary cases, is right, and that it would be more consistent with the delicacy of the female character to be silent, but on occasions like the present, that our desires for the peace of society, the happiness of our friends, the desire to save the lives of our husbands, our fathers, our brothers, our children, and our own lives, will be a sufficient palliation in the estimation of your Excellency for the step we have taken in presenting this petition in support of the one already sent your Excellency by the male inhabitants of this city.

132We would respectfully represent to your Excellency that we have not yet forgot the scenes of grief, misery, and woe, that we had to experience from the hands of ruthless and blood thirsty mobs in the State of Missouri—the cup of misery was prepared by lying, slander and misrepresentation, it was wrung out and filled by tyranny and oppression, and by a ruthless inhuman mob. We had to drink it to the dregs.

132Your Excellency will bear with us if we remind you of the cold blooded atrocities, that we witnessed in that State, our bosoms heave with horror, our eyes are dim, our knees tremble, our hearts are faint when we think of their horrid deeds, and if the petitions of our husbands, brothers, fathers, and sons, will not answer with your Excellency, we beseech you to remember that of their wives, mothers, sisters, and daughters; let the voice of injured innocence in Missouri speak, let the blood of our fathers, our brothers, our sons and daughters speak, let the tears of the widows, the orphans, the maimed, the impoverished speak, and let the injuries sustained by fifteen thousand innocent, robbed, spoiled, persecuted and injured people speak; let the tale of our woe be told, let it be told without varnish, prejudice, or color, and we are persuaded there is no heart but will be softened, no feelings but will be affected, and no person but will flee to our relief.

133Far be it from us to accuse your Excellency of obduracy, or injustice; we believe you to be a humane, feeling, benevolent and patriotic man, and therefore we appeal to you.

133Concerning John C. Bennett, who is trying with other political demagogues to disturb our peace, we believe him to be an unvirtuous man, and a most consummate scoundrel, a stirrer up of sedition, and a vile wretch, unworthy the attention or notice of any virtuous man, and his published statements concerning Joseph Smith, are barefaced, unblushing falsehoods.

133We would further recommend to your Excellency concerning Joseph Smith, that we have the utmost confidence in him, as being a man of virtue, integrity, honesty, truth, and patriotism, we have never either in public or private heard him teach any principles, but the principles of virtue and righteousness, and so we have knowledge, we know him to be a pure, chaste, virtuous and godly man.

133Under these circumstances we would petition your Excellency to exert your privilege in an official capacity, and not to suffer him (should he be demanded) to go into the State of Missouri, for we know that if he should, it would be the delivering up the innocent to be murdered—we would represent to your Excellency that we are a law abiding people, a virtuous people, and we would respectfully refer your Excellency to the official documents of this State during our three years residence in it, in proof of this: if we transgress laws, we are willing to be tried by those laws, but we dread mobs, we dread illegal process, we dread fermentation, calumny, and lies, knowing that our difficulties in Missouri first commenced with these things.

133We pray that we may not be delivered into the hands of mob or illegal proceedings of the militia, but that we may have the privilege of self defence in case of attack—without having to contend with legalized mobs as in Missouri, and we therefore appeal to the honor, philanthropy, justice, benevolence, and patriotism of your Excellency, to afford us all legal protection, and to grant us our request, and we as in duty bound will ever pray.

Taken from the Journal History of the Church, September 5, 1842. The Journal History is a collection of documents and newspaper articles kept by Andrew Jenson, an early Church historian.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
