Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

134Phebe Carter Woodruff

134Phebe Carter joined the Church in 1834, the only member of her family to do so at that time. Her mother was grief-stricken when her daughter decided to leave her home in Scarboro, Maine, and join the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio. She was assuaged only by Phebe's promise to return if she lost faith in Mormonism. Phebe traveled with a small band of converts to Kirtland, where she met and married Wilford Woodruff in 1836. They became the parents of nine children. Three of the first four were living at the time she wrote the letter that follows: Wilford, Jr., four; Phebe, two; and Susan, eleven months.

134 Phebe Carter Woodruff.

134In Nauvoo, Phebe joined the Relief Society. Later she accompanied her husband on two missions before they settled in Utah, where she served as one of the presidents of the Co-operative Retrenchment Society and on the executive board of the Deseret Hospital. She was considered one of the "leading sisters of the Church" and remembered as "one of the wisest women in the knowledge of the Scriptures and in her counsels among her sisters in the Church." [^1] To her joy, both of her parents were eventually baptized by her husband. Phebe died in Salt Lake City on November 10, 1885. Her husband, forced into hiding during the federal raids against polygamists at that time, watched the funeral procession from the Historian's Office, unable to attend the service.

135In the following brief letter to her husband, then in Boston with several other apostles to forward the candidacy of Joseph Smith for United States President, Phebe describes the conditions existing in Nauvoo shortly before the murder of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. She concludes by recounting the details of a dream of Joseph Smith's relating to the Law brothers, formerly faithful Church members, who were responsible for publishing the Nauvoo Expositor, an anti-Mormon newspaper whose press was ordered "demolished" by the Nauvoo city council. Phebe gives no other hint in her letter that she anticipates the events about to unfold.

Phebe Carter Woodruff to Wilford Woodruff [^2]

Nauvoo

135 16 June 1844

135Dear Wi[l]ford

135I have come down to sister [Bathsheba] Smith before I milk my cow lest her letter should be gone to the office to tell you that we are all comfortably well at present the[crossed out] we have all had very bad colds Susan & Phebe [their daughters] have been quite sick Sister Eunice health is a little better. I received 5 dolls. from you from Newark[?] bought about 4 dolls. worth of lumber paid Balis one & now brother Webster is at work on the house the other front room and will go to keeping house by themselves when it is done, we have not yet got the flooring—O you do not know how much you are wanted to see about things here, Sister Smith says tell him to come home when Mr. Smith comes, I suppose she has written all the news there is much talk of a mob here but I have not had the first anxious though[t] about it yet the authorities here demolished the press precisely according to law so they have left us (the Law party) [^3] they tried to land in Madison when the[y] left here but the inhabitants would not have them there so they went fa[r]ther on up the river they tried to get some printing done but the editors there told them that they would not do it for their press was in good repute now. Joseph has had a dream about the Laws he thought they bound him and cast him and [crossed out] into a pit or well like Joseph of old but he made a struggle and got to the top of the well so to look out and he saw a little distance from him one of them in the grasp of a tiger the other a snake and they were calling to him to help them he told them they had tied him and he could not help them a brother soon came along and took brother Joseph out. Our garden does very well brother A Alexander is not going out this season—brother [John] Taylor is waiting for Joseph to say go to him, but there is much excitement here at present and he thinks he had better wait. A messenger has been sent to the governor has gone now. I want to see you much but had quite as lives you would be away now untill this fuss is over. I received 2 letters from home by Arthur Milliken saying that Luther would not come untill Sept. and I think sister Foss not at all I cannot say much to her on mothers account as she tells me she thinks mother would die almost or quite if she should leave. If you go to Maine I want you to buy 2 yds dark brown ribbon 1 inch 1/4 wide and give to mother for me with a kiss and tell her she has not got a child in the world that loves her better or will do more for her than her wandering Phebe, give my love to them all and

135ecept [accept] much love yourself P. W[hittemore] W.

This letter was included in a letter from Bathsheba to George A. Smith, then in Boston, June 15, 1844; original in George A. Smith Papers, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] External evidence suggests that Emmeline learned indirectly that James had gone to sea, though she received no letters from him.
