Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

136Vilate Murray Kimball

136Vilate Murray Kimball, though married to one of Mormonism's most colorful and influential leaders in the early days of the Church, was unassuming, reserved, and seldom "on stage." But she was well known as an example of quiet strength and endurance.

136 Vilate Murray Kimball.

136Vilate Murray was born in upstate New York and married Heber C. Kimball in 1822 at age sixteen, settling with him in Mendon, New York. Seeking religion, the Kimballs concluded to join the Baptist church. Three weeks later, however, a Mormon missionary brought the message of the restored gospel to Mendon. It was a fortuitous event, bringing not only the Kimballs into the Church but also ten members of the Brigham Young family residing in Mendon. The Kimballs moved to Kirtland in 1832 and subsequently followed the Church to Missouri and then to Nauvoo. From the continual disruption of her life, the prolonged absences of her husband, who had become an apostle in 1835, the loss of some of her children, and the introduction of plural marriage, Vilate developed a strong stoicism that demonstrated itself in steadfast and uncomplaining loyalty to her husband and the Church.

136Among her Nauvoo friends were some of the "English sisters" whom Heber had baptized. On their first visit to Vilate, they "acted as glad to see me," she wrote Heber, "as though we had always been acquainted." Their regard for her husband was soon apparent. They all remarked on young David's resemblance to his father and "wept like children" when they saw Heber's picture. [^1]

138In 1843 Vilate and Heber received their endowments from Joseph Smith, and after completion of the Nauvoo Temple, Vilate was one of the first women to have the ordinances bestowed in a temple. She became a devoted temple officiator with her friends Eliza R. Snow, Mary Ann Young, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney, during the winter of 1845 and 1846.

138In 1867 Vilate died at the age of sixty-one in Salt Lake City, preceding her husband by only eight months. The letter that follows is one of several extant letters from Vilate to Heber, who was then in the East campaigning for Joseph Smith's presidential candidacy. It expresses concern for her husband's safety and a desire to join him in order to escape the confusion and fears that engulfed Nauvoo following the martyrdom.

Vilate Kimball to Heber C. Kimball [^2]

Nauvoo

138 30 June 1844

138My Dear Dear Companion

138Never before, did I take up my pen to address you under so trying circumstances as we are now placed, but as Br [George] Adams the bearer of this can tell you more than I can write I shall not attempt to discribe the scene that we have passed through. God forbid that I should ever witness another like unto it. I saw the lifeless corpes of our beloved brethren when they were brought to their almost distracted families. Yea I witnessed their tears, and groans, which was enough to rend the heart of an adamant. every brother and sister that witnessed the scene fe[lt] deeply to simpathyse with them. yea, every heart is filled with sorrow, and the very streets of Nauvoo seam to morn. whare it will end the Lord only knows.

139we are kept awake night after night by the alarm of mobs. these apostates say, their damnation is sealed, their die is cast, their doom is fixed and they are determined to do all in their power to have revenge. Law says he wants nine more, that was in his quorum [of the Twelve]. Some time I am afraid he will get them. I have no doubt but you are on[e]. what makes me feer, is from a circumstance that took place when the legeon was first called out to defend the city. there was several drums found with blood on, no one could account for it. they examened to see how many there was, they found tenn, and while they were exam[in]ing the eleventh there came a large drop on that. Wm has seen them; he says with all the drums have ben used the blood is yet plain to be seen. he has got two if he gets the nine more it will make eleven. [^3] but I try to submit all things into the hands of God.

139I have felt aposed to their sending for you to come home at present and didnot know as they would untill brother Adams called here a few moments ago, and told me he should start in about too hours, if I wanted to write I must send it to the mantion house within that time. so I have not time to say much, neither is it nesaceray as he can tell you all, my helth is geting better, the children are all well. I mailed a letter to you last monday directed to Baltimore. the letters you sent from Washington all came to gather last wedensday, and a paper, the mail has not ben in before for fore weeks. the letter you sent from Pitsburg I have never got. when I red your pressing invitation for me to meet you, and that you had got a witness that I should do so. I again took courage that some door would open that I should yet go. but Alass my hopes are all blasted. my constent prayer now is, for the Lord to presurve us all to meet again. I have no doubt but your life will be sought. but may the Lord give you wisdom, to escape their hands. my time is up to send this, so you must excuse me for I have writen in a great hurry and with a bad pen the children all remember you in love. now fare you well my love till we meet, which may the lord grant for his sons sake Amen.

139 Vilate Kimball

Vilate Kimball to Heber C. Kimball, June 30, 1844, photocopy of original letter, Vilate Kimball Papers, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] External evidence suggests that Emmeline learned indirectly that James had gone to sea, though she received no letters from him.
