Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

140Mary Ann Angell Young

140With her friend Vilate Kimball, Mary Ann Angell Young shared the anxieties and hardships occasioned by the long absences of their apostle/missionary husbands, Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young, who were themselves devoted friends. Like Vilate's life, Mary Ann's was one of quiet support—of her husband and his calling, of her family, and of the demanding tasks required to establish the restored Church of Christ. Though her choice to become a Latter-day Saint subjected her to many physical and emotional struggles, she accepted them as a necessary consequence of being committed to building the Kingdom.

140 Mary Ann Angell Young.

140A deeply religious woman, well acquainted with the scriptures, Mary Ann became interested in the Book of Mormon when she first heard of it in 1830 in Providence, Rhode Island. Two years later, after listening to the message of the missionaries, she was baptized. She moved to Kirtland, arriving in the spring of 1833. There she met Brigham Young, a thirty-two-year-old widower with two young daughters. Mary Ann, who was thirty, had waited, she said, "for a man of God to be her life companion." They were married in 1834. She bore six children of her own, but through the years her mothering extended to all of her husband's many children, who fondly called her "Mother Young."

141Mary Ann Young was one of the first temple ordinance workers, beginning that service in the Nauvoo Temple and continuing, when her health permitted, during her life in Utah. She was also an intuitive nurse, relieving pain and restoring the health of many family members and neighbors. She lived quietly and simply in the "White House on the hill," the home that Brigham Young built for her in Salt Lake City, shunning public activity for pleasant "retirement in her own home." Though she was the senior wife of the president of the Church, "there was no assumption of power in her manner," a quality noted by all who knew her. [^1]

141Beyond some letters to her husband, few of Mary Ann's personal writings are extant. Despite the fear and apprehension under which the following letter was written, she demonstrates calm resignation to whatever lay ahead. The poignant yet pragmatic closing sentence reflects the quiet submission to God's will that sustained her in the wake of the martyrdom.

Mary Ann Angell Young to Brigham Young [^2]

Nauvoo

141 30 June 1844

141My Dear Companion

141I set down to communicate a few lines to you at this time My heart is full I know not what to write to comfort you at this time we have had great afflictions in this place since you left home. I expect you will have the particulars with this letter.

I wrote a letter to send to you. it was in the house three weeks without eny chance to send it. the male has been stoped from the East it is said by the mob. it has not been in but once for three or four weeks. I wrote a adition to [page torn] letter sent it out by P[hineas] H Young a few days sin[ce] I hope you will get it. You have now been gone allmost six weeks I have not had a line from you since you left home I have not time to write much now. we are in great affliction at this time—our Dear Br Joseph Smith and Hiram has fell victiams to a verocious [ferocious] mob the great God of the creation only knows whithe[r] the rest shall be preserved in safety or not we are in tolable [tolerable] good health at presant I have been Blessed to keep my feeling quite calm through all the storm I hope you will be careful on your way home and not expose yourself to those that will endanger your Life Yours in hast[e]. if we meet no more in this world may we meet where parting is no more Farewell

142 Mary A Young to B Young

From the Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] Judy Nolte Lensink, "Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography," Women's Studies 14 (1987): 41. Much has been written about diaries as both literary texts and historical sources. See, for example, Donna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1987); Harriet Blodgett, Centuries of Female Days: Englishwomen's Private Diaries (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1988); Elizabeth Hampsten, Read This Only to Yourself: The Private Writings of Midwestern Women, 1880-1910 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981); Phyllis Rose, Writing of Women: Essays in a Renaissance (Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1985); Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (New York: Ballantine Books, 1988); Leonore Hoffmann and Margo Culley, eds., Women's Personal Narratives: Essays in Criticism and Pedagogy (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1985).
[^2] This letter, with several others, was appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, April 13, 1845. Wilford Woodruff was then serving with his wife Phebe in the British Mission. They had left their five-year-old son, Willy, in Nauvoo. The original is in the Wilford Woodruff Papers, LDS Church Archives.
