Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

143Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith

143Throughout her long and eventful life, Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith used every opportunity to testify of the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith. Having received the temple ordinances from him in Nauvoo, she frequently expressed her gratitude for the privilege of being instructed by a prophet of God. "I know him for what he professed to be," she wrote, "a true prophet of God, and the Lord through him restored the everlasting gospel and every ordinance and endowment that will lead us into the celestial kingdom." [^1]

143 Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith.

143Bathsheba Bigler became a member of the Church with most of her family in 1837 in the town of Shinnston, West Virginia, the place of her birth fifteen years earlier. At the baptism was a young missionary, George A. Smith, who developed an immediate fondness for the young girl. This attraction bloomed into love and eventually led to their marriage in Nauvoo in 1841. Their early married years were marked by many separations while George, a member of the Council of the Twelve, served several missions. Their deep affection and respect for each other found indelible expression in the numerous letters they exchanged.

With all of the public responsibilities that came to her as a member of the Church, Bathsheba was at heart a homemaker who found much satisfaction in creating a warm, hospitable environment wherever she was. Her love of beauty and artistic expression found an outlet in painting. On the journey to the Salt Lake Valley, she carefully protected the portraits she had painted of her husband, her parents, and Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

144When the Relief Society was organized in Nauvoo in 1842, Bathsheba was the youngest of the twenty women who attended the initial meeting. From that day, the Relief Society became a significant force in her life, and she served in several ward and stake organizations in Salt Lake City, her service culminating in her call as general president in 1901. But the temple was probably her first love. One of the first women to receive her endowments, she officiated in the Nauvoo Temple, in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City, in the St. George Temple, and became "presidentess" of the female workers in the Salt Lake Temple. Presiding simultaneously over both the Relief Society and the women temple workers, she symbolized the interrelationship of these two institutions whose shared intent was to save souls, a purpose added by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo to the charitable function of the Relief Society.

144Bathsheba appended the following note to Phebe Woodruff to a letter written by her husband to Phebe's husband, Wilford Woodruff, then serving a mission with Phebe in England. The letter is lighthearted and free from the strain of earlier years in Nauvoo, partly because Bathsheba's husband was at home and partly because Nauvoo itself at that time was relatively peaceful.

Bathsheba W. Smith to Phebe Carter Woodruff [^2]

Nauvoo April 13 Sunday Morning 1845

145Sister Woodruff as my husband has given me the privelage of writing a few lines unto to you in his letter I improve it I hardley know what to say to you but if you ware here I am sure I could find enoughf we all have our healths vary well & enjoy our selves vary well if mobbers howl on evry side, I have been to as many as 15 or twenty parties this winter the most of them ware splendid ones to Brother Page live where[crossed out] in your house but it is not you I will be pleased to see you again I hope I shall I am agoing to school to Br Thayer a Portrait painter from London lirning to draw I am getting along pretty well I want some drawing paper & pencils. I wish Brother Woodruff could send me some, I calculate to send you a scetch of Joseph when I can draw a little better my penn is so vary bad I can hardly write their is not one knife about the hous to mend my penn with, Father Smith has got a house built on the east end of ours & are liveing here we have two rooms under way one on the west & the other on the north. I hope we shall have them done in a few [blank].

145I cannot think of any thing to [write] that is of ipportance My brother will tell you all the news I presume give my love to Brother Woodruff my children tease me so I cant write so I must close by saying may the Lord bless you all & bring you safe home in pease as ever you[r] Sister in the bands of the covenant

145 Bathsheba W Smith

This letter is appended to a letter written by George A. Smith to Wilford Woodruff, then serving a mission in England with his wife, Phebe. Original is in LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
