Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

Reminiscences

"For the Good and Comfort of My Dear Children"

157On the Fourth of July, 1885, Sarah Pea Rich commenced writing "some of the things connected with my life" at the request of her son Benjamin. She was seventy years old and had been a member of the Church for fifty-four years. Sarah's memory reached back over her seventy years and brought to life in rich detail many of the scenes and incidents through which she had lived. All of the usual milestones in a woman's life cycle were there: her birth and early childhood, her courtship and marriage, the births of her children and grandchildren, as well as her joys and disappointments. But the spirit that animates her account comes not from her clear and lively writing style nor from the singular events of her long life. Instead, the quickening element in her personal narrative is the palpable presence of her deep religious faith. More than anything else, her personal history resonates with religious conviction. It is a revelation of her faith and serves the reader as her spiritual autobiography. [^1]

157Her son's request was likely not the only reason Sarah turned her memory into memoirs. There may have been a number of hidden reasons for recording her spiritual journey, including a desire to make her own personal accounting to God, to testify of the restoration of the gospel, or to satisfy her own need to write her life story. [^2] The task of collecting, arranging, and describing in an ordered account all of the hundreds of incidents, decisions, and relationships that comprised her life, however, gave it cohesive unity and meaning for both her children and herself. She wrote to reassure both herself and her posterity of the reality of her life experience and the validity of the sacrifices she was called to make in committing herself to her newly embraced religion. Moreover, the process of writing her life story was itself significant, for it enabled her to act alone in the recreation of her own world, a world in which her experience, her perspective, and her judgment were central.

158For whatever purpose, many early Latter-day Saint women, unable for various reasons to keep a daily account, felt just as compelled as the diarist to trace their experiences by recollection, to leave a valedictory that not only explained but also linked their lives and times with those that followed. Their writings are reality remembered, filtered through time, experience, and self-appraisal. Their authors have in effect stepped outside their lives, connected to the events they record only by memory or sometimes by the prompting of a note or diary fragment. They have had time to evaluate, reflect on, and prioritize their experiences.

158Their narratives are more structured, more selective, and more obviously thematic than diaries. Unlike diaries, whose entries are ordered by days and years, the memoir is an unbroken narrative, a seamless story that flows smoothly along the stream of memory. Shaped by an imperfect memory and a deliberate selectivity that fits the writer's purpose in recreating her life, the past these reminiscences create is not "objective history." Neither are their accounts dispassionate recitals of another time, another place, nor do they wear the artifice of "literary" journals, self-conscious and stylistic autobiographies most often written for publication. [^3] The selections that follow are personal, individual retellings of life stories or incidents that continued to strike an emotional chord in the writer as she transformed them into words. There is little reason to suppose that these reminiscences enhance reality, since the reality they portray is so consistently corroborated by contemporary accounts. Moreover, some human experiences are so intense and life-changing that memory returns not only the event in its fullness, but also the emotions that surround it.

158Conversion for early LDS women established their connection to a new religious community, wherein they found identity and secured a place for themselves. [^4] It also meant relocating to that community to gather with the body of Saints, a move ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand miles. This often entailed a wrenching separation from family, friends, comfortable homes, and profitable livelihoods, as well as the loss of loved ones to the travails of disease, accident, or persecution encountered on the journey. Separation and sacrifice flow as undercurrents to the dominant theme of faith and community in the women's religious writings.

159Though they express distinct experiences, most of these memoirs share common characteristics. They all reveal a strong sense of history and a desire to recapture a time when events seemed larger than life. They are not just reflections on solitary, individual spiritual journeys. They are voices united in the restoration story, witnesses to those past events irretrievable in all their exquisite detail except for these personal accounts. Conversion is their keystone, the pivotal point of the life story.

159All of these women were converts, first-generation Mormons who knew they were in the vanguard of the restoration movement. This fact alone made their lives extraordinary and their testimonies worth recording. Mary Gibbs Bigelow's account of her conversion lends a clear and unwavering voice to the record. When the Mormon elders taught her the gospel, she "believed it right off and obeyed it in the spring." Jane Snyder Richards, on the other hand, put off baptism until a severe illness and a brother's prayerful ministrations opened her eyes to its necessity. "I saw as plainly as if a book was opened before me with it written in it my need of baptism," she remembered. "If Christ who was sinless needed to be baptized should I hold myself as better than He?"

159If a common faith binds these accounts together, the personalities of their writers give them distinct styles and individuality. Elizabeth Heward and Drusilla Hendricks are most alike, exhibiting similar literary characteristics, but they tell different stories. Their reminiscences, written from notes or diaries, vibrate with vivid anecdotal detail and smooth narrative styles. The three writers who were children in Nauvoo, Margaret Clawson, Louisa Decker, and Eliza Margetts, remembered their childhoods in very distinct ways. Lighthearted, dramatic Margaret entertainingly recounts childhood disappointments and frustrations, while Louisa movingly relates the terrible aftermath of the Nauvoo exodus that left her an orphan. Eliza's brief, straightforward narrative focuses on the martyrdom and her visit to Carthage jail the next day, followed by her memory of the "miracle of the quails" on the way to Winter Quarters, singular events of which she felt compelled to leave her own personal witness. The distinctiveness of the accounts confirms the truth that there is no one "woman's view of Nauvoo."

160Whether chronicling their family life or the broader historical events surrounding it, whether painting the retrospective with large brush strokes or sketching only a corner of the historical canvas, each writer depicts a life that asks to be taken seriously. Their experiences should not be read as footnotes to the historical record. More accurately, their histories provide a counterpoint to the better known traditional male motif, adding a distinct female theme that weaves in and around the more familiar strain. Sometimes the two themes blend into a pleasing unison, but more often they move to the pulse of their own rhythms.

160However individualistic these women's accounts may be, their strong sense of community merged their individual voices into that of the larger group. They may have been writing about their own experiences, but those experiences conveyed the dynamics of the religious community that was taking shape around them. Their narratives can never be wholly understood or appreciated in isolation. Each is a part of a larger story, one voice in the whole community of faith. Nauvoo was the crucible from which they emerged spiritually strengthened, energized, and committed. It is no wonder that many of their reminiscences end at the exodus from Nauvoo or soon thereafter. They had given their witness, they had successfully met the test of true believers, and they had demonstrated their commitment to laying the foundations of the Kingdom. The rest of their lives was a denouement to that historic moment in time, a playing out of the climactic experience that had been Nauvoo.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Eliza A. Cheney to her Family, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 14, 1841, in Eliza Jane Cheney Rawson, "Historical Letters and Sketches, 1919," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^4] Ellen Douglas (Parker) to her family, Nauvoo, Illinois, April 14, 1844, typescript copy, LDS Church Archives.
