Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

169Jane Snyder Richards

169In 1831, when Jane Snyder was eight years old, her family moved from New York to Camden in "Upper Canada" (Ontario), where they first heard the gospel message. Robert, Jane's brother, was the first of the family to embrace the gospel. He moved to Kirtland and spent the next five years proselyting for the Church. On one of his missionary journeys, he returned to Canada and converted and baptized all of his family except Jane and her oldest and youngest brothers. The family had a strong desire to join the body of Saints, then in Missouri, so in 1839 they sold their belongings and began a trip that would be continually interrupted for two years before they finally caught up with the Church in Nauvoo. Though she hadn't yet been baptized, Jane went with them.

169 Jane Snyder Richards and her husband, Franklin.

169The family traveled as far as La Porte, Indiana, where they stopped because Jane's niece, Sarah Jane, was ill. While they were there, Jane suffered a debilitating illness that left her unable to speak or move. Her missionary brother Robert, while preaching in a nearby community, visited his family and, upon seeing how ill Jane was, fasted and prayed for her and repeatedly expressed his desire that she be baptized. During one of his administrations to her, she said, "light came into my mind, and I saw as plainly as if a book was opened before me with it written in it. My need of baptism." The pain and paralysis left her and she was able to voice her wish to be baptized right then, despite her weakness and the winter cold. Ice was broken in the river and Robert baptized her. "My disease was cured," she recorded, "and have I need of any one to tell me what mormonism is with such a personal experience?"

170Robert visited Nauvoo in the spring, and when he returned to La Porte, he brought a message from the Prophet Joseph Smith that the Snyders were to remain in Indiana to provide housing for traveling elders passing through that area. One of those traveling elders was Franklin D. Richards, a future apostle of the Church, who was on his way to Canada. His companion became ill, so the two missionaries stayed with the Snyders through the next winter. After two years in La Porte, the Snyders finally joined the Saints in Nauvoo. [^1] Jane was married to Elder Richards in 1842, and shortly before they left for the West in 1846, they entered into the practice of plural marriage.

170In Utah Jane served for many years in the Relief Society. She was also active in behalf of woman suffrage and other causes related to the advancement of women.

170When Franklin D. Richards was appointed probate judge of Weber County, Utah, in 1869, he and his wife Jane settled in Ogden. Two years later Jane was called to be president of her ward Relief Society. Before completion of the railroad spur linking Salt Lake City and Ogden, she felt isolated from her Salt Lake City friends, especially since there was no one living in Ogden "who had been connected with the [Relief] Society in Joseph Smith's time." But she was able to maintain some of her early friendships when Eliza R. Snow and other sisters from Salt Lake City came to Relief Society quarterly meetings in Ogden. In 1877, after a reorganization of the stakes, Jane became the first stake Relief Society president in the Church. She served in that position for thirty-one years. She was also first counselor to Zina D. H. Young in the general Relief Society presidency for thirteen of those years.

170As committed suffragists, Jane Richards and her daughter-in-law Emily represented LDS women in the National Council of Women and the National Woman Suffrage Association. They both played prominent roles in preparing the Utah exhibition for the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893.

171The following excerpt from Jane's reminiscences, written in 1880, is seasoned with many years of devotion to the Church, during which her faith became firm. Her contributions to the growth and welfare of the Church, and particularly to the women of the Church, had by that time become numerous and well recognized.

171Jane's account is less a narrative than a series of descriptive statements. More historically oriented than some of the other reminiscences, it maintains a greater emotional distance. She describes the trying scenes of the martyrdom almost dispassionately: "I should have spoken of the excitement and distress that prevailed in Nauvoo the night after Brother Joseph's funeral." There is no "I" in the memory, no recital of how she felt about the events she describes.

171Her husband's ecclesiastical responsibilities claim a major portion of her recollections. Only when she writes of plural marriage and the young (and pretty) new wife her husband takes does Jane touch an inner chord. Her reserved style nonetheless reveals a woman deeply immersed in Mormonism and quietly but determinedly anxious to show her loyalty to its principles.

Reminiscence of Jane Snyder Richards [^2]

In the fall of 1841 we started for Nauvoo 300 miles distant Mr. Richards returning with us. He was recalled by Pres Smith on account of ill health. We settled for a-while at Job Creek near La Harpe Ind when my Brother died. Mr Richards and I had become engaged but not married untill a year Later upon his return from a mission with Phineas Young in Cincinnati. We were married on the 18th day of December 1842 and went on to Nauvoo and settled there.

172My Fathers family came on immediately and purchased a residence near us in Nauvoo Illinois on the Miss River. The place was thinly populated and all were Mormon settlers and poor having been driven out from Caldwell Co Missouri by persecutions. The houses were cheaply built frame or brick houses, and a few log houses, a temple was in a course of building Nauvoo was divided into wards and each ward had a presiding Elder with school houses and meeting houses. In warm weather we held our meetings in the Grove as there was no place large enough to hold all the people together. If it was necessary for a large gathering in Winter it was also held there. We tried to economize and build a little two story brick house which was compleated in 1846, only three months before we were oblidged to leave it. Though we lived in it while it was building.

172Nauvoo was a very beautiful place its name signifies ["]beautiful," and was named by the prophet Joseph Smith. I[t] was situated at the head of the rapids at the foot of which the town of Keokuk was situated on the opposite side of the River. The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith I recognized him from a dream I had had. He had shuch an angelic countanance as I never saw before He was then thirty Seven years of age of ordinary appearance in dress and manner. A child like appearance of innocence. His hair was of a light brown blue eyes and light complexion. His natural demeanor was quiet his character and disposition was formed by his life work. He was kind and considerate taking a personal interest in all his people. Considering every one his equal. We were regular in our attendance at the meetings. And was always anxious to hear Brother Joseph.

172At this time, I met for the first time men who afterwards became so distinguished[:] Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, John Taylor and Wilfred Woodruff, George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson & many others.

172On the 2nd of November we were blessed with a little Daughter whom we named Wealthy Corvisa. When she was three months old my Father died. When she was six months old, Mr Richards started on a Mission to England. But within four months returned to Nauvoo, not having got beyond N.Y. State. This was in May. In June on the 27th Brother Joseph Smith was murdered by the mob at Carthage. I remember perfectly well his appearance at the Grove when he delivered his last sermon. On the morrow he was to go [to] Carthage, two miles distant to answer to a charge of treason against the Goverment.

173He had previously been tried and acquited. But now he seemed impressed with the conviction that he was to meet his death and seemed at the first to shrink from going. But in this meeting he told his people that he was innocent of any charge that could be brought against him. But if he must go, He would go like a man and if he should die, He would die like a man. He was promised protection to and from Nauvoo, by the Goverment and was too confiding in their promise. Among those who accompanied him were John Taylor his Brother Hiram & Willard Richards. The remaining twelve apostles were on missionary labors in the U.S.

173They were tried and acquitted of the charges, Govenor Ford being present. The people retained President Smith and his Brother on the plea that they had more charges to bring up. The Elders remained to protect and comfort them That night. Gov Ford was in Nauvoo with a company of Soldiers assuring the Mormons of the safety of the brethren, who were at that very hour in the hands of the mob. Gov Ford was of small stature. And the Mormons had a song in which were lines. (Gov Ford he was so small He had no room for a Soul at all)

173The mob surrounded the jail and said that if the Law would not reach him, powder and ball should. He was shot and sprang out of the Window falling to the Ground dead. His brother was shot dead in prison. John Taylor was shot several times and the mob left him for dead Willard Richards escaped as by a miracle and was the only one to attend to the burial of his companions and the affairs of his distracted people at home. As soon as word reached Nauvoo of the terable tragedy a company was formed who went out to meet and bring back the victims the mob had dispersed at once upon accomplishing their feindish crime.

173Our people felt uneasy which was the way they learned so quickly about the trouble. Willard Richards undertook to send us word but as he had no sympathizers. No one would carry the intelligence Some of our people went into the place and discovered the truth.

174A proclamation was published and generally circulated calling back all the Elders who were sent out on missions to return to Nauvoo, and it was in responce to this call that Elder Richards returned. There was shuch a feeling of hatred that letters directed to Nauvoo would not be delivered. And so I had heard of nothing from my husband since his departure.

174Upon the return of the Apostles and Elders a meeting was called and by an unanimous vote Brigham Young was chosen President as he stood on the stand he said he felt as though he would rather sit in sack cloth and ashes for a month than appear before the people. But then loneliness seemed to require somebody to step forward and he felt constrained to do so. And we knew he was [to be president] because he had the voice and manner of Joseph at the time as hundreds can testify.

174I should have spoken of the excitement and distress that prevailed in Nauvoo the night after Brother Joseph funeral. Word was brought to us from the Prairies that the mob was coming in to exterminate the whole Fraternity. all night men were on guard and woman and children prepared for flight.

174Even the Dogs howled and manifested great uneasiness and hourly we thought we heard the noise of horsemen. At midnight a terrific thunder storm broke on us. So unusual in its violence that as we were afterwards told it drove the mob back. A thousand men we were told were on their way bent on our destruction. But the rain wet their amunition, and so renderded them powerless, to destroy us. The mob seemed to give up further persecution at this time. They had killed our leaders and were satisfied.

174Of Hiram Smith I should have said that he was the Patriarch of the Church and one with his Younger Brother Joseph in counsel and dearly beloved by everybody in the church. Joseph Smith was the Prophet and leader.

174President Young was golden haired and blue eyed [with] a full round face, beaming with inocense. He was genial and always approachable always precise and modest in his demeanor with women and in his conversation. From the moment he was placed in this position the people loved him and were grateful to him for the protection he should give them. He had before been prominent a leader of the Quorum of the Twelve apostles. Now John Taylor succeeded him in that office.

175Matters went on more quietely in Nauvoo untill the fall of 1845 when the mob began to burn all about us stacks of Grain and fields and settlements and driving the families from their homes night or day. Burning their Homes, but not attempting destruction of life unless they met resistance. This was at Green plains and on the outskirts of Nauvoo, fifteen or twenty miles distant. The mob said they would drive all into Nauvoo and all Nauvoo into the Mississippi River.

175Early in the winter of [18]45 it was decided by President Young that the church should move farther west the temple was still being built according to the revelation. But was not entirely finished untill spring. A portion of it was dedicated by President Young during the winter and meetings held there. Late in the spring and after Pres Young and the majority were gone it was finally dedicated. It was in Feb and March that the greater portion of the population had succeeded in crossing the Miss River crossing on the Ice in order to save ferriage. poorly fitted out and travelling but a few miles at a time. We were among the last to go. The mob harrassed and threatened and tried to arrest Brigham Young and he thought it expediant to leave.

175Among my woman friends at Nauvoo I must mention Mrs. Julia Farnsworth, Mrs. Leavitt Kind and motherly always ready and helpful Whenever my husband or I was sick. Mrs Fish Mrs Bilate [Vilate] Kimball Mrs Jeannetta Richards [Willard Richards's wife] very intelligent and kind and respected by everybody. Mrs John Taylor. Mrs Phobe Woodruff and Mrs. Rockwood Mrs Jeannetta Richards died just before our start from Nauvoo.

175My Husband returned to nauvoo when my baby was ten months old, about a week after Joseph Smiths death. He went to work as carpenter at once on the temple and on our house. Which as I said was completed only three months before we were oblidged to leave it. While my husband was away I spent part of my time with his parents and part of the time with my Mother. I had met Mr Richards parents for the first time this winter. They had just come to Nauvoo. Father Phineas Richards I found was a man of strong character firm in his religious convictions and consistent In Mother Richards I found a noble hearted woman. Who gave me a Daughters place in her home. and in her love. I was also very warmly attached to the Brothers and sister of my Husband.

176A few months previous to Joseph smiths death he had recieved a revelation in reguard to Polygamy and Hyram Smith had talked of it in confidence with my husband who mentioned it to me, though I spoke of it to no one. It seems that Joseph Smith had taken some more wives during these months. But the revelation required that he should do it without publicity at this time, as the mob spirit was already so much excited without this having been thought of at all. It was not on this account he was persecuted as it was not known untill after his death.

176The celestial marriage or sealing were not solemnized untill it could be done in the temple although with Joseph Smith it neccessarily was done elsewhare as the temple was not then ready for use. During this winter and previous to the company starting [for the West], Mr Richards took his second wife, Elizabeth McFate. Polygamy was now made known to us for the first time and while the majority of the Church were made acquainted with the doctrine it was only practically entered into by few. In my case it came at first thought as a strange thing and I was uncertain as to the result. But was satisfied that it was a sacred revelation and that my religion required its acceptance. This wife Elizabeth was young (about 17 and pretty) and amiable very considerate and kind to me Never in our associating together was there an unkind word between us. I was in delicate health and from the time she first entered my home three or four days after her marriage she seemed only concerned to relieve me of trouble and labor. She was ready to take hold and do any-thing always asking me for direction. We lived in our two story brick house she occupying the upper portion.

177To those in the church who knew of the doctrine, I always spoke of her as Mrs Elizabeth Richards, but even now it was not publicly talked about. I knew of other Families at this time living in Polygamy. But as yet it was a new thing. I was sick some of the time and Elizabeth would be very attentive and kind and interested to do what she could for my little Daughter Wealthy. We lived happily together and indulged no evil or Jealous feelings towards each other. In the latter part of May we sold our house which we had built with shuch sacrifice denying ourselves in every way to save enough to build and now we sold it for the paltry consideration of two yoke of half broken cattle and an old wagon. Taking with us two cows one trunk of clothing but little Furniture and scanty provisions to last if Possible untill next spring. Principally bread stuffs no tea or sugar or luxuries of any kind A neighbor a Gentile Mr Cheesbro very considerately gave me one pound of tea which through sickness and great suffering was about all the subtenance [sustenance] I had for some time.

177We left our home before we were ready to start on our journeying for the mob was so threatening that I dared not remain longer. We camped out on the other side of the River for six weeks and about July 1st started West.

Original is in the Jane Richards Papers in Richards Family Collection, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
