Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

178Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward

178Elizabeth Terry was born in Palmyra, New York, in 1814, and two years later her family moved to Canada. Elizabeth's sojourn in Palmyra overlapped the residence of the Joseph Smith family there by about a year. The Terrys settled in Albion, Ontario, Canada, where Elizabeth received a meager education in a Sunday School because the families throughout the area were too scattered for a daily school. When she was sixteen, Elizabeth married Francis Kirby, a tavern keeper, who turned out to be a companion she "did not wish to have for life."

178Always of a religious bent, Elizabeth became a Baptist, but after she heard the message of the LDS missionaries in 1837, she was determined to become a Mormon. Only after strenuous pleadings did her husband give Elizabeth permission to be baptized. In 1838 she and her parents and siblings became members of the Church. The rest of her family then migrated to Missouri and the next year to Illinois. Elizabeth remained behind with her husband, who immediately began to harass her because of the Church. An unsuccessful trip to Nauvoo to see about working with his father-in-law intensified his opposition to the Mormons.

178In 1842, keeping a promise he had made to her father, Francis allowed Elizabeth to visit her family in Nauvoo, where she hoped "to see the Prophet Joseph Smith and ask him whether [she] should go back to Kirby or not." She did not meet the Prophet but did arrange an interview with Hyrum Smith, who advised her to return to her husband. Before she reached home, however, Elizabeth learned that Francis had suddenly died. She was shocked and saddened despite the difficulties of their marriage. She closed his business affairs, sold their property, and returned to Nauvoo.

179The extract that follows, taken from a longer reminiscence, begins with Elizabeth's return to Nauvoo and includes references to John Heward, a friend from Albion, whom she married in Nauvoo. Though Elizabeth is not one of the more familiar women of this period, her experiences paralleled theirs and her personal consecration to the building of the Kingdom is clearly evident in her account.

179After leaving Nauvoo, Elizabeth and John Heward joined one of the first companies to reach the Salt Lake Valley. They suffered many privations during their first years in Utah. In 1855 they settled in Draperville (present-day Draper), where Elizabeth died in 1878. She and John had eight children.

179Until 1859 Elizabeth kept a diary (its present whereabouts is unknown), on which she based her reminiscence. Throughout her reminiscence she often omits details since, she reminds her family, they can be found in her diary. She wrote both the reminiscence and her diary, she said, "for the benefit of my children."

179After she had written so regularly for so many years, it is unfortunate that Elizabeth ended her diary so abruptly. It is possible that by 1859 her life had settled into a more stable pattern, and the need or desire to preserve it in writing seemed less imperative than during the tumultuous events that preceded the exodus to the West.

Reminiscence of Elizabeth Terry Kirby Heward [^1]

I arrived at my father's house July ?; he was then living in Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois. I felt to rejoice very much and was very thankful to the Lord for his exceeding great mercy in bringing me safely to my friends and to the body of the church. On this same day Brother James Emmett's son was killed with lightening. Their house was not far from father's, so mother and I went to see him. It had struck him on the breast, making a brown spot about four inches in diameter. He was standing in the door when he was struck. I believe he was about nine years old. There was only the one flash of lightening during the whole shower and the thunder was not very heavy.

180I am only making a brief sketch of what occured from time to time. [Elizabeth makes occasional reference to or copies directly from her diary.] August 13th I was baptized for Kirby and his mother Ann Waples, his Uncle William Kirby, his Aunt Charlotte Foster, and his sister Nicholas Kirby, all were dead, but this work all had to be done again. [^2] It was [a] very sickly time, so I spent a great portion of my time working for the sick.

180September 6th I was at a prayer meeting and Sister Wheeler sung in tongues and gift of interpretation was given to me and we had a joyful time indeed. I never missed a meeting when it was in my power to go. At this time I was living with Bro. Samuel Clark. They lived a short distance from father's so I went home every night for I knew if I should lie down and sleep among the sick I should be sick too. In this way I was able to take care of the sick for some time and had better health than I had in Canada. Sister Clark had a daughter born and on the 2nd of October 1843 her daughter Emma Clark died. October 9 I went out of Nauvoo a few miles on the prairie to take care of my aunt Elizabeth Terry, wife of my Uncle Timothy Terry. I stayed there until November 4, 1843. I liked to live with them for they were very agreeable and good to live with and this time passed away very pleasantly.

180November 18, 1843. My father and mother and my brother Jacob and his wife and myself went to Bro. Hyrum Smith's and got our Patriarchal Blessings of which we have the copies. About this time, it was taught in our meetings that we would have to sacrifice our idols in order to be saved. I could not think of anything that would grieve me to part with in my possession, except Francis Kirby's watch. So, I gave it to help build the Nauvoo Temple and everything else that I could possibly spare and the last few dollars that I had in the world, which altogether amounted to nearly $50, I believe, but I kept no account of it, for I trusted Bro. Whithead, who kept it, for he was the clerk at that time. I here insert my Patriarchal Blessing:

181A Patriarchal Blessing on the head of Elizabeth Kirby, daughter of Parshall and Hannah Terry, born at Palmyra, Wayne County, New York, November 17, 1814

181Sister Elizabeth, I lay my hands upon your head in the name of Jesus of Nazareth and place and seal a blessing upon your head that shall come to pass in future, for in the future is your reward and your last days shall be your best days; for the desires of your heart and you shall have peace in your habitation and tranquility in your places of abode. And for your heart of integrity you shall be blessed in the covenant of grace, being a daughter of Abraham and of lineal descent therefore the blessing of your father shall be yours to go down with your posterity. And you shall be blessed in all your avocations of life, and in your possessions and tenements, in your basket and in your store. And [you] shall have communion with the Holy Spirit, even the spirit of inspiration where with you shall be inspired, and your footsteps directed and the hand of God shall be extended and mercy, wherein you shall have deliverance more than in days that are past where you had experience in its administerations, wherein He has put forth His finger to bless you not withstanding the tribulations, afflictions and sorrows of your heart.

181Therefore, now let your heart be comforted in the witness that God has been mindful of you, and the same hand of providence shall smooth the path and make easy your way in these last days and shall bring your final possessions, principalities, and [you shall] have dominion, immortality and venerated in the lineage of your posterity from generation to generation, and as to your days and years, they are numbered and shall be many. These blessings I seal upon your head, even so, Amen.

181Given by Hyrum Smith, Patriarch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, November 18, 1843.

181I spent a great part of my time sewing and washing and working for the sick, but made my home at my father's house. There were a great many of the Saints that died, and it grieved me very much that the following lines came into my mind and seemed to press on me to write them:

182Oh, all ye Saints of Latter Days, I'd have you give ear, Unto the chosen Prophet's voice, In this the latter year. Oh, keep his precepts and his laws, For they to you are given, Just as received from Jesus Christ, In revelation given. For Joseph was ordained of God, Stands to you as a Savior, If you will obey his voice Confident believing, And you should hold him up by faith, In prayer before the father, In Christ the great Redeemer's name, For of good, he's the giver. In bands of virtue, truth, and love And covenant that eternal You'll ride triumphant over hill And all things that infernal. Oh, all you lovers of the truth, That is in meekness given, May you with Joseph as your head, Receive your crowns in heaven.

182My mind had been somewhat down for sometime and on the 25th of January I was reading in the Book of Mormon where it says: "Thy watchmen shall lift of their voices and with the voice together shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion. Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem, for the Lord hath comforted His people." [Mosiah 12:22-23.] When I read these words, my whole soul was filled with joy and hope in the great mercy and goodness of God in the redemption of the human family. I began immediately to sing in tongues and sang several verses; this was the first time I had that gift, so I truly rejoiced in the Spirit and praised the Lord. I passed a great part of my time in going to meetings, working for the poor and taking care of the sick. I wrote to Samuel Hackett and my sister, asking them to come to Nauvoo to make us a visit and to bring my things that I left at Belvidere, but they could not come. So they got John Heward, who was living a few miles from there, to come. He arrived at Nauvoo on the 11th of May.

183I had been acquainted with him for several years. My parents were old and my father's health was poor, and I was afraid that I should become chargeable to them. As the first year's rent of my property in Canada had to go to pay a debt, I knew it would be sometime before I could get anything from there to help me to live, so when John Heward saw the circumstances under which I was placed, he told me if I was willing he would buy a place in Nauvoo and go back to Belvidere and sell his farm and come to Nauvoo to live. I knew that I could not obtain my blessings as I was, so thought perhaps it was the best thing that I could do. So on the 20th of May, 1844, we went to Bro. Hyrum Smith and got him to marry us.

183John bought Bro. Timonth King's house and lot and his cow and on the 5th of June, John started back to settle up his affairs in Boon County, Illinois and I went to my old occupation taking care of the sick. I almost always worked for those who were very poor so that I received but very little for work besides my board. On June 16th I went and heard Bro. Joseph the Prophet preach to a very large congregation in the rain; I thought I would stay and listen as long as he would stay and preach; though it rained very hard, all of the people seemed to feel as I did.

183A short time before this a filthy nuisance of printing press was destroyed in Nauvoo. Many falsehoods had been published against the Church in it. The editors raised a mob and said if they could not get Joseph Smith, they would destroy the whole city for revenge.

183The first thought that came into my mind when I heard they were after the Prophet Joseph with a writ was "Curse the man that will give him up." But for the love he had for the Church, he gave himself up to save the brethern, also his brother Hyrum and others went with him to Carthage, and on the 27th of June, 1844, our beloved brothers Joseph and Hyrum were murdered in Carthage jail. But as this is all written and well known in the Church, I will not make a full account of it here, and will only say it was a time of solemnity and the deepest mourning. I felt as though I could willing go and help avenge their blood.

184On July 19, 1844, John Heward came home. He had sold his place and all that was on it to his brother William Heward, but had to wait a year for the first payment; so this kept us quite destitute. John went to work in the harvest field, for which he has never to this day (1853) received his pay, but he worked so hard in the hot weather and bad water to drink that he came home July 20th and went to Father John Smith and got his Patriarchal Blessing.

184While the Prophet Joseph was alive, he was President of the Church and Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon were his counselors. At the time of his death the twelve were on missions and Sidney Rigdon had gone east to try to make a better living for himself and family than he could in Nauvoo. He had already got tired of living with the Saints and suffering the persecutions that Joseph and Hyrum and the rest of the Church had to undergo, but when he heard that they were dead, he came to Nauvoo as soon as possible to set himself up as the head of the Church.

184On the 4th of August 1844, Sidney preached to a large congregation and tried to win their hearts with great swelling words. He told them that as the church was fourteen years old, they must now choose a guardian. I thought, when he said this, that "I have chosen Bro. Brigham Young for my guardian sometime ago, and shall not make any other choice now". I had written a letter to him for that purpose, of which I have a copy. He told them that their whole salvation depended on the choice they would make. Everybody seemed to be in the greatest trouble to know who should be the head of the Church. Bro. Rigdon had only given them three days in which to make their choice. Bro. Parley P. Pratt had got home by this time and he told Sidney not to be in such a hurry. Brigham Young came home before the time expired and just in time to save the Church, for he knew that the Prophet Joseph had given the Twelve their endowments before they left Nauvoo and had told them that the whole responsibility of the Church would rest upon them. So on the 8th of August, there was a meeting called and the Twelve Apostles were chosen to preside over the whole church. This brought peace again to the Church, all except a few who followed Sidney Rigdon for he conspired against the Twelve and drew off all that he could. Indeed, he carried his plot to such an extreme that on the 8th of Sept. 1844, he was cut off from the Church. This was truly a time of trouble and sorrow, but the Spirit of the Lord whispered peace to the faithful.

185John became a great deal worse and I was sick with ague and neither of us was able to fetch water to drink. Sometimes when I heard children playing in the street I would step out and hire them with melons and cucumbers, to bring us some water. We had little to eat besides corn meal mush and milk and this gave John diarrhea so bad that he could not walk across the room unless I helped him. I was a little better soon, so that I took some melons and traded them off for about a peck of apples. The next day I traded half of the apples for four pounds of flour. We had no team and it was very hard for us to [get] wood. John was sick a long time, but on the 19th of October he was much better so that he took a little corn on a wheelbarrow to mill, but this was too much for him and it made him worse so that I was obliged to take the wheelbarrow, which was not our own, and fetch the meal from the mill. This grieved me very much to think that we were reduced to such poverty. In this way, our time passed until January 6, 1845, when I received a check from my agent Richard Carr in Canada for $90 on the New York Bank. After some little trouble, I got it exchanged and gave $10 to help build the temple and $1.25 to the Bishop for the poor and also redeemed a small keepsake, which I had given as a pledge for money enough to get the letter out of the office.

185January 18, 1845, I received under the hands of Father John Smith . . . but as I have a daily journal of my life, which my children can read at any time, I will not give but a small account of the things which transpired from day to day, and John Heward says he is going to write a history of his life, so I expect he will write many things which I do not mention.

186September, 1845, the mob began to break out and burn thousands of places belonging to the brethern, also stealing their cattle and driving the Saints to Nauvoo, and doing all the mischief they could out in the branches.

186December 1, 1845. My daughter Rachel was born. I did live and that was all. But could not sit up for about six weeks. On January 27, 1846 I went with John to a feast held by the 14th Quorum of Seventies. On February 9th John started for Canada on foot, a distance of 800 or 900 miles to sell my land. John got a little boy, Alma Millet, to stay with me while he was gone. Our house was open and the weather was very cold and Rachel was taken very sick on the 20th Feb. While I was sick, my breasts were so bad that she had to be weaned, so now I had to get up in the night to feed her in the cold and would set some milk for her by the bed and [it] would freeze in a few minutes. Then Alma was taken sick and he was so bad father Millet had to take him home on the 25th of Feb. Then I was left alone with my little sick child. Sometimes a little girl named Katharine Alred, daughter of Lige Alred, would come and stay with me in the daytime and was very kind to me. Rachel grew worse all the time. On the 4th of March, my brother Jacob D. Terry's wife came and stayed with me until eleven o'clock at night, and we thought the child was getting better. I attended her until four o'clock and then I fell asleep and when I awoke at six o'clock she was dead. I trembled so that I could hardly stand, but I wrapped her in a blanket and took her to my father's to ask them if she was really dead. Mother said she was dead. I could not tell what killed her unless it was inflamation of the lungs. Bro. Huntington buried her out on the prairie in the buring ground east of the Temple about three miles.

186I was very lonesome until the 17th of April, 1846, when John came home. He had sold the property in Canada for $700, which was less than half what it was worth, but that was the best he could do with it, for he was a Mormon and Mr. Johnson said he had possession and talked of not giving him anything for it. But his wife said the money was hers and she would buy it and send the money as soon as I should sign the deed and send it back to her. The whole Church in Nauvoo had entered into a covenant to give all that they had to help the poor from Nauvoo. This was done at the fall conference and at this time the Twelve were all gone from Nauvoo, except Bro. Orson Hyde, so we went to him for counsel. He said everyone that had property and did not help the poor would be cursed and that we had better [place] writings into the hands of Bros. Babbitt, Haywood, and Fullmer, who were trustees for the whole church in Nauvoo. This we did, believing with all confidence, that he would do what was right with it. When it came it lacked $73 of the amount agreed upon. Bro. Babbit kept $227 to help the poor and I gave $100 to my father to help him for Nauvoo. I believed I did right with the money, but some of my friends were angry because we let the trustee have the money to help the poor instead of giving it to them. They said they were poor and had done a great deal for the church and ought to be helped. But we thought the trustees ought to know who were in need of help better than we did. On the 8th of June we started from Nauvoo and followed the Heads of the Church to the west. June 20th, we camped alone on the prairie about two miles from wood or water for we did not know where the camping places were. In the night I was sick with cholera morbus. I suffered very much and it seemed as if I should die for a drink. John laid hands on me and through mercy of the Lord I got better so that we were able to go on in the morning. On June 25th we overtook Thomas Clark and family; this was the first time we ever saw them. We traveled with them to the Bluffs. On the 25th we got to Mount Posgah. I gave Bro. Clark two sovereigns, which is nearly ten dollars, for a cow; cattle were cheap then.

On June 30th we started again on our journey. July 4th we met Bros. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, who were going back to Pisgah to get volunteers to go to California in the United States Army to fight the Spaniards. Yes, my heart aches while I write it. After they had burned the houses and robbed the Saints of almost all they possessed, then drove them into the wilderness at the point of a bayonnet amongst the wild savages on the western prairies and desert; yes, I repeat, after the wicked had done all this, instead of the President of the US raising up and avenging our wrongs, he sent men after us calling for five hundred of our men to go into the US service and as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints never had transgressed any but commanded they yield to this call, also these five hundred men left wives and children without houses or provisions to perish with cold and at mercy of the wild Indians, to go and secure their vile persecutors, who had driven them from the lands of their nativity endeared by the graves of their fathers, who had suffered and bled by the side of General Washington when he fought and obtained freedom from British oppression and formed a Constitution and pursuits of happiness with liberty to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences. Yes, the Saints have suffered all this because they have dared to believe that the Lord has spoken from the heavens again and revealed his will concerning men on the earth and also sent a Holy Angel with the gospel and the priesthood which he conferred upon Joseph Smith without which no one could be saved.

This excerpt is taken from "A Sketch of the Life of Elizabeth Terry Heward," typescript copy, LDS Church Archives. It is also published in a family history, "Parshall Terry Family History," typescript, compiled by Mr. and Mrs. Terry Lund (Salt Lake City, 1956, 1963), 66-78.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
