Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

189Sarah Melissa Granger Kimball

189Sarah Melissa Granger Kimball lived a long and productive life as an energetic, innovative, and faithful member of the Church. Born in Phelps, New York, on December 29, 1818, she moved to Kirtland, Ohio, with her family in 1833, after converting to Mormonism. Her intellectual curiosity soon demonstrated itself when she began attending the School of the Prophets in Kirtland. Throughout her life she was known as "a deep religious thinker, and reasoner, and a student of the Bible, Book of Mormon and other books of a similar kind." [^1] By her own habit of study she hoped to be a model for other women in the study of church doctrine and consistently urged them to read the scriptures.

189 Sarah Melissa Granger Kimball.

189When Sarah was twenty-one she married Hiram Kimball, a friendly non-Mormon, in Kirtland, and they then settled in Nauvoo, where Hiram had previously established himself as a successful merchant. She was thus much more comfortably situated than many of the Saints during Nauvoo's early days of settlement.

In 1842 Sarah's zeal to assist the builders of the Nauvoo Temple led to the organization of the Relief Society, which she explains in the following account. She served for more than forty years as president of the Fifteenth Ward Relief Society in Salt Lake City. An innovator of uncommon talent, she was instrumental in setting the pattern for Relief Society halls (the upstairs for art and science, the downstairs for trade and commerce) and for granaries to store Relief Society wheat. She also played a role in raising and distributing funds to support immigration, the Deseret Hospital, teacher training, temple building, the furnishing of chapels, and numerous other worthy causes. During her term as a ward Relief Society president, she also served as secretary in the Relief Society general presidency under Eliza R. Snow and as a vice president under Zina D. H. Young when the Relief Society was incorporated.

190But Relief Society was only part of Sarah Kimball's lifetime interests. When her husband died in 1863, she became self-sufficient by teaching school, an experience that strengthened her conviction of the need for more employment opportunities for women. She also supported the intellectual development of women by offering Relief Society lessons on such topics as physiology, the Constitution, and the Atonement. She was known as a fervent advocate for women's rights, there being "no stronger minded woman in all Israel than Sarah Kimball," according to one contemporary biographer. [^2] As an active suffragist, she presided over the Utah Territorial Woman Suffrage Association and successfully lobbied the constitutional convention delegates to include woman suffrage in the state constitution in 1895. She died a much-respected and revered woman on December 1, 1898. Her contributions to the Church and her work in behalf of women place her among the most influential of early Mormon women.

190A personal economizer, she was liberal to the needy; a model homemaker, she was an advocate for women's rights; a devoted mother and foster mother, she was an innovator and entrepreneur, making the Relief Society a vehicle to increased opportunity for woman's development. Identified by one associate as "a statesman, a philanthropist, and a missionary," [^3] Sarah Kimball earned the respect shown her throughout her adult life, and she died having seen the fulfillment of many of her goals. In the document that follows, she gives her account of the origins of the Relief Society in Nauvoo, the principles on which it was established, and its relationship to the Church.

Relief Society OrganizedHCReminiscence of Sarah Melissa Granger Kimball [^4]

Relief Society OrganizedHCMarch 17th 1882

Relief Society OrganizedHC191Early Relief Society Reminisence

Relief Society OrganizedHC191Sister Geo. Godard invited a goodly no. of brethren and sisters to their pleasant home in 14th Ward S. L. City to celebrate the 40th (fortieth) Annaversary of the organisation of the Relief Society by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Relief Society OrganizedHC191The following brief account of the origin of the Society was given by Sarah M. Kimball.

Relief Society OrganizedHC191March 1, 1842 the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints was poor in worldly goods and earnest in devotion to the labors required. The Nauvoo Temple walls were about three feet high. Strong appeals were being made by the President of the Church and others for help to forward the work.

Relief Society OrganizedHC191Miss Cook a maiden lady Seemstress, one day in conversation with me on the subject of a recent appeal for provisions, clothing, beding and general supplies for the workmen and their families, remarked that she would be pleased to contribute needle work if it could be made available. I proffered material for her to make up, and suggested that others might feel as we did. We then agitated the subject of organising a Sewing Society. The object of which should be to aid in the erection of the Temple.

Relief Society OrganizedHC191About a dozen of the neighboring Sisters by invitation met in my parlor the following Thursday and the subject was further discused, and approved. Sister Rigden suggested that Sister E. R. Snow be invited to take part and to assist in getting up a constitution and Bye-laws, the speaker was delegated to wait on Miss Snow and solicit her aid which was cheerfully and efficiently rendered. A Constitution and bye laws was prepared and submitted to President Joseph Smith. He pronounced it the best constitution that he ever read, then remarked this is not what the sisters want, there is something better for them. I have desired to organise the sisters in the order of the Priesthood. I now have the key by which I can do it.

Relief Society OrganizedHC192The organisation of the Church of Christ was never perfect until the women were organised. He then said I want you (E. R. Snow) to tell the sisters who delegated you that their offering is accepted of the Lord and will result in blessing to them. He further said I want the adjourned meeting to meet with me and a few of the brethren in the Masonic Hall on Thursday at 1 P.M. next, and I will organise you in the Order of the Priesthood after the pattern of the Church. And I wish Emma to be nominated and elected President of the organisation in fulfilment of the revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants which Says She is an Elect Lady. An Elect Lady is one who is elected.

Relief Society OrganizedHC192 Sarah M. Kimball

The original is in the Relief Society Record, 1880-1892, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Eliza A. Cheney to her Family, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 14, 1841, in Eliza Jane Cheney Rawson, "Historical Letters and Sketches, 1919," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^4] Ellen Douglas (Parker) to her family, Nauvoo, Illinois, April 14, 1844, typescript copy, LDS Church Archives.
