Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

193Mercy Rachel Fielding Thompson

193"A veteran Mother in Israel," as one contemporary characterized her, [^1] Mercy Thompson embodied the attributes of that honored title: faith in the gospel and service in the kingdom. Born in Honidon, England, near Preston, where the gospel was first introduced to Great Britain in 1837, Mercy emigrated to Canada with her brother Joseph in 1832. They were joined by their sister Mary two years later.

193 Women temple workers. Mercy Rachel Fielding Thompson is seated third from left.

193In 1836 the three Fieldings accepted baptism after hearing the message of Parley P. Pratt, and immediately thereafter they moved to Kirtland. Joseph Fielding was selected to be one of the first missionaries to carry the gospel to England the following year.

193In Kirtland Mercy met and married Robert Thompson, who, before his untimely death in Nauvoo in 1841, served as secretary to Joseph Smith. Mercy and her infant daughter then joined the household of her sister Mary and Mary's husband, Hyrum Smith.

193In 1844 Mercy received her endowments from the Prophet Joseph Smith and began her long service as a temple worker in the Nauvoo Temple. She and her young daughter resided in the temple while Mercy either officiated in the ordinances, served as clerk, washed and ironed the clothing, or supervised the cooking for temple workers.

194She migrated to Utah with her widowed sister Mary and continued her ordinance work in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. Known for her generosity in contributing to Relief Society charities, she was treasurer of the Sixteenth Ward Relief Society for twenty-one years. A highlight of her later years was a visit to Canada in 1871, where she renewed acquaintance with friends, and a trip to England in 1872 with a group on its way to Palestine, led by George A. Smith. She remained in England with family members for nearly a year before returning to Utah. She exchanged letters with her brother James, a minister in Preston who had initially been friendly to the Mormon missionaries introduced to him by his brother Joseph when the missionaries arrived in Preston in 1837. He turned against the Church, however, when many of his flock converted to Mormonism. Throughout their long correspondence (of which only a few letters remain), Mercy and James each tried to convince the other of the truth of his or her own religious claims.

194As a temple worker, Mercy hoped for the fulfillment of a long-held dream: to live to see the completion of the Salt Lake Temple. After forty years of construction, it was finally dedicated in April of 1893. Mercy died the following September.

194Mercy Thompson left few written records, but the following undated account relates a remarkable dream and its significance in her own life and in the development of Latter-day Saint doctrine.

Reminiscence of Mercy Rachel Fielding Thompson [^2]

In 1843, I could not tell the Month I was sleeping with my Sister Mary Smith Brother Hyrum being absent on business when I dreamed that I was in a garden and my late dear Husband Robert B. Thompson (who died August 24th 1841) came to me and the Marriage vow was repeated by someone I cannot tell who and were Husband and Wife I awoke in the Morning deeply impressed by this Dream which I could not interpret.

195Brother Hyrum came home in the Evening being somewhat in rather a meditative mood he said he had had a very remarkable Dream. he said his late Wife Jerusha Barton [Barden] and her two Children, viz. Mary and Hyrum [all three deceased] were brought and presented to him on his arrival at home he found a Message had been sent from his Brother Joseph requesting him to come to his house immediately he went and to his amazement found that a Revelation had been given stating that Marriages contracted for time only lasted for time and were no more one untill a new contract was made, for All Eternity and for those who had been sepperated by Death a Proxy would have to be obtained to Act for them of cource no time was lost by those who had an opportunity of securing their Companions and the first presidency and as many of the Twelve as were [available] and the Presiding Bishop of the Church were all invited to meet in an Upper Room in the Prophets House each Man bringing his Wife of course Such a wedding I am quite sure never witnessed before in this generation. Of course my case was a singular one and had to be considered but the Prophet soon concluded that his Brother Hyrum had the best right to act for Robert B. Thompson. My Sister Mary Smith of course standing with Hyrum for Jerusha Barden perhaps some may think I could envy Queen Victoria in some of her glory. Not while my name stands first on the list in this Dispensation of women seal[e]d to a Dead Husband through devine Revelation.

A photocopy of the original is in possession of the author, courtesy of Carling Malouf.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
