Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

196Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney

196One of the most revered Mormon women of her time, Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney, endearingly known as "Mother Whitney," was also called "the comforter" by those who received blessings of peace and healing at her hand.

196 Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney.

196At the first patriarchal blessing meeting held in the Kirtland Temple, she received the gift of "inspirational singing," as she called it. "Thou hast been blest of the Lord by the gift of faith in singing the songs of Zion," Isaac Morley revealed in the blessing. Joseph Smith called her "the sweet songstress of Zion" and promised her that if she remained faithful, she would never lose the gift of singing in the pure Adamic tongue. Just a year before her death, she sang for her friends, exercising that spiritual gift for the last time.

196Elizabeth Ann Smith was born the day after Christmas in 1800 in Derby, New Haven County, Connecticut, to Gibson and Polly Bradley Smith. When she was eighteen she traveled with a maiden aunt, Sarah Smith, to the Ohio frontier, an unlikely venture for two single women. There she met Newel K. Whitney, an enterprising young fur trader and businessman. In 1822 they were married, settling in Kirtland, Ohio, where Newel became a partner with Sidney Gilbert in a successful mercantile business. Newel and Elizabeth Ann were attracted to the Campbellites, a millenarian sect, but were soon disillusioned and prayed for spiritual direction. A divine manifestation prepared them for acceptance of the gospel, and they eagerly accepted the Mormon message. The Whitneys provided lodgings for Joseph and Emma Smith when the Prophet first arrived in Kirtland in 1831, and the two couples became immediate friends and close associates in the Church.

197In 1838 the Whitneys left their comfortable home, Newel's thriving business, and longtime friends to follow the Church westward to Missouri. They each reluctantly left a family member in Kirtland who had been unable to accept the truths of the gospel: Elizabeth's surrogate mother, her aunt Sarah, and Newel's brother and business adviser, Samuel. There was heartache on both sides, as neither could understand the choices made by the other.

197Sojourning without her husband during the winter of 1838 in Carrollton, Illinois, Elizabeth and her children were reunited with Newel in Nauvoo the next year, following a siege of the ague. But Nauvoo offered opportunity for a new beginning, and after living for a period in the Prophet's store, the Whitneys obtained a home of their own. Elizabeth was one of the founding members of the Relief Society when it was organized in 1842 and became a counselor to Emma Smith, the society's first president. In 1843 she was the second woman, after Emma, to receive the temple ordinances. Joseph Smith officiated in the rites, which were performed in the upper room of his store, since the temple was not yet completed. In January 1844 Elizabeth Ann gave birth to the first child "born heir to the Holy Priesthood in the New and Everlasting Covenant." [^1] She was among the first women to perform temple ordinances in the Nauvoo Temple when it was completed in 1845, working daily during the winter of 1845-46 to enable worthy Saints to receive their endowments before leaving for the West.

197In 1850, just two years after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Elizabeth was left a widow with nine children. Her grief was assuaged through service in the Endowment House when Brigham Young called her to take charge of the "woman's department." Only when her health failed late in life did she discontinue her ministrations there. When the first general presidency of the Relief Society in Utah was organized in 1880, Elizabeth, then eighty years old, was called to be Eliza R. Snow's counselor. She served until her death two years later.

198Two floral tributes at her funeral bespeak the characteristics that made her one of the best-known women in Israel. A harp, beautifully woven with colorful flowers, epitomized her inspirational singing, and a sickle, wreathed in white flowers and a sheaf of wheat, symbolized her beloved Relief Society. Little known to a present generation, Elizabeth Ann Whitney was a stalwart of her own.

Relief Society OrganizedHCReminiscence of Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney [^2]

In the Fall of 1838 we left Kirtland, and with what we considered necessary for our immediate wants we commenced our journey to Far West. Our family then consisted of six children, the two youngest being very delicate in health. My eldest son was then fifteen years of age. While we were on our way, a report reached us that the Saints in Missouri were being driven, mobbed and persecuted in a most shocking and terrible manner; we were careful to investigate the matter, in order to ascertain its truth. We went on to St. Louis and waited there until we could obtain the facts in relation to the matter, which we soon learned were most startlingly true. We considered it safest to go over into Illinois to spend the winter, and decided upon Carrollton, Greene Co., Illinois. Here I remained with my children alone, while my husband returned to Kirtland to settle some business and wait further orders from the Prophet Joseph. We were informed the goods we had sent up to Missouri were thrown into the street, and the store burnt to the ground. My eldest son taught school while we remained there, and as the persecution was at that time most extreme, we kept quiet in regard to religion. We were kindly treated, but more particularly by two families who were our near neighbors. In the Spring my husband returned, and shortly after, accompanied by my eldest son, went up to Commerce, since called Nauvoo. At that place they found that the Prophet Joseph and many others of the Saints had settled and commenced to re-organize and sustain each other and the doctrines in which they believed. Joseph then told my husband to return to his family and as quickly as practicable join the Saints there. Meantime a man named Bellows, who had formerly known my husband in Kirtland, recognized us as the Mormon Bishop's family, and determined to have us mobbed and driven from the town; but those two families who had all the time befriended us, offered to render us assistance in getting away, by crossing the river in the night. So in a neighborhood where we had been looked upon with the greatest respect, we were treated like outlaws, and compelled to flee for safety. My husband and son returned in time to cross the river with us; when we reached the opposite bank and felt comparatively safe from our immediate enemies, I shall never forget my husband's taking off his hat, wiping the perspiration from his brow, and thanking God for our deliverance. Strange how trifling incidents like these, sometimes leave indelible impressions upon the memory which can never be effaced. From there we went up the river to Quincy, Illinois, where several families of the Saints who had been driven from Missouri were living; among these was the family of Titus Billings, one of our nearest neighbors in Kirtland; his wife was the first woman baptized in Kirtland, and is still living [1878]. We found many other friends and their families. We remained in Quincy during the winter, and passed the time rather pleasantly; my eldest son was fond of music, and so were the Billings' boys, and they used to go out together to play for parties, and thus rendered some assistance in obtaining a living, for we had left our means in Kirtland.

199Early in the Spring of 1840 we went up to Commerce, as the upper portion of the City of Nauvoo continued to be called. We rented a house belonging to Hiram Kimball, whose widow [Sarah M.] and children are residents of this city [Salt Lake City]. Here we were all sick with ague, chills and fever, and were only just barely able to crawl around and wait upon each other. Under these trying circumstances my ninth child was born. Joseph, upon visiting us and seeing our change of circumstances, urged us at once to come and share his accommodations. We felt the climate, the water, and the privations we were enduring could not much longer be borne; therefore we availed ourselves of this proposal and went to live in the Prophet Joseph's yard, in a small cottage; we soon recruited in health, and the children became more like themselves. My husband was employed in a store Joseph had built and fitted up with such goods as the people were in actual need of.

Relief Society OrganizedHC200One day while coming out of the house into the yard the remembrance of a prophecy Joseph Smith had made to me, while living in our house in Kirtland, flashed through my mind like an electric shock; it was this: that even as we had done by him, in opening our doors to him and his family when he was without a home; even so should we in the future be received by him into his house. We afterwards moved up stairs over the brick store, as it was designated. It was during our residence in the brick store that the Relief Society was organized, March 17, 1842, and I was chosen Counselor to the President of the Society, Mrs. Emma Smith. In this work I took the greatest interest, for I realized in some degree its importance, and the need of such an organization. I was also ordained and set apart under the hand of Joseph Smith the Prophet to administer to the sick and comfort the sorrowful. Several other sisters were also ordained and set apart to administer in these holy ordinances. The Relief Society then was small compared to its numbers now, but the Prophet foretold great things concerning the future of this organization, many of which I have lived to see fulfilled; but there are many things which yet remain to be fulfilled in the future of which he prophesied, that are great and glorious; and I rejoice in the contemplation of these things daily, feeling that the promises are sure to be verified in the future as they have been in the past. I trust the sisters who are now laboring in the interest of Relief Societies in Zion realize the importance attached to the work, and comprehend that upon them a great responsibility rests as mothers in Israel. President Joseph Smith had great faith in the sisters' labors, and ever sought to encourage them in the performance of the duties which pertained to these Societies, which he said were not only for benevolent purposes and spiritual improvement, but were actually to save souls. [^3] And my testimony to my sisters is that I have seen many demonstrations of the power and blessing of God through the administration of the sisters, but they should be ever humble, for through great humility comes the blessing. The Lord remembers His daughters and owns and acknowledges, in a perceptible manner, those who are striving to be faithful. I could say much to my sisters on this subject, for it is one in which I am deeply interested. I have been a living witness to the trials, sacrifices, patience and endurance of thousands of them, and my heart goes out to all those who are seeking to walk the narrow way and keep fast hold of the iron rod. The Father has great blessings in store for His daughters; fear not, my sisters, but trust in God, live your religion and teach it to your children.

201It was during the time we lived at the Brick Store that Joseph received the revelation pertaining to Celestial Marriage; also concerning the ordinances of the House of the Lord. He had been strictly charged by the angel who committed these precious things into his keeping that he should only reveal them to such persons as were pure, full of integrity to the truth, and worthy to be entrusted with divine messages; that to spread them abroad would only be like casting pearls before swine, and that the most profound secresy must be maintained, until the Lord saw fit to make it known publicly through His servants. Joseph had the most implicit confidence in my husband's uprightness and integrity of character; he knew him capable of keeping a secret, and was not afraid to confide in him, as he had been a Free Mason for many years. He therefore confided to him, and a few others, the principles set forth in that revelation, and also gave him the privilege to read it and to make a copy of it, knowing it would be perfectly safe with him. It was this veritable copy, which was preserved, in the providence of God, that has since been published to the world; for Emma (Joseph's wife) afterwards becoming indignant, burned the original, thinking she had destroyed the only written document upon the subject in existence. My husband revealed these things to me; we had always been united, and had the utmost faith and confidence in each other. We pondered upon them continually, and our prayers were unceasing that the Lord would grant us some special manifestation concerning this new and strange doctrine. The Lord was very merciful to us; He revealed unto us His power and glory. We were seemingly wrapt in a heavenly vision, a halo of light encircled us, and we were convinced in our own minds that God heard and approved our prayers and intercedings before Him. Our hearts were comforted, and our faith made so perfect that we were willing to give our eldest daughter, then only seventeen years of age, to Joseph, in the holy order of plural marriage. She had been raised in the strictest manner as regarded propriety, virtue and chastity; she was as pure in thought, in feeling and in impulse as it was possible for a young girl to be. Yet, laying aside all our traditions and former notions in regard to marriage, we gave her with our mutual consent. She was the first woman ever given in plural marriage by or with the consent of both parents. Of course these things had to be kept an inviolate secret; and as some were false to their vows and pledges, persecution arose, and caused grievous sorrow to those who had obeyed, in all purity and sincerity, the requirements of the celestial order of marriage.

202The Lord commanded his servants; they themselves did not comprehend what the ultimate course of action would be, but were waiting further developments from heaven. Meantime the ordinances of the house of the Lord were given, to bless and strengthen us in our future endeavors to promulgate the principles of divine light and intelligence; but coming in contact with all pre-conceived notions and principles heretofore taught as the articles of religious faith, it was not strange that many could not receive it; others doubted, and only a few remained firm and immovable. Among that number were my husband and myself; yet although my husband believed and was firm in teaching this Celestial order of Marriage, he was slow in practice. Joseph repeatedly told him to take a wife, or wives, but he wished to be so extremely cautious not to do what would probably have to be undone, that in Joseph's day he never took a wife. When he did so, he did it to fulfill a duty due to the principles of divine revelation as he understood his duty, and believing sincerely that every man should prove his faith by his works; but he afterwards took several wives, and with one or two exceptions, they came into the same house with me, and my children; therefore, I believe I am safe in saying that I am intimately acquainted with the practical part of polygamy.

203We learn to understand human nature by being brought into close connection with each other, and more especially when under trying and difficult circumstances; and we seldom think more unkindly of persons from gaining an insight into their real hearts and character. Instead of my opinion of women being unfavorable or my feelings unkindly in consequence of being intimately associated in family relationship with them, I am more favorably disposed to women as a class, learning more of the true nature of woman-kind than I ever could without this peculiar experience; and I am willing and ready to defend enthusiastically those of my sisters who have been genuine enough and who possessed sufficient sublimity of character, to practically live the principles of divine faith, which have been revealed in these the last days, in the establishing of the kingdom of God upon the earth. It has required sterling qualities indeed to battle with the opposition on every hand, and not be overcome.

203That this is God's work and not man's should be apparent to all those who are acquainted with the history of the saints, their persecutions, their trials, their difficulties, and the marvelous means of their deliverance,—when dangerous and various untoward circumstances environed them.

203My husband built a comfortable dwelling house on Parley Street in Nauvoo, but still we endured many privations, which in our own home in Ohio would probably never have fallen to our lot; but we always felt we must be thus tried to prepare us for future exaltation, and that we might be able to participate with those whom God had approved and owned, who "came up out of great tribulation."

203Every one acquainted with the history of our people know the terrible results of the apostacy of "Bennett, Foster and the Laws." Joseph Smith had no peace, his life was sought continually by his enemies, and this was the occasion of constant anxiety and trouble to the saints.

204The persecutions brought upon our people in Nauvoo and other places adjacent, by the wicked misrepresentations of such men as Dr. Bennett, William and Wilson Law, and others who had been members of our Church, increased rapidly. Every now and then Joseph Smith was arraigned before the magistrates on some pretext or other, and the Saints were threatened with mobs, and they felt there was no security for them because of their betrayal by designing and treacherous men.

204In January, 1844, my youngest daughter was born. She was the first child born heir to the Holy Priesthood and in the New and Everlasting Covenant in this dispensation. I felt she was doubly a child of promise, not only through the priesthood, but through Joseph's promise to me when I gave him my eldest daughter to wife. He prophesied to me that I should have another daughter, who would be a strength and support to me to soothe my declining years; and in this daughter have these words been verified. My health was very poor, but I remained strong in the faith of the Gospel, and full of courage to persevere in the latter-day work. My two youngest children were frail little tender blossoms and required the most constant care.

204During the ensuing summer a fearful and continuous storm of persecution raged, until it led to the massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; and John Taylor, who, although pierced with bullets until his life scarce hung by a single thread, afterwards recovered. After this horrible tragedy, the people sorrowed and mourned for their Patriarch and Prophet. Indeed, the terrible grief and consternation which were the result of the untimely death of these noble men was beyond description.

204The Gentiles, our opposers, thought they had destroyed our religion, overthrown our cause, and destroyed the influence of our people, and actually had accomplished all that was necessary to do away with Mormonism.

204But God's work cannot be thus ignored; another prophet, Brigham Young, was raised up to succeed Joseph, and the work rolled on. We were not allowed, however, to rest in peace; those who had apostatized from us and were filled with a spirit of rebellion against the work sought by all their power and influence to stir up the authorities of government in the State of Illinois, and to drive us from the bounds of civilization. At this time the people were energetically at work upon the Temple, and President Brigham Young and his brethren of the Quorum of the Twelve, with the Bishops and all the leading men, were pushing everything forward towards completing the Temple, in order to obtain certain blessings and confirmations that had been promised to the Saints when the Temple should be so far finished as to enable them to work in it. The people were most of them poor, and they denied themselves every comfort they possibly could to assist in finishing the Lord's house. In the latter part of the fall of 1845 we commenced work in the Temple, and then I gave myself, my time and attention to that mission. I worked in the Temple every day without cessation until it was closed.

205We were making preparations to leave Nauvoo and go into the wilderness. I had a large family, and my household cares and my many other duties were indeed arduous; I worked constantly day and night, scarcely sleeping at all, so great was my anxiety to accomplish all that was necessary and go with the first company who left in February, 1846, crossing the Mississippi River on the ice.

These excerpts are taken from the Woman's Exponent 7 (November 15, 1878): 91; 7 (December 15, 1878): 195; 7 (January 1, 1879): 115; 7 (February 15, 1879): 191.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Eliza A. Cheney to her Family, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 14, 1841, in Eliza Jane Cheney Rawson, "Historical Letters and Sketches, 1919," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
