Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

206Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith

206A biographical sketch of Bathsheba Smith appears in the letters section of this volume to introduce a letter she wrote to Phebe Woodruff. Letters are only a part of Bathsheba's written legacies. She also left a variety of other writings, including diaries, an autobiography, some reminiscences, and several articles for the Woman's Exponent and other church periodicals. She lived a long and eventful life, well documented in the literary trail she left behind.

206For Bathsheba Smith, Nauvoo was pivotal in the formation of her faith and life as a Latter-day Saint. She frequently reflected on her experiences there, particularly on her association with Joseph and Emma Smith. She also often expressed how privileged she felt to have received the temple ordinances at the hands of the Prophet, to be instructed by him in the meaning of each step of the temple ceremony, and to enjoy his company in these private, sacred gatherings. Her first home as a young bride, the births of her two children, and the beginning of a joyous marriage were all part of her Nauvoo experience, which remained a happy memory for Bathsheba despite the upheavals and dislocations of the Church's final years in Nauvoo.

206The reminiscence that follows is a short but complete narrative of Bathsheba Smith's life in Nauvoo. It is anecdotal and largely personal, focusing mainly on her marriage, her home, her children, and her husband. But when it shifts briefly from the private to the public, it seems consciously aimed at the reader, bearing witness of Joseph's prophetic calling, her own acceptance of plural marriage, and the validity of the claim of the Quorum of the Twelve to leadership of the Church after the death of Joseph Smith.

206Despite its dispassionate style, Bathsheba's recollection is detailed and informative. Besides the personal conviction it conveys, it is also an entry into the personality of its writer, forthright, unequivocating in her convictions, and loyal. How poignantly in character was her last act before she left her beloved Nauvoo home: tidying up the rooms, sweeping the floor, and "putting the broom in its accustomed place behind the door," leaving a perfectly kept house for those who were driving her from it.

Reminiscence of Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith [^1]

In the spring of 1840 my family moved to Nauvoo Illinois. Here I continued my punctuality in attending meetings, had many opportunities of hearing Joseph Smith preach and tried to profit by his instructions, and received many testimonies to the truth of the doctrines he taught. Meetings were held out-of-doors in pleasant weather and in private houses when it was unfavorable. I was present at the laying of the cornerstone of the foundation of the Nauvoo Temple, and had become acquainted with the prophet Joseph and his family and I had a deep love and respect for his wife, Emma, which has never changed.

207I had promised a young man that I would "keep his cabin" in Missouri and on the 25th of July 1841, I kept this promise and was married to George A. Smith the youngest member of the Twelve. Elder Don Carlos Smith [cousin of George A. Smith and younger brother of Joseph Smith] officiated. A year before my marriage I had not heard from the man I loved since he left for his mission to England until one day Lorenzo Snow joined him in London and gave him news of me and my family. One day a neighbor came to our house showing a letter addressed to Bathsheba W. Bigler and post-marked Liverpool. He held the letter high to tease me, but knowing well who had written my name, I danced and sang for joy. Presently he burst into tears and gave me the precious letter. [When] George A. Smith returned I had six letters tucked away among my precious belongings.

208My husband was born June 26, 1817, at Potsdam, St. Lawrence Co., New York. I first met him when a neighbor introduced him to my father saying, "I want George A. Smith to meet Mark Bigler because you two will so enjoy each others' stories." George A. Smith came to the Bigler home as a missionary. Each time he came to visit the farm we would kill a fat turkey. My husband declared he enjoyed seventeen turkey dinners around the Bigler hospitable board.

208Mr. [George A.] Smith has received many honors and has been given various positions of trust. April 26th, 1838, he was ordained a member of the High Council at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

208On April 26, 1839, while kneeling on the cornerstone of the foundation of the Lord's House in the city of Far West, he was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles. He immediately started on a mission to preach the Gospel in Great Britain from which he returned twenty days before our marriage. Two days after we were married we started, carpet bag in hand, to go to his father's who lived in Zarahemla, Iowa Territory, near the Mississippi River. We walked about a mile and a half to the river side. A skiff had just pushed off; we hailed it. The owner came back, took us in and rowed us across the river without charge. We were met by my husband's brother, John L. Smith, with a horse and a light wagon, who conveyed us to his father's house. There we found a feast prepared for us, in partaking of which my husband's father, John Smith [brother of Joseph Smith Sr.], drank [to] our health, pronouncing upon us the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. I did not understand the import of that blessing so well then as I do now. I was indeed happy and all of our relations on both sides were well pleased with our marriage.

208After living at father Smith's about a month we started housekeeping in a small log cabin close by. From the time I was in my teens I had been laying away linen and other articles, preparing myself to some day help furnish a home. Mother fitted me out with furniture, earthenware, cooking utensils, beds and bedding. My husband had china and earthenware which the Saints in Staffordshire potteries had presented him. All of these blessings added to our comfort and happiness. But the house leaked and the chimney smoked. We next bought an unfinished log house. We fitted it up and built a brick chimney, but that, too, smoked. Soon after this my husband was counseled to move to Nauvoo. We did this and rented a log house of Ebenezer Robinson, but it was open and that chimney, too, smoked.

209In a few weeks we rented a more comfortable room of Bp. Vincent Knight. Then Brother Joseph gave us a lot which had a small log house on it. My husband fixed up the place as best he could; but, after all, it was the worst looking house we had yet lived in. I was ashamed to have my acquaintances see me in such a looking place. It, however, had the desirable qualities of neither leaking nor smoking.

209My husband went to work with all the time he could spare and soon had a storey and a half frame house put up, with four rooms in it—two below and two above. By fencing and draining the lot, and with great labor, we soon had a splendid garden, thrifty [thirty?] fruit trees, flowers, vegetables and corn. I spared no pains nor effort to make this home a place good to look upon.

209As the 4th of July, 1842, came on Sunday we celebrated the 4th on Monday. A military display by the Nauvoo Legion was followed by a sham battle. My husband was chaplain in the general's staff. Emma [Smith] and other ladies rode with the staff. At four o'clock on the morning of Wednesday the 7th a son was born to us. Words are feeble to express my joy. His father named him George Albert [Junior].

209In two months more, my husband was leaving for a mission. I had but five pounds of flour, but there were vegetables and corn in our garden and a cow supplied us with milk and butter. My brother-in-law, Caleb W. Lyons, made me a large grater and I grated the corn into meal on which we lived until my husband was able to send me flour. He also sent me some pork, beans, and wild, dried grapes, which lasted us the winter. Our garden supplied us bountifully with vegetables. In two months Mr. Smith returned, having preached in many of the principal towns in Illinois. The winter set in early and with severity.

210When on his mission to England, my husband, while preaching out-of-doors in London, injured his left lung, causing occasional hemorrhages. This winter 1842-3 he took a violent cold, which settling on his lungs, confined him to his room for some weeks.

210In the spring of 1843 Missouri renewed her wicked persecutions. Brother Joseph [Smith] was arrested in Lee County, Illinois, while on a visit to his wife's relations. Great effort was made by his brethren at Nauvoo to obtain his release. At great expense of time and means he was brought to Nauvoo and there discharged under a writ of Habeas Corpus. In this year, 1843, my husband went east as far as Boston, on a mission, preaching and attending conferences by the way. He returned in the fall. My son, George Albert, had been sick all winter with dysentery, which caused me great anxiety. He was now improving.

210Soon after my husband returned, we were blessed by receiving our endowments and were sealed under the holy order of Celestial Marriage which order is for time and eternity and was revealed July 12, 1843.

210I heard the Prophet charge the Twelve with the duty and responsibility of administering the ordinances of endowments and of sealing both for the living and the dead. My husband and I met with Joseph and many others in a room dedicated for the purpose and prayed with them repeatedly. [^2]

210I heard the Prophet give instructions concerning plural marriage.

210In the spring of 1844, many elders went forth preaching. My husband, on the fifth of May, started to preach and lecture. He visited Illinois, Indiana and Michigan. Soon after he went a terrible persecution began in Nauvoo, which ended in the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum. I am unable to describe the sorrowing that followed. I cannot think of it without experiencing again those days of anguish and horror and mourning.

210My husband returned August first and on the fourteenth a daughter was born to us and we gave her the name Bathsheba. I have always thought that her sympathy and her tendency to weep over another's distress was due to my harrowed feelings previous to her birth. The Twelve immediately returned and though the times were exciting, under their wise counsel excitement abated. The spirit of resentment gave way to mourning, from which the people emerged more hopeful and more determined that Truth should triumph. The Twelve, who were acknowledged as the presiding quorum of the whole church, immediately exercised all their influence to finish the Temple and the Nauvoo House in accordance with the Revelation of January 19, 1841 [D&C 124].

211Not content with the cruel wrongs already inflicted, our persecutors continued to annoy us. Notwithstanding this, work on the church buildings was pushed until September 1845, when the burning, by the mob, of one hundred and seventy-five houses belonging to our people in Hancock County caused the sheriff, J. B. Backenstos, to issue a proclamation calling for two thousand men as a "posse commitatus" to disperse the house burners. My husband, in charge of the work, released four hundred workmen to compose part of this posse. The house burners, to avoid arrest, left the country, and work on the temple redoubled in zeal.

211Governor Thomas Ford sent General John J. Harding at the head of four hundred militia to Nauvoo. He dismissed the sheriff's posse, but made no effort to arrest the house burners. General Harding informed the Saints in Hancock County that they could get no protection from the state. The mob was determined to drive the Mormons from the state and therefore, they must go.

211Previous to this, a council of church authorities, had passed a resolution (which, as a matter of policy, was kept private) to send one thousand five hundred men as pioneers to make a settlement in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. This resolution was determined on and in accordance with the design and policy of the Prophet Joseph when living.

211Those burned out of their homes fled into Nauvoo for shelter. Our house was filled with refugees. With every means available, Mr. Smith [George A.] pushed work on the Temple, so that in the fall of 1845, thousands received their endowments. I officiated for a time as priestess.

212Mr. Smith and I believed firmly in Joseph Smith as a Prophet of the Most High. We believed that he had sealed his testimony with his blood. I became thoroughly convinced as well as my husband, that the doctrine of "plurality of wives" as taught by Joseph the Prophet, in our hearing, was a revelation from God; and having a fixed determination to attain to Celestial Glory, I felt to embrace every principle, and that it was for my husband's exaltation that he should obey the revelation on Plural Marriage, in order to attain to kingdoms, thrones, principalities and powers, firmly believing that I should participate with him in all his blessings, glory and honor.

212In accordance with this purpose I had in the last year, like Sarah of old, given to my husband five wives—good, virtuous, honorable women who had gathered to Zion without their families. [^3] Four of these women were considerably older than I and two of them older than my husband. They were all deeply religious. I was young, only twenty-three years old and Mr. Smith but twenty-eight, though I believe we were mature for our years on account of experiences gained amid the perilous times through which we had already passed. I was proud of my husband and loved him, knowing him to be upright in all things, a man of God, and believing that he would not love them less because he loved me more, I had joy in a testimony that what I had done was acceptable to my father in heaven.

212The fall of 1845 found the city of Nauvoo one vast work-shop, for nearly every family was wagon building. Our parlor became a shop in which to paint wagons and, likewise, every other parlor in the neighborhood was put to some such use, in the general preparation for the winter exodus.

212On the 9th of February, 1846, in company with many others, my husband took me and my boy of three and a half years and my little girl of one and a half years and some of the other members of our family (the remainder to follow as soon as the weather would moderate), and we crossed on the ice the Mississippi River and turned our faces toward the wilderness in which we were to seek out an abiding place.

213We left a comfortable home, the accumulations of four years of labor and thrift and took away with us only a few much needed articles such as clothing, bedding and provisions. We left everything else behind us for our enemies. My last act in that precious spot was to tidy the rooms, sweep up the floor, and set the broom in its accustomed place behind the door. Then with emotions in my heart which I could not now pen and which I then strove with success to conceal, I gently closed the door and faced an unknown future, faced a new life, a greater destiny as I well knew, but I faced it with faith in God and with no less assurance of the ultimate establishment of the Gospel in the West and of its true, enduring principles, than I had felt in those trying scenes in Missouri. I, a girl of sixteen, had at that time declared to the weeping Saints, around the death-bed of David Patten, that God had established His church with the promise that it should never be thrown down and I testified that though we might some of us be called to give up our lives, yet the Kingdom of God should stand and His people would be preserved. Now I was going into the wilderness, but I was going with the man I loved dearer than my life. I had my little children. I had heard a voice, so I stepped into the wagon with a certain degree of serenity.

This autobiography, one of several versions, was edited by Alice Merrill Horne, a granddaughter of Bathsheba W. Smith. Original typescript is in possession of Harriet Horne Arrington.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Eliza A. Cheney to her Family, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 14, 1841, in Eliza Jane Cheney Rawson, "Historical Letters and Sketches, 1919," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
