Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

214Margaret Gay Judd Clawson

214Margaret Judd was ten when she and her family arrived in Nauvoo in 1841. Canadians who joined the Church in 1836, they had met one obstacle after another as they attempted to gather with the Saints. Finally they reached Nauvoo, only to be confronted with additional hardship. They shared with other newcomers the scarcity of housing and provisions, and each member of the family had a turn with malaria or some other sickness. In time, however, the family settled into a comfortable home, and life seemed more promising. Margaret's admiration for the resourcefulness and determination of her parents and her mother's commitment to the gospel is clearly demonstrated in the many homely incidents that make up her recorded recollections. Though written years after the events took place, they convey the sense of drama and community spirit that influenced her view of life as a young girl in Nauvoo.

214 Margaret Gay Judd Clawson.

214The Judds immigrated to the Salt Lake Valley with one of the earliest pioneer companies, and in 1850 Margaret joined with several other theatrical-minded people to form a drama company there. Hiram Clawson was one of the number. Their marriage two years later brought together two of early Utah's best-known thespians. They became the mainstay of the Deseret Dramatic Association and were regular participants in other theatrical ventures.

215Margaret performed in the opening presentation at the Social Hall in 1853 and appeared on stage in Utah, usually playing comedic parts, many times over the next twenty-five years. She was a well-known and prominent member of Salt Lake City society at the time of her death in 1912.

215The excerpt that follows, taken from a lively, expressive life history, shows Margaret Clawson's observant eye, impressionable memory, and a sensitivity to the human drama that unfolded in Nauvoo and her family's participation in it.

Reminiscence of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson [^1]

At last in the spring of 1841 we went to Nauvoo. How happy Mother was! She was a devoted Latter-day Saint. Her one thought from the day she was baptized was to gather with the Church, and now she was in their midst. Well, when we arrived there Brother Noble who had gone right through found us and insisted on our family sharing part of his home until we could get a place of our own. Houses were very scarce Mother had her misgivings knowing Mrs. Noble too well. But "Necessity knows no law," so my parents accepted his kind offer, and things went along a little while But the lady of the house soon began to show the Cloven foot, she did not belong to the Church and was as bitter as gall, and very quarlsome and never let an opportunity pass without saying something disagreeable about the Church, and especialy about the Phrophet. All the apostate lies she could hear she took such pleasure in making mother listen to often. But Mother had made up her mind that she would not quarrel with her. But it was pretty hard to have to hear her sneers, insinuations and abuse continualy. I remember once mother had me sit down and read the Book of Mormon. That was too much! She took a cup of water, and dashed it over me and the book. Well, things got from bad to worse until mother could stand it no longer. In the mean time, father had bought a lot. So he got some lumber and built a shanty and mother was delighted to get out of a comfortable house into all the discomforts of a shanty. When the Sun shone it was hot and when it rained it was wet, but mother never uttered one word of complaint. Not even that horrid woman could keep her from enjoying her religion. My parents were faithful attendants to the meetings in the "grove" to hear Joseph preach, I have seen and heard him many times. Strange as it may seem, in about a year that good brother Noble took his wife back to the state of New York where they came from and never returned to Nauvoo although before he came he sold out everything with the firm determination of spending the rest of his life with the Church, but her everlasting fault finding and complaining had the desired effect at last, & the old adage "A continual dropping will wear out a stone" was verified.

216Soon after we got there brother Riley was taken with a white swelling on his knee. Poor boy, How he suffered. Mother used to be up with him night after night working so hard trying to releive his sufferings, but nothing seemed to do him any good, so she decided to have him baptized in the font [of the Temple]. Before going she told him that the Lord could heal him so he went with the greatest confidence. When they got there mother lifted him out of the wagon and carried him to the font, and an Elder took him in his arms and carried him down into the water. He could not tak[e] a step or put his foot to the ground without the most exc[r]uciating pain; but after he had been baptized and was carried to the steps[,] mother waiting to take him in her arms, all at once he called out, "Oh, Mother I can walk and sure enough he walked right up the steps, and from that time he had no more pain in his knee. The swelling gradualy went down, and he was soon running and jumping with his playmates as usual and never had any more trouble with his leg. How little I could then appreciate mother's feelings at the miraculous healing for there never lived a more tender devoted mother. Would that I could do justice to her great, good, and noble qualities. She was a natural born nurse and well did she magnify that gift. There was a great deal of sickness in Nauvoo at that time. How often and often she would go around among her sick neighbors nursing and helping them, and more than that she made me go with her. I was only a little girl, but I could give a drink of water to the poor things burning with fever, also wash dishes and many other little chores. Not inheriting any of mothers nursing qualities, it was a great hardship to me. How I did hate it! Wasn't it bad enough to wash dishes at home without going to the neighbors, and when any of them got well, I was delighted, only because I knew that I would not have to go there any more. Oh, the selfishness of human nature even in children. Father was working very hard at that time getting material to build us a house. He used to go to an island in the Mississippi to get lumber. He would go Monday morning and stay until Saturday evening getting out what was called shakes—our house and many others were made of the same. It was an all sumer job getting a little two room house built. I think it was about a mile east of the grove, a nice location on what was called the Bluffs. Then there were the Flats down by the river. What a beautiful view from above and the ever interesting sight of steamboats passing up and down the Mississippi with Joseph's home, the Mansion house, the center of attraction. I have heard mother tell of a little incident about the Prophet. Soon after we went to Nauvoo, she had occasion to do a little shopping, going to the store, she passed his home. He was standing on the lawn conversing quite earnestly with several very elegant, gintile gentlemen. As she passed along, very naturaly she looked at the Prophet. She knew him, but he did not know her. All at once he reached his arm over the fence and grasped her by the hand, and gave her a hearty shake. He did not hesitate in his conversation with the gentlemen and mother passed right on. I need not say she was delighted. I am sure he divined what a noble-spirited woman she was[.] Well when our house was done and we moved in my parents were delighted. It was their own home and in the midst of the Saints, where they expected to live the rest of their days. Our family consisted of father, mother, brother Riley, sister Phebe, and myself. Grandfather and grandmother Judd lived with us part of the time. My Grandparents were most welcome in our home. Mother and grandmother were always on the best of terms. Grandmother said "I would rather live with Teresa than any one I ever knew." Mother not being like many daughters-in-law who look upon their mother-in-law as their natural enemies. So their association was always most harmonious. I was very fond of my grandmother Judd. I have only a faint recollection of my grandmother Hastings as I never saw her after I was six years old, but I have heard Father say that she was a very kind, liberal-hearted, generous, woman. I think it was about in forty-two or three that the mob used to harrass the Saints very frequently and we often had quite exciting times. It was generally known when the mobs were prowling around outside of Nauvoo. The bretheren were advised to always be in readiness to meet them to protect their homes and families. One morning I saw something more than usual going on at one of our neighbors, an English family by the name of Thompson. So I ran over to see what it was. Well, the word had been brought in that the mob was coming and very near, to the Thompsons (he was a very small man) with others had been called to the war. His wife was hurrying to get her protecter ready to go. I was filled with patriotism, when I saw him staggering off under the weight of his lunch and gun. After bidding him good bye, she stood there and called after him As long as she could see him these encour[a]ging words, "Now, Thompson, stick to thy post and don't thee flinch." No doubt they stimulated him to greater deeds of valor, But the expected did not happen. It was merely a false alarm, the mob was not there, and Thompson came home, covered with glory and as brave as a lion and said what he would have done if the mob had been there, much to the admiration of his wife and myself. Times were very hard and provisions were scarce. Father was an industrious, hard working man and could work at two trades, but it seemed almost impossible for him to get the right kind of pay for his work to provide the ne[c]esaries of life for his family. So he want back to LaHarp [Indiana] to work. He used to send us flour, meat etc. Transportation was not as easy in those days as now it is, so father had to watch his chance for sending us provisions, and if he missed we ran short. Father often walked the 25 miles home to see his family. He was a splendid walker. He told us once when he came home of a mad dog overtaking him. He was a terrrible sight, his eyes were blood red, his tongue hanging out, and frothing at the mouth. Father was quite pleased when he passed without a salute. In a very short time a lot of men and boys with clubs and guns came running after the dog. They said he had bitten a boy and several animals. In a little while, father heard them yelling and the guns fired off, so he supposed they had killed the dog. As I remember it now I suppose father had not had an opportunity of sending us any provisions at that time so we got up one morning to find ourselves without anything in the house to eat except some shelled corn. There were five of us at that time mother, grandmother, brother Riley, sister Phebe & myself. What were we to do? We had heard of a woman who had a hand mill for grinding. She lived about a mile from us, and as our only alternative was the corn. So Mother said "Children, do you think you could take some and grind it, and when you come back I will make a nice Johnny cake for our breakfast". Of course, we could. So brother and I started out in high spirits with all the corn we could carry, in high spirits and feeling the importance of helping to support the family. Well, when we got there she took us into the back yard, and showed the mill and told us that we would have to pay her toll for the use of it. We had heard that before. We started in real brisk, it did not seem so very hard. We talked and laughed and encouraged each other. The meal seemed to run out of the hopper quite fast and we thought Mother would be so surprised to see us home so soon with such a lot of meal. Well, when we had gotten nearly half of the corn ground that harred [horrid] woman came out and took it all in for her share. Oh, didn't our hearts sink! And did not that mill get awful hard to turn, and then the handle slipped off and struck me on my finger nail and hurt me dreadfully. Then it was Riley's turn to grind, so I could stop and cry awhile. It was not long before the handle slipped again, and knocked his finger nail nearly off. Poor fellow, how he did cry, and how the blood run. He always got the worst of every hurt. I went into the house and asked the woman for a rag to put around his bleeding finger but she would not take the trouble to give me one, but said "It would not hurt very long." So I tore a piece off my apron and wrapped his finger up. Well, it was my turn to finish grinding the corn. I could not expect Riley to work any longer with his aching finger. Everything must have an end and our grist was ground at last, & we started home, "wiser, but sadder children." When we came in sight of home there was Mother watching for us, and when she saw our bunged up eyes and sore fingers she could scarsely restrain her tears. I don't think she expressed herself half as strong as she felt, for her eyes were unusually bright and her cheeks very red. If mother had met that woman then there would have been quite a flow of eloquence. I think in a very short time mother had the meal sifted and the corn bread in the spider baking, and when it was done, oh, what a delicious breakfast. No sweeter morsel was ever set before a king than that hard earned Johnny cake was to us, As good luck would have it, father sent us some provisions from LaHarpe that very day. With all our poverty and hardships, I never heard Mother speak one word of complaint, she was so thankful to be with the Saints and hear the teachings of the Prophet. Father planted us a garden that spring. The vegetables grew very fast, but the weeds grew faster. Mother made Riley and I do the weeding (or some of it). We used to say if it was only shady, and we could sit down it wouldn't be so hard, But to go right out in the hot sun, and stoop over to pull the weeds We thought it awful cruel of Mother to have us do it. She often used to show [us] how to do it. It seemed so easy for her. Why she could pull more weeds in five minutes than we could in half an hour, and still she insisted o[n] us doing it. Oh, the hardships of childhood. I think it was the latter part of 1843, that my Uncle and Grandfather went to Springfield Ill, from there they kept writing to Father, Telling of what good times it was there saying coopers were getting higher wages than any other trade, and if he would come there for awhile that he could get a good start, and would not have to live from hand to mouth, as he was then doing. Altho' Father was hard working and industrious, he did not seem to get ahead at all. So after awhile, he decided to go. Mother was very loth to leave Nauvoo, hoping it would be for only a short time. There was quite a little branch of the Church there. In the spring of 1844, we went to Springfield, Illo. We had not been there more than two or three months when we got the news of the Prophet's death. Mother would not believe it. Said it was a false report. But when it was confirmed our house was a house of mourning. I don't think Mother could have felt worse if it had been one of her own family. Father got all the work he could do at fair wages, But with a family to support, and clothe and house rent to pay & he didn't get rich very fast. And there was another one added to our home. On New Years day, 1845 brother George came and that made us six in family. My Second great grief came on the fourth of October, 1844, when my dearly loved Grandmother left us for a better world. She was so pleasant and kind to all. Mother loved her as her own Mother. I shall never forget how dreadful I felt. It seemed the sun would never shine again. I was then thirteen and could fully realise our great loss. I could not eat and slept very little until Mother became quite worried about me. But youth and time obliterates sorrow. She was sick about two weeks and said from the begining that she did not want to get well again. After she was in her Coffin, one of my young cousins Came to look at her. As soon as he saw her he said, "Oh, Grandma is laughing["] and if that beautiful smile was an indication of her happiness, it was indeed supreme. After the Saints left Nauvoo, my parents redoubled their exertions to get an outfit to go to the Rocky Mountains. In the meantime, Father had one or two quite sick spells which put him back considerably. How well I remember what a hard time he had breaking in the animals to draw the wagon. There were six cows and two oxen. The oxen were well broken and quite sedate, But the cows were wild and unruly. He would get help to yoke them up, and then would start to drive them. All at once, they would run off in an opposite direction to where he wanted them to go, Or would run around to the back of the wagon, and get all tangled up. Well, this went on for days and days, and while Father was breaking the cattle, Mother was praying. She told me afterwards that many nights when we were in bed asleep that she would go out into the orchard at the back of our house, and there pour out her soul in prayer, asking the Lord to open the way for us to go with the Saints. She was willing to share their privations for the sake of being with them. Another source of anxiety to her was that I was in my teens, at the romantic age of seventeen, and Mother knowing the susceptibility of the human heart, was afraid that some young man might persuade me to think more of him than I did of her, and induce me to remain there. She could not live away from the Church, and she could not leave a child behind. So my parents said we must not stay here any longer. Well, after weeks of hard work, Father had gotten the cows broken so that he could drive them, And on the ninth day of May, 1849, my brother Riley's sixteenth birthday, we said good bye to our friends and relatives, got into our wagon, and started on our long, eventful journey. Oh, how Mothers countainance beamed with joy! What did she care for hardships, if she could only reach the goal. One of many little romances. The night before we left—My true lover, Henry Ridgley, came to bid me farewell, And under our trysting tree (a big tree close bye) we each vowed eternal constancy, for four years at least. For at the end of that time, he would be of age, and then he would come to claim me for his own, even if I was at the end of the Earth. Well, he did come to see me, but it was forty years after inste[a]d of four years. He had a wife and three children. I had a husband and was the mother of thirteen children. The romance of youth gone—the reality here. How we could talk of the long ago, and laugh at each others inconstancy. After a pleasant two weeks visit with us, he returned to Springfield and in five years after, I received a letter from his wife telling me of his death.

This version of Margaret Clawson's reminiscence is from a corrected typescript of the original holograph, which is in the LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
