Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

223Eliza Clayton Margetts

223Eliza Margetts was a member of the Clayton family from Manchester, England, whose more famous member was her older brother, William. In 1850, after migrating to Utah, she married Henry Margetts. They became parents of a daughter, Alice, who remained their only child for ten years until their son, Henry, was born. Nine years later the Margettses adopted another daughter. Eliza and Henry loved drama and performed in local dramatic productions in Salt Lake City. Their daughter, Alice, early showed a theatrical bent and acted with her parents as a young child. The family also loved to travel, particularly to areas where they could immerse themselves in the theater and enhance their knowledge of the dramatic arts and theatrical experience.

223In 1869 Henry and Eliza were called to assist in the settlement of Paris, Idaho, north of Bear Lake on the Utah-Idaho state line, where he was appointed probate judge. Paris became their permanent home. Though a long way from any cultural center, the family took their talents in drama and music with them to the Bear Lake Valley, producing and acting in numerous cultural presentations. Henry and Eliza both died in Paris, just three weeks apart: Henry in January 1901 and Eliza in February.

223When her family emigrated from England to Nauvoo, Eliza Clayton was only ten years old, but her memories of Nauvoo remained vivid throughout her life. Living in Carthage, Illinois, at the time of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, she was more than a casual observer; she visited the jail immediately after the murders, leaving a brief but graphic description. She also left an eyewitness account of the battle of Nauvoo and the miracle of the quails, one more testimony of these extraordinary events in Mormon history.

Reminiscence of Eliza Clayton Margetts [^1]

At the age of ten years I, with my parents, emigrated from England, and arrived at Nauvoo in the fall of 1840, our family being large father was counseled by the Prophet Joseph to go into the country, we did so, and remained away from Nauvoo untill the Summer of 1841, when we moved back, in consequence of the persecution of mobocrats.

224I have a distinct recollection of hearing Ruth, wife of Wm Clayton, talk of the organization of the Female Relief Society, on her return home from the meeting at which said organization took place.

224We moved to Carthage in the fall of 1842, at which place we lived untill after the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. In the forenoon of the day on which these atrocious murders were committed some of the neighbours, disguised and with painted faces, came to our house and told mother she had better get out of the way as they were going to kill the Prophet that day. A terrific storm arose that day, and in the afternoon we heard the firing of guns and soon after saw some of the murderers run away howling like fiends. My sister Lucy who was at this time living with the jailer's family, and was at the jail when the shooting commenced, came home and told what had happened. The next day I went with my sister Lucy to the jail, we found the doors and windows open and everything in confusion, as tho the people had left in great haste, we went up stairs to the room in which the Prophet and his brother had been shot, everything seemed upset, there were some Church books on the table and portraits of Joseph and Hyrum's families on the mantle piece. Blood in pools on the floor and bespattered on the walls, at sight of which we were overcome with grief and burst into tears. After becoming somewhat collected we gathered up what we supposed belonged to the inmates of the room at the time of the murder, and placed them together on a trunk that was in the room.

225 Carthage jail, from a painting by Frederick Piercy, ca. 1857.

225About three weeks after the massacre of Joseph and Hyrum, we moved back to Nauvoo. I witnessed the trying scenes the saints passed through untill they were driven from Nauvoo.

225I remember a circumstance that occured during what is called the battle of Nauvoo. While at the well drawing a bucket of water, a cannon ball from the enimies guns struck the chimney of the house in which we lived, which so much frightened me that I got my finger fast in the well windless [windlass] [^2] and in extricating myself skinned my finger nearly the whole length.

225"I was among the remnant of the sick and dying saints on the banks of the Mississippi, after the expulsin, when they were miraculously fed by quails that alighted in their midst." When the quails alighted they lit on our laps and every thing that was around[.] after we had caught enough to eat they flew towards the west like a swarm of bees. Before this there were some young men went out in the woods with there guns to find some game for their famlies to eat and while they were gone the quails came and had gone when they got back, they had bad luck while they were out and killed nothing and had to come back with out anything to eat for there families and great were their joy when they found every body had plenty to eat.

Photocopy of original letter, entitled "Reminiscences of Nauvoo," is in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
