Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

227Mary Gibbs Bigelow

227The brief autobiographical sketch left by Mary Gibbs Bigelow details her early life and marriage and ends abruptly at the close of her experiences in Nauvoo. As with many of the other autobiographical accounts, Nauvoo was central to her life history, and recapturing its memory somehow explained the life that followed. Mary's reminiscence reveals a woman who, within the narrow circumstances of her early life, lived fully and earnestly. Every homely detail gains significance and vitality through her vivid prose, especially the step-by-step account of making her wedding dress, from raising and picking the cotton herself, ginning, carding, and spinning it into a fine thread, weaving the thread into cloth, and bleaching it until it was pure white, to the final design and sewing of the dress.

227Mary's early life was spent in Broom County, New York, where she lived until her marriage in 1826 to Nahum Bigelow, twenty-four years her senior, whom she had known since she was thirteen. He waited patiently until she was seventeen to marry her. Mary and Nahum had ten children, two of whom, Lucy and Mary Jane, became plural wives of Brigham Young.

227The Bigelows heard the gospel when they were living in Lawrence, Illinois, and after joining the Church they moved to Nauvoo, settling in nearby Camp Creek. In the fall of 1844, while fighting for her life after she and her infant son were stricken with malaria, Mary had a remarkable vision. In it, she records, the Savior promised her that she would recover, but when she inquired about her baby, she was told only, "Your babe is in mine own hands." Three inquiries brought the same answer. Mary recovered, as did the baby, to her great delight. However, the following spring the child once again became ill, and this time the outcome was not as Mary had hoped. Though his death was difficult to accept, Mary wrote, "the same spirit rested on me as it did when I had the vision," and she soon felt the peace of reconciliation with God's will.

228In the fall of 1845, after a quiescent period following the death of the Prophet the previous year, the Bigelows experienced the mob raids on the communities surrounding Nauvoo. Mary left a vivid description of the devastating personal toll of those depredations. Her son Hyrum, sixteen at the time, shouldered a major responsibility in protecting the family because of his father's illness.

228The Bigelows eventually moved west and settled in Farmington, Utah, where Nahum died in 1851, leaving Mary with six children not yet married. She eventually moved to Provo. In 1888 she died in St. George, at the home of her daughter Lucy Bigelow Young, then living in Brigham Young's winter home. Mary's vivid and detailed account of her last days in Camp Creek and Nauvoo conveys the fear and apprehension of those uncertain times.

Reminiscence of Mary Gibbs Bigelow [^1]

We moved to Nauvoo in the fall of 1843. We went to Brother Matthews, and then down by the levee. Bought land and began to farm. We were all taken sick, had a terrible sickness—fever and ague. We lived there through the massacre and I had a son born on the 4th of July, a week after the Prophet was slain. We called his name Joseph Smith Bigelow. He lived nine months and sixteen days and died.

228The fall after he was born, at conference time, I was taken very very sick. All were very sick. We had sickness from the time we lived there until we left. While I was so very sick and was given up by everybody, and was thought to be dying even by myself, I sent to the field for my husband to come and put down the dates of the births of my children. He came in haste and taking the Record Book put down the names and dates of some whose record had not been made.

229Then afterwards I had a vision. The Savior came to me and told me that I would get well. What about my baby, I asked, for he was also very sick. He answered me, Your babe is in mine own hands. With it I will do as seemeth me good. He then told me again that I would get well, for I had a work to do. Again I asked about my baby and received the same answer. The third time he promised me that I would get well, and again I asked about my baby, and again he gave me the same answer.

229The baby got well and fat. This was in the fall. I got well also. But when the baby was so lovable in the spring it took the water on the brain and died suddenly. The same spirit rested on me as it did when I had the vision. I dedicated him to the Lord, and I never shed a tear until I had been to the grave and came back.

229When we came back into the house Daniel stepped into the house first and clasping his hands said, O my little Dafie is gone, is gone. He was too little to speak plain. Whereupon we all burst into tears and lamentations. My sympathy was aroused, although I felt resigned to the will of the Lord, feeling it was all right.

229My little Liola had the black canker which took his under jaw bone out and five teeth. I went the same summer to see my parents. Liola died while I was gone. He was so bad that the neighbors came in and sat up with him, and were also there after he died. He had spasms. When I came back I felt lonesome indeed. We had our blessings by President Young.

229The next fall after the mob commenced to mob and burn houses, we were advised to move into Nauvoo from Camp Creek. We took all the honey we could and everything that we could, leaving the corn in the field. We took our cows, our horses and wagon and oxen and went into Nauvoo. We afterwards gathered corn and squashes.

229We were in Nauvoo at the October conference held in the Temple in 1845.

230Brother Young spoke that now the excitement and mobbing was allayed for the brethren to go back and secure their crops. My husband was not well when we moved back. He had the chills. We were among the first that moved back and being on a public road the mob noticed us.

230On Monday evening after dark a posse of the mob came. They came and knocked on the door. Father was on the bed with a chill. The man said that he had orders to notify us to leave immediately. Father asked him, leaning on his elbow, "By what authority do you order peaceable citizens to leave."

230He stuttered, "By orders of the Governor and other officers."

230"It is not likely," Father said, "that the Governor will be giving orders for peaceable citizens to leave their homes. What is your name?" "Where do you live?" Father asked. He stuttered, "I live, live, all over—everywhere. I was from Carthage yesterday." They made a big noise out doors and voices called: "Come out, don't be jawing with no woman," as I had told him that I wasn't going to go. If I wasn't a Mormon they wouldn't order me out. ["]If you want to murder us, take us all out and leave us all together.["]

230A young man that had been to school with one of my boys came in and said that, "We have not come down to parley with the women. We want to know if you are going to leave immediately." He spoke in a mad, savage and determined manner. Father said, "No, we are not going." Then he said, "If you are not going, you will be tumbled out and burnt up." Voices out doors said, "Stick a brand of fire in the house and that will start them"

230He started for the fireplace and I started for him with the shovel or tongs. They called him out for another consultation. He came in again a second time, just inside of the door and said, "We will give you until Thursday night to leave or you will be tumbled out and burned up." They then rode off.

230The next morning we started Hyrum off to Nauvoo to let President Young and Col. Markham know of the threats of the mob. While Hyrum made the statement about the mob President Young sat with his head in his hands and then rose up and said, "If the mob should come to burn my house I would defend it to the last. Go home and tell your father to make an affidavit and have it sworn to, and then send it to Carthage to Major Warren. He is stationed at Carthage to prevent mob violence, so it is right for your father to send a written statement to him, and if he won't do anything, come to Nauvoo and you shall have all the help that you need." Joseph Young gave a pistol to Hyrum and told him to give it to his father to defend himself.

231Hyrum came home. Edgar Gimsley, who was his campanion, went with him to Carthage. They went across the bottom fourteen miles nearly to Carthage, staying all night, and in the morning rode into Carthage and got there about 10 o'clock. He rode up to the Court House yard and went into the house and asked for Major Warren. He called him out to the back door of the Court House and handed him the paper.

231He said because of court being in session and having sent some troops to Lima he couldn't spare any troops, but could spare some the next day. Hyrum answered, "Next day the mob will have the house burned and leave us without a home." He next inquired where he lived. Hyrum told him on the road between Laharpe and five miles from Pontusie. He noted it down.

231Hyrum went back to the horses and his companions. He felt very despondent and foreboding and anxious so he wheeled on his heel and went back to Major Warren and said, "The mob will very likely be there tonight and if you could spare but four men, it will probably keep the mob from burning our house."

231He studied a moment but said he could spare none. Hyrum and his companions mounted their horses and started immediately for Nauvoo.

231Then Major Warren about 1 o'clock had a consultation with Captain Morgan who said, "That is more important than all there is here to do. We have been notified and there may be trouble there." Consequently he sent a Lieutenant and three men who went around to Laharpe and came down to our house. It was a long way around to Laharpe, perhaps 24 or 25 miles, which brought them to our house about nine o'clock.

231Hyrum and companion arrived at Nauvoo between sundown and dark and rode by the Temple to the little guard house west of it. Joseph jumped off his horse and inquired for Col. Markham. One answered, "I don't know where he is." What do you want of Col. Markham, where do you live, where do you come from, was asked at once.

232"I live at Camp Creek but am now from Carthage. We went there to tell Major Warren about the mob threatening to burn our house, and he couldn't send anybody and was told to come here and Col. Markham would send all the help that was needed." Then he gave Hyrum to understand that Col. Markham and possee had gone up to Pontusic on a little steamboat landing on the Mississippi river and not seeing anything going on returned that night to Nauvoo.

232As Hyrum had had no dinner and the horses had had nothing to eat he went down to President Young's and had supper, fed the animals and started home. He arrived home about 1 o'clock.

232When the troops [the Lieutenant and three soldiers from Carthage] were within a mile of our house they got a jack Mormon, Mr. Dickson, to pilot them. [^2] Asked first for Squire Logan and then for Mr. Bigelow. He [Dickson] was friendly and came to the yard, saying, "They live in here," and then turned back.

232When Mary Jane and I saw someone coming, I said, "Here they come!": Mary Jane came running in and said, "Four are coming, and I don't think Hyrum is with them" Father was in bed with his night cap on.

232One of them outside said, "You stay here and I will go and see." Father said, "That's not Hyrum," took his gun, expecting the mob and went to the door.

232One [of the soldiers] stepped to the door asking, "Does Mr. Bigelow live here?" "Yes that's my name" answered he, "What do you want?" "Let me in and I'll tell you," said the outsider. "In the name of common sense, what do you want?" asked Father. "What's the use to be so particular," said the one on the outside.

232Then my husband, as he [the soldier] was pushing his way in, shot off his pistol and shot him in the left breast. And as he turned he said, "Boys, come to my assistance, I'm shot." Then he shot him again in the right side and cut his sword belt.

233The men cried out, "We are from Carthage, we came to protect you;" then one caught his foot in the stirrup and fell. One came running and fell over the sawhorse. Father said, "Why didn't you tell me so before, I wouldn't have shot you any sooner than I would my wife or children."

233Father had let go of the door and had challenged him three times, and pulling the pistol had shot him in the left breast. And as the man turned and spoke, he took the gun and shot him the second time, because he did not tell his business as he ought to have done.

233When the candle was lit, the Lieutenant come up to the table and unbottoned his coat and said, "I came to protect you and see how you've hurt me." "Why didn't you tell me," Father said, "I wouldn't have shot you any more than I would my wife or one of my children." His coat was thickly padded and was smoking, but the pistol was too near, too much lead and too little powder so that he lived. He soon became so faint and exhausted that we got him on the bed and he bled profusely. All were alarmed lest he should die. The three men came in and readily understood that it was owing to his stupidity that he was shot.

233Then Dickson came back, came into the house and got excited. One of the soldiers was dispatched to Carthage for Dr. Barnes and the Lieutenant's brother.

233The Lieutenant said, "It is my own fault. I ought to have told him, but I did not think the old man was so smart, so courageous. But I will make an affidavit that whether I live or die, it will clear your father."

233The firing of the gun was the signal for the mob to gather and the mob hearing the firing began to come.

233The arms and saddles were in the house and one man said, stretching out his arms, "I will shoot both pistols into the crowd."

233Dickson went out the back door and told the mob that the soldiers were there and then the mob rode away and left us in peace, save for our anxiety for the Lieutenant.

233One of the soldiers had come running in saying, "There's a possee of men gathering around here." He gave his orders. Do your duty. Take my pistols. They went out of one door and Dickson went out of the other. Asa [another Bigelow son] was out with the soldiers.

234Hyrum sat up with the Lieutenant and me. Father went to bed as he was sick. The Lieutenant let Hyrum take his $200 Gold watch to keep him awake. It gave an alarm or played a tune every half hour and was amusing.

234I got supper for the men. A little before daylight the doctor came with the Lieutenant's brother. Dr. Barnes talked to father in a wicked way and said, "such a man as you ought not to be at large." But the wounded Lieutenant Everett said, when the children felt bad, "Don't feel bad for my statement will clear your father."

234The names of the soldiers were Bush and Hedges. The Lieutenant had said to the soldier that had been sent off, "I don't know whether I will die before you come back or not." A school teacher, Mr. Caldwell, came that morning and talked with the doctor and found out the truth, but being bitter against the Mormons he went away and raised a great excitement against Mr. Bigelow all over the country.

234I got breakfast and after breakfast Hyrum hitched up the team, putting a straw bed and bedding and a buffalo robe, and Mr. Bigelow got in to go off to trial.

234The Lieutenant was comfortably fixed in the doctor's carriage and went to Pontusic, where he made out an affidavit that Mr. Bigelow was not to blame, and then took a steamboat to his parents' home in Worsaw, I[llinois]. Mr. Bigelow and Hyrum went down to Pontusic. One soldier remained with us, knowing that danger threatened Mr. Bigelow.

234I heard parties passing, looking at Mr. Bigelow laying sick in the wagon and saying, "let's take him out and flay him alive. This is the old codger that did the deed. Let's take him out and tie a stone around his neck and throw him into the river." The soldier Hedges heard such expressions and said to us, "They intend to get away with him," but he kept by us and no one interfered.

234The Lieutenant gave his affidavit to the soldier and we went on to Carthage. I had taken lunch with us and we ate at Pontusic. While going over the prairie we went by the ashes of a house that had been burned down. It was Leonard Rice's house, in the prairie settlement, and by a place where one of the mob was killed. He was a hostile, savage wicked fellow. The Lieutenant's brother went with Lieutenant Everett to his home, and the doctor and carriage was with our cavalcade.

235Between daylight and dark we drove into Carthage. My husband and myself were taken to Hamilton's Hotel, and Hyrum went to the barracks and stayed with the soldiers who had a stag dance. I slept upstairs; had a bedroom to ourselves. At 10 o'clock we went to the Court House. They took the pistol and gun and Mr. Bigelow went to be examined.

235Lawyer Babbit, I think his name was Almon, one of our brethren who was acting attorney for the Mormons, came and whispered to my husband that he would assist him if he needed him in a legal defense. He accepted him thankfull, but there was no trial. Major Warren and Captain Morgan came next saying that he suggested sending the men, and that four men were sent. Hedges came next and gave a correct and favorable statement of losing their way and arriving at Mr. Bigelow's house late at night and what happened there. The written affidavit of Lieutenant Everett was then read by the clerk. It praised him as he was sick and old and yet so brave and shrewd, and that the mob did come afterwards, and being so favorable it cleared my husband.

235The Judge decided then that according to the testimony he did not consider any need for further action in the case. He said the case ought to be a reminder to the people to be cool and calm, and not to be rash, and then he dismissed the case.

235My son Hyrum saw the jail in which Joseph Smith was incarcerated and the window where he was shot. Mr. Bigelow was taken in a wagon to the Court House and helped into the room, but was unable to sit up but a little while there. After the case was dismissed we got into the wagon again, and started home. On nearing the house Mary Jane and Lucy met us telling us that James Porter and another man had told them that our lives were not safe, that the mob was coming to kill us all.

235We got home a little before night and I was so glad to see my lonesome little children who had been tormented with fear on our account and who were glad that we got home safe and alive. We had samp mush [^3] for supper.

236James Porter who was living on my husband's farm and another man from Musgusto Creek came and told us that the mob was coming to burn the house and had threatened to kill old Bigelow and all his family. We did not feel safe, so one of the boys took Lavinia to Sister Gunsleys, as she coughed so bad, and we hid everything that was valuable and took our bedding and went and made our beds in the corn, near the bean patch where we had pulled up the beans. We took all of the children in bed with us, never undressing them, and having everything dark about the bed so that the mob wouldn't see us. It was cloudy. I was very sick with the sun pain. My husband administered to me and I felt better. After prayers we laid down but had but little sleep as we felt like watching. In a very little while we heard the firing and whooping at the house and were glad that we were hid. My husband said, "lay still and pray, children." We all prayed silently.

236They yelled and set the bloodhounds on our track but the Lord preserved us from them. We could see them loping around, and heard the mob racing through the corn field in search of us. The corn was hardly ripe and not gathered. We got up in the night and moved our bed in the hollow, and then my husband and Hyrum went and leaned on the fence and watched proceedings. When the mob dispersed they came back and went to bed.

236The mob came about 10 p.m. and went away at 3 a.m. They had ranted around until then. We were the only family in Camp Creek that was molested, which we wondered at. At last daylight came and my husband got up, bidding us to lie quietly until he came back and he would see if the mob was completely gone. The November night was gone and the sun was up before he got back. He found the house still standing but the windows were broken. The tracks of horses feet were all around the house. We went back and my grown daughters commenced picking up the hidden things.

236I wanted to get breakfast and sent my fourth child, my second son Asa, to the beautiful large spring that was under the porch of the milk house. The spring ran off into the milk house, where we kept milk and butter pans, churn, etc. Asa went down for water. He brought the water to the house, but said he believed the spring was poisoned as there was a glistening green scum on the water. He poked it away and got another pail full and it was the same. I felt that the child was inspired by God, and as the water stood the scum rose again. I said, "Don't use it, but let it stay until Father comes, and go to another place to a Branch for water a half a mile away."

237When Father came back he put some of the water in a bottle to take to Nauvoo, and have Dr. Willard Richards and others analyse it. When it was taken the doctor said it contained four ounces of arsenic and would have killed ten men. We got some good water and had joint mush and milk which we had every meal. The corn meal was made by shaving off the corn with a jointer or plane. The corn was still soft.

237We washed up the tin cup and spoons. A man with a broad brow came along who had lost his way and came to our house to inquire the way. When he found out about the mob, the Lieutenant, the poisoning of the spring, he entreated us to move into Nauvoo and told us he would help us all that he could. We harnessed up and put our things into his wagon and our own and started for Nauvoo. We got there safe but were all wet, as it rained all day. We went to an old Dutchman's by the name of Stuedevant. Hyrum used to go back to Camp Creek and help get the stock and crops. He boarded at Porters. Sometimes Mr. Bigelow went out, but it was after a while as he was afraid of being ambushed.

237At the time he was poisoned about Christmas. He had been out once before but this time my husband, myself and Hyrum went out home to get a grist of corn ground, and not considering it safe for my husband to go near Pontusic on the Queens mill road he stayed at Porter's home working in the cornfield. James Porter, who always had breakfast, came over and kindly invited Mr. Bigelow to come to breakfast. He did not wish to go as he had provisions with him and wanted to get his own breakfast at home, but Porter insisted, and begged so and as he had always been friendly my husband went. No children were visible. They were not up, but were still sleeping. At breakfast he was offered coffee. He felt as if he ought not to take it but drank it. It was poisoned with white vitriol but he felt no effects of it then.

238Hyrum stayed and gathered the corn. We took down some squashes and Hyrum quit staying at Porters. When Porter came over in the morning he wanted to buy some big iron kettles that we scalded pigs in. He was bribed to poison Mr. Bigelow and that was why he kept his children in bed so that they wouldn't get poisoned, and entreated Mr. Bigelow to go to breakfast. My husband felt queer after breakfast and while going home, I drove the team. That afternoon while fixing a wagon tongue he commenced trembling and turned pale around the mouth. He sat down on the wagon tongue. Hyrum went for an Elder who got Brother Patten, brother to David W. Patten, to come. It was snowing. They came in and sat down and looked at Father. He was screaming with pain. They administerd to him, spoke in tongues saying that he should get well. He had been poisoned by the hand of an enemy. Father vomited up some very green stuff, probably enough to have killed ten men.

238After Brother Patten had spoken in tongues he said that my husband should get well and go to the Rocky Mountains and establish his family. He stayed about all night, and he [my father] surely got better and was healed.

This excerpt is taken from "Autobiography of Mary Bigelow (Maiden Name—Mary Gibbs), June 26, 1809-April 10, 1888," typescript copy in the Marvin M. Witt Papers, LDS Church Archives.

---
Notas:
[^1] For additional details, see George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 68-77.
[^2] Susan Jolly to Samuel Taggart, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 1845, Albert Taggart Papers, microfilm of originals, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Eliza A. Cheney to her Family, Nauvoo, Illinois, October 14, 1841, in Eliza Jane Cheney Rawson, "Historical Letters and Sketches, 1919," typescript, LDS Church Archives.
