Carol Cornwall Madsen, In Their Own Words: Women and the Story of Nauvoo ( 1994)

247Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy

247"Not a hundredth part hath been told," Nancy Tracy wrote as the concluding statement of a life sketch that she hoped would be read "with some degree of interest" by her children's children. She was right in her assessment. Although her reminiscence is remarkably detailed and observant, it provides only the contours of the peaks and vales that comprised the whole of her long life. Nonetheless, she has mapped the major landmarks along her life journey clearly enough that the reader never misunderstands their significance or puzzles over the direction she chose to take.

247 Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy.

247Her early life promised comfort, peace, and security in the familiar, familial setting of Jefferson County, New York. After her father's death, she was raised by loving grandparents who provided her with schooling, domestic skills, and a strong religious character. But she resisted associating with any single denomination.

247Soon after Nancy's marriage to Moses Tracy in 1832, Mormon missionaries brought the gospel to Jefferson County. The sermon of David Patten made the gospel "plain and beautiful and easy to understand," she remembered. "I believed with my whole soul and I could see that I had been preserved from uniting with other creeds."

247After their conversion in 1834, she and her husband traveled to Kirtland, where they witnessed the marvelous events attendant to the dedication of the temple and hoped to make the city their permanent home. But Missouri beckoned, and the Tracys made the "long and toilsome journey" a thousand miles to the west. They shared the sorrows and depredations of the other Mormons in Missouri and once again packed up their dwindling supply of belongings to make a new home in Illinois.

248The first sentence of Nancy Tracy's reminiscence notes that her life was filled with "hardships, poverty, and persecutions ever since [she] embraced the Gospel in the year 1834." Her experiences in Missouri, in Illinois, in the trek west, and even in Utah attest to that self-appraisal. After losing two sons in Nauvoo, she despairingly noted that "it seemed almost impossible to raise a child there." The trials of the journey to Utah and efforts to create a new community took their toll. Her husband died in 1858 after a long, disabling illness, and being left to manage their family and farm alone, this forty-two-year-old widow with ten children understandably felt "worn down with toil and hardship." A second marriage, though it brought her motherhood for the eleventh time, eased many of her burdens. She lived a long and faithful life until her death in Marriott, Weber County, Utah, in 1902.

248"Through all my sufferings I never doubted," she wrote to her children, "but felt to cling to the Gospel." Experiencing the spiritual manifestations in the temple in Kirtland and receiving her endowments in the temple in Nauvoo gave her, she believed, the spiritual strength to endure. Living near the temple site in Nauvoo, Nancy watched the progress of the building's construction, and she found it as difficult to leave the temple as to leave her home when the Saints were driven out of the city. "But the hand of the Lord is over us," she affirmed, "and so we shall find a resting place."

Reminiscence of Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy [^1]

Winter passed and spring came but with wet, stormy weather. However, the Saints left [Missouri] as fast as they could, going east. We started in March [1840], about the middle, I think. Imagine our feelings in leaving our homes and starting out not knowing where we were going and leaving our Prophet and leaders in prison at the mercy of those bold fiends of human shape. Notwithstanding our afflictions, the hand of the Lord was over His people, and they found a place of rest for the season.

249As I said, we took up our march towards the rising sun. It stormed continually. Our outfit for the journey was a meager one. It consisted of one horse attached to the two wheels of a wagon with bed sheets for a cover. The box was seven feet long; so sometimes at night we could make a bed in the cart by taking things out. But we would make our bed outside when the weather would permit. It was tedious traveling. When we got on the Mississippi bottom, it was terrible. It was 9 miles across and took two days to cross. At last we landed in Quincy, Illinois, and found the people very hospitable. They seemed willing to do all they could to alleviate the condition of the Saints. We traveled on up the river about 40 miles and stopped to see what we should do. This was in Adams County. There, five families of us, 3 families named Tippets and Gustavus Perry and ourselves stopped. We found some empty cabins which the owner let us go into. The place was sparsely settled, but we were glad to get shelter. It was 7 miles to the little town where there was a store and other public buildings. The Saints in general traveled on up the river, but we stayed here one year and raised corn, turnips, and other garden stuffs. Brother John Tippet's wife died here in child birth. Her babe also died, which cast a gloom over us. She was a good woman, and we sadly missed her. I suppose her grave is still alone and unmarked to this day.

249In the spring following, we made another move north. Our horse having died, Brother Tippet loaned us one to go on with. The Saints had located a place to settle still farther up the river called Commerce. It was a very sickly place, but the only one we had to go to. When we got up there, lo and behold! there was Brother Joseph in the midst of the Saints. I will not attempt to describe his miraculous escape from prison, suffice it to say he got safely to his family and the bosom of the Saints. So Mr. Clark was greatly mistaken when he said we should never see Brother Joseph again. [^2] The Lord worked out the deliverance after the Saints had all left the state.

250Well, here we were again to start anew to make another home with nothing but our hands and brains to begin with. We were not conquered in spirit but determined to live our religion and stand by the principles of the Gospel and help to build up the kingdom of God on the earth. The people of Illinois seemed willing to give us a resting place. It was really a beautiful place to build up a city with the grand Mississippi rolling down past, her steam boats playing [plying] up and down. It was sublime! They called the City Nauvoo, the beautiful.

250We got a city lot just below the brow of the hill where the temple was to be built. We built us a good log house, fenced in the lot. One full acre had a picket fence in front of it, and it began to look like really living again, although we had to live very close, both for food and clothes.

250My fourth son was born in this house on the 22nd of June, but he was a sickly child and died when he was twenty months old. It was a hard place to raise children for a great many died of summer complaint when teething.

250We lived in this house about two years and then sold the place to Brother Wilford Woodruff. We got another lot farther west on another block and this time built a frame house with two good sized rooms. After we moved into it, I took up a school for three months and so passed the summer.

250The work on the temple was progressing, Elders were being sent out to the nations to preach the Gospel, emigrants from different parts flocked in, and everything prospered. About this time the Relief Society was organized with Emma Smith, president, with two counselors, and Eliza R. Snow, secretary. This was for the relief of the poor and for every noble purpose that came within woman's sphere of action. I united with this society. There was much valuable instruction given in these meetings. Sometimes Emma would bring the prophet in to give instructions. One in particular, I remember, he opened the meeting by prayer. He was so full of the Spirit of the Holy Ghost that his frame shook and his face shone and looked almost transparent. This was about the time that the order of Celestial marriage was given by revelation to him. He had taught it to a few who would hear it, but I heard him say at one time when he was preaching (turning to those that sat behind him), "If I should reveal to these, my Brethren, who now seem to be my bosom friends, what God has revealed to me, they would be the first to seek my life." And it was so. Even when this law of Celestial marriage was taught, these very men, William Marks, the Laws, and others, turned vipers against him. The clouds had begun to gather. It was not all sunshine now in Nauvoo. The opposing element was at work. The prophet was harassed with false brethren and apostates trying to prefer charges against him and bring him before the courts, but they could not prove anything against him. And for what reason was this tirade against him? It was because he was a prophet of the living God and because he had chosen to lay the foundation of the kingdom of God on the earth in this last dispensation. This has been the case in every age of the world when there has been a prophet to lead the people of God. They have been persecuted in like manner, and this is still another testimony of the divinity of this work.

251Again I turn to our temporal affairs. Again we had a chance to sell and better our conditions. An old couple came from the east and wanted a home. We sold this home of ours to them for $225. Then my husband went up on the hill near the temple and bought a small lot and built another house with three rooms and a basement and with a brick fire place and an old fashioned brick oven by the side of it. This was a beautiful location; fronting the east was the public square and to the south just one lot and a street separated us from the temple. Here we hoped would be our permanent home. My husband did his own carpenter work and also helped to work on the temple. Out of my bedroom window I could see the masons at work and could hear the click of their hammers and hear their sailor songs as they pulled the rock in place with pulleys. It was grand to see. Notwithstanding, trouble was brewing and work on the temple was being pushed ahead.

252One day I looked over toward the temple and saw a large crowd gathered with some two or three women present; so I thought I would go over. I put on my bonnet and shawl and made my way over. Brother Joseph was there and seemed busily engaged over something. Finally, he looked up and saw us women. He said for the brothers to stand back and let the sisters come up. So they gave way, and we went up. In the huge chief corner stone was cut out a square about a foot around and about as deep lined with zinc, and in it Brother Joseph had placed a Bible, a Book of Mormon, hymn book, and other church works along with silver money that had been coined in that year. Then a lid was cemented down, and the temple was reared on the top of this. It made me think of the prophets in ancient days hiding up their records to come forth in some future generation. At any rate, it was for some wise purpose, but I never heard any explanation of it. [^3] The building progressed rapidly, and I was present when the cap stone was laid and heard the last ring of the trowel. The Saints turned out enmass. The address on that occasion was pathetic and grand, being delivered by Brigham Young.

252There was much to contend with during the raising of that house for the evil one was stirring up the hearts of the people for he knew blessings would be poured out upon the Saints in that house. However, the Lord held the enemy at bay for the present.

252Previous to this, Brother Joseph had written his views on the powers and policy of the government. It was printed and came out in pamphlet form. The Elders that were sent out on missions were counseled to take this work with them and present it to the world.

252My husband had been in the employ of Amos Davis, a merchant in Nauvoo, for one year, and I had been teaching school. At this time, my husband was one who was chosen to go and preach the Gospel and also produce this pamphlet wherever he went. He was to go the state of New York. Consequently, he would go and visit his birth place. I got an idea that I would like to go with him and see my relatives. I had been away about ten years, and I had now four children. It seemed quite an undertaking, but I felt equal to the task; so my husband asked counsel of Brother Joseph. He told him to take me along, and I would prove a blessing to him. Therefore, we prepared to go; my husband went to Mr. Davis and got his wages, and besides, Mr. Davis made him a present of a nice suit of clothes, a hat, and fine boots and gave to me a dress pattern.

253When we were ready, we went down to the landing. There were quite a number of elders going. Brother Joseph and Hyrum were at the landing to see the brethren off. The Church owned the steamboat. Her name was Osprey, and we were going as far as St. Louis on her; then we were to take a larger boat, the Robert Fulton, from St. Louis to the mouth of the Ohio river and up that river to Pittsburgh. But when we got to this river, we got in shallow water and ran aground. They could not move her, and so we had to wait until another boat came along and took us off. This one was called the Clipper. We could step right off the Fulton's lower deck onto the Clipper's upper deck, as she was so close along side and was a smaller boat.

253From this point, we went to Louisville, where we had to go through the locks for there was great fall in the river. From there, we went on up to Pittsburgh and thence by sail and canal until we came to Buffalo. Then we went down Lake Ontario to Sackets Harbor, and we were now within 16 miles within Father Tracy's and 10 miles from Samuel Mattison's, my husband's brother-in-law. I stayed at the hotel, and he walked to his brother-in-law's and got him to go and bring us to his house. We stayed that night with them, and he took us next day to father's where we received a cordial greeting. It had been 3 weeks now since we left Nauvoo. We were tired and had to have a rest. We visited for a while and then father Tracy took us to Polaski, about 15 miles away, to see my mother and sister, and also my brother Eli. My brother Albert was in Canada teaching school and was a Methodist minister. When he heard we were there, he dismissed his school for a few days and came over to see us. We taught him the Gospel, but he was satisfied with his religion and would not listen to the message we had to bear. At last he went back, and it was the last time I ever saw him although we corresponded with each other. He is now in Missouri and has a family.

254We ended our visit for this time with my relatives, not forgetting to preach to them the Gospel and give them Joseph's views on the policy of the government. We then returned to Ellisburg, my husband to start out on his mission. When we got back, we received the heart rending news that our prophet was slain in Carthage jail. We were horror stricken. My husband sobbed aloud, "Is it true? Can it be true, when so short a time ago he set us apart to fill this mission and was all right?"

254The story of how they came to their death has oft been told. Joseph and his brother Hyrum had had the faith of the state pledged to them that they would be protected if they would give themselves up to be tried, but it was concocted beforehand to murder these innocent men. They knew they could prove nothing against them, and so they resorted to strategy to take their lives, thinking they would put an end to Mormonism. But the day of reckoning will come when vengeance will be taken. The Lord says to leave it with him, that he will repay. His plans are not to be frustrated by the puny arm of man.

254Well, this, of course, cast a dark gloomy shadow over Nauvoo and all the Saints near and far, for they loved the Prophet of God. But Mormonism was not dead. Neither was it going to die. The Lord could raise up another to build on the foundation that was already laid. These wicked men did not comprehend the predictions of the ancient prophets that in the last days God would set up His kingdom, no more to be thrown down or given to another people.

254My husband continued in his mission during the summer and fall. He baptized two and bore faithful testimonies wherever he went. In the winter months he stayed at his father's and labored in the branch that remained in Ellisburg. He belonged to the Seventies' quorum and had authority to make some things right that were not altogether in order in the branch.

254Winter passed. Many of the twelve and other elders that were not on missions were called home.

255In the spring, we made preparations to go back to Nauvoo. We bore faithful testimonies to those of our friends who had not obeyed the Gospel, bid them farewell, and then father took us to Oswego and there we took steamboat up to Lake Ontario. We stopped to view Niagara Falls, which was a grand sight. Our route home was the same as when we went. When we got to Pittsburgh, we went on board a river steamboat named "Sarah Ann." It was an old boat. When we got to Louisville, they chose to go over the rapids instead of through the locks. It was very risky, as the boat was so old. The shore was lined with people watching. Everything was so quiet on the boat you could have heard a pin drop. Everyone held his breath until she got safely over; then there were cheers from the shore and wavings of hats and handkerchiefs. The boat steamed on until we got to the mouth of the Ohio river. Then we came out onto the grand old Mississippi. We were now 500 miles below Nauvoo. The time seemed long, we were so anxious to get home to the city of the Saints.

255We arrived on Sabbath morning, but oh how lonely and quiet everything seemed.

255When we were in Louisville, I had left the boat as she lay at the wharf and had gone into a store and purchased some things, among which were a nice bonnet and veil. I could not get at my trunk, and so I tied them up in a large handkerchief and hung them up on a hook in the roof of the boat. When we got to the Nauvoo landing, I forgot all about them in our hurry and they went on with the boat and I never saw them again.

255Our house had been rented while we were away. As soon as we arrived, we went right home and prepared to go to meeting for that day was appointed for us to choose a first presidency to lead the Church. The saints convened in a grove. Sidney Rigdon and his followers were on hand to contest their right to be the leaders of the Saints. At one time he was one of Brother Joseph's councilors, but he was not righteous, and Joseph shook him off saying that he had carried him long enough and he would carry him no longer. Therefore, it was out of the question to have such a man lead the people.

255Brigham Young was the man chosen and sustained by unanimous vote to be the mouthpiece of God to the Saints. I can testify that the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham that day as that of Elijah did fall upon Elisha, for it seemed that his voice, his gestures, and all were Joseph. It seemed that we had him again with us. He was sustained by the voice of the people to be the prophet, seer, and revelator.

256Soon after this, my youngest child was taken sick and died in two weeks. His name was Theodore Franklin and he was two years and two months old. Now I had two little boys laid side by side in the burying ground, their little graves the same size.

256Well, the Temple was so far completed that fall that the Lord accepted it at the hands of the Saints, and it was dedicated. The Saints began to receive their blessings. Therein we had our endowments in that house.

256The evil one saw that the Saints were getting power from on high. Of course, he raged and stirred up the feeling of enmity against us, and the people again determined to drive us from our homes. So during the winter months preparations were made and some had already left their comfortable homes and crossed the river on the ice to go into the wilderness beyond civilization we know not where only as the hand of the Lord shall lead us. O liberty! thou precious boon that our Fathers shed their blood to gain, whither hast thou fled? But the hand of the Lord is over us, and so we shall find a resting place.

256On the 15th of March, 1845, my sixth son was born. [^4]

256About the last of May, previous to our departure from Nauvoo, I was aroused from my slumbers one night, hearing such heavenly music as I had never heard before. Everything was so still and quiet when it burst upon my ear that I could not imagine where it came from. I got up and looked out of the window. The moon shone bright as I looked over at the Temple from whence the sound came. There on the roof of the building heavenly bands of music had congregated and were playing most beautifully. The music was exquisite! And we had to leave all this; the Temple, our homes, and the pleasant surroundings and bid farewell. It was to your tents, O Israel. [^5]

256 "Emigrant Train Crossing the Plains," painter unknown, from the Relief Society Magazine (1917).

257At another time, fire caught in the roof of the Temple. How it caught, I never knew, but for awhile it seemed that the house would be destroyed. Men, women, and children came out and formed a bucket brigade. The wells were drained and finally they went with wagons and barrels to the river for water and at last succeeded in putting out the flames. The damage was considerable. It seemed that if the evil powers could not harass the people one way, they would do it in another.

257But now the time had come for us to take up the line and march, this time far away to the west where white man's foot had never trod. We were going to find a resting place among the red men of the forest. Our journey had been delayed some time on account of my confinement, but as soon as I was able to travel we started out. So farewell to beautiful Nauvoo. May the Lord have mercy on our enemies' souls for their cruelty and wickedness to an innocent and law abiding people. But we are to be a tried people and to be made perfect through suffering.

---
Notas:
[^1] In some early religious traditions, principally the Puritans and Friends, in order to become members, women were required to keep a daily account of their spiritual awakening and progress. Other women were impelled by their own desire to mark their spiritual journeys, their diaries becoming a permanent record of these "spiritual pilgrimages." See Carol Edkins, "Quest for Community: Spiritual Autobiographies of Eighteenth-Century Quaker and Puritan Women in America," in Estelle C. Jelinek, ed., Women's Autobiography, Essays in Criticism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980), 39-52.
[^2] Like Sarah Rich's effort, Rachel Woolley Simmons also felt impressed to write a journal "for her own satisfaction." Modestly disclaiming any great merit in its style or content, she nonetheless believed it would also bring pleasure to her children. See Rachel Woolley Simmons, "Reminiscences and Journals, 1881-1891," holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] In the late nineteenth century, even though she published her autobiography, the Duchess of Newcastle nevertheless included the disclaimer that "it is to no purpose to the Reader, but it is to the Authoress, because I write for my own sake, not theirs; neither did I intend this piece for to delight, but to divulge; not to please the fancy but to tell the truth . . . " in "A True Relation of My Birth, Breeding and Life," The Lives of William Cavendish, Duke of Newcastle, and of his Wife, Margaret Duchess of Newcastle, ed. Mark Antony Lover (London: John Russell, 1892), 309-10, as quoted in Domna C. Stanton, "Autogynography: Is the Subject Different?" in Domna C. Stanton, ed., The Female Autograph, Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 14.
[^4] See Edkins, "Quest for Community," 39-52.
[^5] Elizabeth Ann Whitney, a counselor to Emma Smith in the Nauvoo Relief Society, had received her endowments with her husband, Newel K. Whitney, from the Prophet Joseph before the temple was completed.
