Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

Preface

Moses warned his people Israel: "Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life" (Deut. 4:9). Moses bore a strong testimony that God is active in the affairs of his children, which is one of the greatest messages contained in the scriptures. Nowhere can this be seen more clearly than in the experiences that are recorded in the Old Testament. In that sacred volume we see God at work among humankind: making covenants for the benefit of the faithful, revealing his will through his prophets, controlling the powers of nature and the forces of history in behalf of those who love him, and watching over those who can turn nowhere else for deliverance but to him.

This volume, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: The Old Testament—Genesis to 2 Samuel, is presented as the third in a series of books intended to enhance and supplement one's personal study of the Standard Works of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Recognizing that there is no substitute for a sincere and serious study of the scriptures themselves, this series, Studies in Scripture, is presented as a resource, an aid in pointing members of the Church toward the profound realities to be discovered in the books which comprise our scriptural canon.

The Old Testament is perhaps the least read and least understood of our Standard Works. While some have never taken advantage of the beautiful truths and compelling histories contained in it, others have found it to be a treasure of powerful witnesses of God's love for humankind. This book is intended to provide Latter-day Saint readers with historical and doctrinal insights that will enhance their study of the first half of the Old Testament. We are pleased to present this book, the purpose of which is to bring Latter-day Saint readers closer to their scriptural heritage and thus closer to the divine source of all truth.

Each of the contributors is responsible for his or her own conclusions, and this volume is a private endeavor, and not a production of either Brigham Young University or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Although the writers and editors have sought to be in harmony with the teachings of the scriptures and the leaders of the Church, the reader should not regard this work as a primary source for gospel understanding but should turn instead to the scriptures and the words of modern prophets for authoritative doctrinal statements.

We express our sincere appreciation to those who have contributed chapters to this book. We requested their contributions because we value their wisdom and their expertise. We have enjoyed our association with them during the process of the editing of this volume. We also would like to thank Steven A. Shanafelt for his computer expertise, F. Warren Bittner for his tremendous indexing skills, Gary Lee Walker for his valued editorial assistance, and the staff and management of Randall Book Company for their fine work.

We sincerely hope that this book will make a meaningful contribution in bringing Latter-day Saints to a greater understanding and appreciation of the Old Testament and an increased desire to study it. As editors we have enjoyed our work on this volume and hope that others will find similar satisfaction in reading it.

Kent P. Jackson

Robert L. Millet

August 1, 1985
