Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

1

GOD'S TESTAMENT TO ANCIENT ISRAEL

KENT P. JACKSON

The Old Testament derives its name in contrast to the New Testament. The word "testament" means covenant, and the Old Testament, which includes the covenant that God established with Israel at Sinai, obtains its name from that source. The New Testament derives its name from the new covenant of Christianity, which is contained within its pages. Key scriptural passages upon which this terminology is in part based are Jer. 31:31-33, along with New Testament references to Jeremiah's words (e.g., Heb. 8:8-13), and Jesus' words at the Last Supper (Matt. 26:28; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20; 1 Cor. 11:25). Jeremiah spoke of a new covenant that God would establish with his people, not like the old covenant written on tablets of stone, but a new covenant to be written in men's hearts. Jesus introduced the sacrament as a "new testament." Though the terms Old and New Testament may not be entirely appropriate as titles for the two records—either historically or theologically—still the names convey well the concept of the covenant of Sinai being the precursor and forerunner to the greater covenant of the gospel. And certainly the sacred record which we call the Old Testament serves well to set the stage and prepare the way for the greater revelation to come.

It has been noted often that it is difficult to define what the Old Testament is. A more productive quest is to define what the Old Testament contains. The Old Testament is not a book—it is a collection, a collection of thirty-nine books that comprise the record of God's dealings with his covenant people of the era of Moses—ancient Israel. The core of its record extends from the call of Moses, ca. 1250 B.C. to the mission of Nehemiah, ca. 432 B.C. Yet it also includes a record that extends as far into the past as the creation, and prophecies that extend as far into the future as the glorification of the earth. Its scope, therefore, is limitless, even as the scope of the gospel itself has no limits.

In the present form and organization of modern Bible translations, the material in the Old Testament, ancient Israel's sacred record, can be divided into four sections: the Prologue, the Historical Core, the Writings, and the Prophetic Books (see chart, "The Books of the Old Testament").

The Prologue to the Scripture of Ancient Israel

The Prologue to ancient Israel's sacred record is the book of Genesis. It can be called a "prologue" because it is not part of the basic historical narrative collection which comprises the core of the Old Testament. Yet it provides the absolutely essential backdrop to that narrative, which begins with the mission of Moses. Indeed the Old Testament begins with Moses, a fact which we learn from the first two chapters of the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the Bible. According to that restored account (which has been canonized in the Pearl of Great Price as Moses 1 and 2), Moses, sometime after the call to his prophetic mission, saw in vision the endless works of the Father and learned of the mission of his Son. [^1] He was commanded: "I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak" (Moses 1:40). Continuing, the Lord said: "I reveal unto you concerning this heaven, and this earth; write the words which I speak. . . . In the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest" (Moses 2:1). With this begins the familiar creation account.

Genesis is significant not only for the account of the creation but for the material that follows as well. In it we learn of mankind's temporary sojourn in Eden and expulsion into mortality. [^2] We trace the parallel and contemporaneous developments of the kingdoms of God and Satan [^3] and follow the line of patriarchal priesthood from Adam to Jacob and his children.

Outside of the creation account in the first few chapters, which were revealed prior to the deliverance of Israel from Egypt (Moses 1:26), we do not know at what point in Moses' career the Genesis material was revealed or otherwise made known to him and Israel. But ancient Israel's profound need for Genesis should be clear to all who read it. The Israelites in Moses' day were experiencing both a rebirth as a people and a restoration of revealed truth. The information contained in Genesis was vital for their establishment as a covenant people and for their relocation to the land that had been promised to them through their forefathers. Genesis taught Moses' people who they were, where they came from, and where they were going. It taught them that they were created in the image of the one true God, who personally cares about his mortal children and takes an active interest in their affairs. It made clear to them the fact that they were the inheritors of sacred covenants that God had made with the pious men and women from whom they descended. And it let them know that the land to which they were being led was theirs.

Some scholars believe that Genesis was written centuries after the time of Moses in the social and political setting of the Israelite monarchy. [^4] Although we cannot trace with exactness the history of the Genesis text, and although it is possible that the text as it stands now was influenced by later scribes and historians (as in the case with Mormon's editing in the Book of Mormon), there is no doubt in my mind that the setting of the revelation of Genesis is with Moses and the Israelites. Genesis was revealed to Moses at that time. It provides answers to questions that were more relevant to Moses' generation than to any other, and it serves well as the prologue to the history of the House of Israel that was being constituted into a nation under Moses' inspired direction.

In the Church today we understand our role as modern Israel partly because of the book of Genesis, which is as vital to our own understanding of our position in Israel as it was to our spiritual and lineal forefathers of ancient times. It is not insignificant that the modern-day restoration of true religion also included the restoration of much of the foundational material that is part of the Genesis history, including such things as the Book of Moses, the Book of Abraham, the Joseph Smith Translation changes and additions to later parts of Genesis, [^5] and several key revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants that pertain to our origin and our covenant heritage.

The Historical Core

The core of the Old Testament is the large body of historical material that extends from the calling of Moses to the last record of the career of Nehemiah (ca. 1250-432 B.C.). This includes the following books: Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1-2 Samuel, 1-2 Kings, 1-2 Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah. [^6] These books, which were written by a variety of authors, chronicle the history of Israel from its reconstruction in the days of Moses to the end of the Old Testament period. They constitute the core to which the Genesis prologue and the collections of Writings and Prophetic Books are added.

Like the Book of Mormon, the Old Testament teaches its messages primarily through history. In these pages we can see how God is active in the affairs of mankind and how men and women have responded, or failed to respond, to the efforts of God and his chosen servants. The pious (and unnamed) historians of the Old Testament wrote from a perspective of deep personal commitment and obedience to the Lord's will. Their objective in writing is obvious: they hoped that future generations would learn through the examples of the past not to make the mistakes that had been made before, while duplicating the behavior of those who had lived righteously. Sadly, most of the lessons that modern readers can learn from the history of ancient Israel are from bad examples. [^7]

The historical books of the Old Testament, including Genesis, make up the largest group in the Bible, totaling 668 pages (using the LDS Bible publication), or 56.4 percent of the Old Testament. This compares with 404 pages total in the New Testament and 531 pages in the (1981 English) Book of Mormon. Certainly there is much to learn about life from the experiences related in the Old Testament (see 1 Cor. 10:11).

The Writings

Modern translations place the literary works of the Old Testament in a group before the books of the Prophets. The traditional ancient grouping places them last (see chart, "The Ancient Divisions of the Hebrew Bible"). These include the following books: Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon (also known as the Song of Songs), and Lamentations (which appears in modern translations between Jeremiah and Ezekiel). Several of these books belong to a category of writing called "wisdom literature," in which wisdom, or the capacity to go through life prudently and successfully, is conveyed through various literary styles. Perhaps the finest example of wisdom literature in the world is the book of Proverbs, a collection of brief sayings that convey wisdom from one generation to the next. The book of Psalms, the hymn book of ancient Israel, is unparalleled in its expression of Israelite devotion.

The Writings include 200 pages of the Old Testament, or 16.8 percent of the total.

The Prophetic Books

The last of the divisions in modern Bible translations contains the books of the Prophets. Unlike most of the other books of the Old Testament, which are anonymous, the Prophetic Books are identified by the name of the author (except in the case of Jonah, which appears to be an anonymous work named for the prophet in the story). These are commonly divided into two groups, the Major Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel; and the Minor Prophets: Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. The division between "major" and "minor" is based solely on the length of the books and not on the importance or quality of the content. It is significant to note that in the Book of Mormon the words of the prophets are integrated into the historical narrative, while in the Old Testament they are found in a separate collection.

The Prophetic Books comprise 317 pages or 26.8 percent of the Old Testament.

Reading and Understanding the Old Testament

Many Latter-day Saint readers find the Old Testament to be the most difficult of the Standard Works of the Church. Yet rather than paying the necessary price to discover its beautiful truths, they avoid it. Admittedly it has special problems that require special solutions. But those solutions are within the reach of most Latter-day Saints, and the rewards for one's efforts will be substantial.

Travelers outside of their homelands often experience perplexing cultural and language barriers. Since the Old Testament is the product of a culture vastly different than our own, and since it was written in languages that few members of the Church can read, both cultural and language barriers stand in the way of most readers. Even in translation, readers of the King James Version must deal with an English text that is over 350 years old, in a dialect that few modern readers can understand without considerable effort. Yet Bible readers who pay the needed price of serious and prayerful study and thought will find great satisfaction in their reading. Hard work and patience are often required.

I suggest the following four keys to gaining the most from reading the Old Testament:

(a) the historical and cultural circumstances within which it originated, and

(b) the contemporary issues and concerns to which the biblical writers addressed themselves (see 2 Ne. 25:5-6).

Joseph Smith and the Bible

The Prophet Joseph Smith was not only a restorer of scripture, but he was a serious student of the Bible as well. His speeches were often punctuated with scriptural lessons or scriptural examples—always coming from the Bible. [^8] In his personal journals he often recorded his strong desire to learn Hebrew, in order to enable him to understand the Bible better. Learning Hebrew for this purpose was one of the most compelling and urgent desires of his life, as his journal attests. [^9]

The Prophet took the Bible very seriously, yet he was aware of its limitations and often pointed out problems that he saw which resulted from the uncertain history of its transmission from original sources. The following quotations are representative of his thought concerning the Bible:

"Many important points touching the salvation of men had been taken from the Bible or lost before it was compiled." [^10]

"There are many things in the Bible which do not, as they now stand, accord with the revelations of the Holy Ghost to me." [^11]

"We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly" (Article of Faith 8).

"I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^12] In this remark Joseph Smith itemized three sources of inaccuracies in the transmission of the Bible. Those who have had the experience of learning (or trying to learn) a new language can sympathize with "ignorant translators," as can those who type or take notes with "careless transcribers." Only the errors introduced by "designing and corrupt priests" were done with evil intent.

While Joseph Smith was frank to point out limitations in the Bible and dedicated his life to the restoration of precious truths that it lacks, his love for it never waivered. He viewed his study of the Bible as part of his prophetic calling, and he taught from the Bible not only with power but with conviction and affection. A final remark from him summarizes his feelings and should serve as a challenge to all students of the Old Testament today:

"He who reads it oftenest will like it best." [^13]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Two brief examples will suffice. First, Job's existence and experience has been questioned by modern students of the Bible. D&C 121:10 indicates otherwise. Second, we possess no account of Moses' ordination to the priesthood in the Old Testament. D&C 84:6 supplies the information that he received it from Jethro, his father-in-law.
[^2] The Hebrew text of Gen. chapter 10 lists seventy descendants of Noah who became the progenitors of the seventy gentile nations of the earth. The Septuagint Greek text has the names of 72, adding the name of Elisha to v. 2 and Cainan to v. 22. I have dealt with this complication in my article "The Seventy in Scripture," in A Symposium on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: LDS Church Educational System, 1983), pp. 27-32.
[^3] This view of Abraham as a restorer of what had been given in earlier ages is a distinctively LDS notion. See, for example, Spencer J. Palmer, "Mormon Views of Religious Resemblances," BYU Studies 16.4 (Summer 1976):660-81.
[^4] For the background of this idea and its history, see R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1969), pp. 3-7.
[^5] See Julius Wellhausen, Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel (New York: Meridian Books, 1957). A readable summary appears in H. H. Rowley, The Growth of the Old Testament (London: Hutchinson & Co., 1950), pp. 15-46; Harrison, pp. 19-32.
[^6] See Otto Eissfeldt, The Old Testament: An Introduction (New York: Harper and Row, 1965), pp. 171-76; Georg Fohrer, Introduction to the Old Testament (Nashville: Abingdon Press 1968), pp. 167-77; also Harrison, pp. 647, 652-53; and Rowley, pp. 29-31.
[^7] See M. Haran, Temples and Temple Service in Ancient Israel; An Inquiry into the Character of Cult Phenomena and the Historical Setting of the Priestly School (Oxford: Clarendon, 1978); D. N. Freedman, "Review of Haran, Temples and Temple Service. . .," Biblical Archaeologist (Spring, 1980):121-22.
[^8] See Rowley, p. 46; and Eissfeldt, pp. 165-67.
[^9] Harrison, pp. 25-26, 33-61.
[^10] See, for example, William F. Albright, The Biblical Period from Abraham to Ezra (New York: Harper and Row, 1963); and Donald J. Wiseman and Edwin Yamauchi, Archaeology and the Bible (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1979).
[^11] The most recent instance of finding a civilization virtually "intact" is that of Ebla at Tel Mardikh in northwestern Syria. See Paolo Matthiae, Ebla: An Empire Rediscovered (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1980); and Giovanni Pettinato, The Archives of Ebla: An Empire Inscribed in Clay (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1981).
[^12] Gerhard von Rad, "The Form-Critical Problem of the Hexateuch," in The Problem of the Hexateuch and Other Essays (Edinburgh and London: Oliver & Boyd, 1966), pp. 1-78. The passages in question are Deut. 6:20-24; 26:5b-9; Joshua 24:2b-13. I have long thought that such a (memorized) recitation lay beneath Nephi's recapitulation of the history of his people in 1 Ne. 17:23-42.
[^13] E.g., Eduard Nielsen, "The Role of Oral Tradition in the Bible," in Old Testament Issues, ed. Samuel Sandmel (New York: Harper and Row, 1968), pp. 68-93.
