Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

3

GENESIS AND THE EARLY EXPERIENCES OF MANKIND (Genesis 1-11)

KENT P. JACKSON

The Book of Genesis

The book of Genesis is one of the most important written documents in the world. As a record of cultural and historical significance it is unsurpassed, and as a scripture that chronicles God's interaction with mankind it is of infinite worth. Genesis is the book of beginnings. In its pages we have the scriptural account of the creation of the heavens, the earth, life on earth, and the human race. Genesis also contains the record of covenants that God made with the earliest generations of humankind. As such it is of profound significance to the Saints of the last days, who are the heirs of those covenants. Among other scriptural records Genesis is unique in many ways, and the contributions that it makes to our religion are immeasurable. [^1]

As has been noted in chapter 1, Joseph Smith was direct in pointing out that the Bible as we have it now is not in its original state of perfection, having undergone changes in the hands of uninspired individuals through the centuries of its history. [^2] Notwithstanding that reality, it is clear that the Lord has preserved it to the point that it remains today a powerful blessing in the lives of Latter-day Saints and other believing people around the world. Divine providence has watched over Genesis throughout its long history—from Moses' writing of the revealed creation account to the latest ancient scribal emendation or deletion. And in spite of imperfections in the received text—which are clarified to a great extent through modern revelation, including Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the Bible [^3]—the book of Genesis remains today a powerful record of God's activities in behalf of his children.

Genesis can be outlined in the following way (with the greatest detail given to the sections discussed in this chapter, Gen. 1-11):

The Creation and the Eden Experience

Because the Creation is discussed in detail elsewhere, only a few brief comments will be provided here. [^4] Genesis gives only two chapters that relate the basics of the Creation, while parallel accounts are found in Moses 2-3 (the JST revision of Gen. 1-2), and Abr. 4-5. Latter-day Saints who attend the temple are aware that additional information on the Creation is provided there.

The detailed process by which the Lord brought the universe and planet Earth into existence is not known by man. It is not unlikely that the principles of science as understood today will never be able to explain the divine powers and the divine actions that created these things. When Moses was shown all the creations that the Father had made through Christ, he—like many others today—wanted to know more. He said: "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them" (Moses 1:30). The Lord's response provided Moses with no further information in answer to his question, yet it taught him and us a great lesson: "For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me" (Moses 1:31). There are some things that the Lord has not seen fit to reveal, even to the greatest of the prophets. As Moses needed to be satisfied with God's wisdom in that matter, so must we. In his own discussion of the Creation, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

Our analysis properly begins with the frank recital that our knowledge about the Creation is limited. We do not know the how and why and when of all things. Our finite limitations are such that we could not comprehend them if they were revealed to us in all their glory, fulness, and perfection. What has been revealed is that portion of the Lord's eternal word which we must believe and understand if we are to envision the truth about the Fall and the Atonement and thus become heirs of salvation. This is all we are obligated to know in our day. [^5]

The Lord has promised that the time will come in which greater things will be made known. That time will be in the Millennium:

In that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven (D&C 101:32-34).

For our current needs, the Lord has given us the beautiful, powerful, concise, and systematic creation accounts of the scriptures. He has also given us collectively an intellectual curiosity that has opened the frontiers of science for the betterment of all life. I believe that Latter-day Saints would do well to realize that it will not be until Christ comes again that the full story of God's creative act will be made known—through revelation (D&C 101:32). In the meantime we can learn to live with certain questions not yet answered, trusting that it is wisdom in God that not all things are made known in our day (Moses 1:31).

Perhaps the most powerful message that is contained in the Genesis creation account (and in the other accounts as well) is that the Creation was a deliberate act of God. The scriptures leave no room for the idea that the existence of life on Earth is accidental. While we may not know the details, we can be assured that God was in control of his creative process. Moses learned that it was through Christ that the Creation was accomplished: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth" (Moses 1:32). We also learn from the Genesis account that the crowning achievement of the Creation was man. Modern revelation tells us why: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Creation was thus not only an act of God, but it was done with a divine purpose as well. We, God's children, are its greatest beneficiaries.

The narrative concerning the experience of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden is quite brief. [^6] Here, as with the Creation account, the temple adds additional detail. The Genesis account emphasizes the fact that it was the prospect of obtaining a knowledge of good and evil, "as the gods," that induced Adam and Eve to eat of the fruit (Gen. 3:5-6). Among the consequences of their actions, the following are listed in Gen. 3: Eve would bring forth children in sorrow (v. 16), the ground would be cursed, requiring much effort to produce food from it (vv. 17-19), and Adam and Eve would die (v. 19). Despite their expulsion from a state of paradise, Adam and Eve did obtain knowledge, and in that sense the process of the fall made them, as God said, "as one of us, to know good and evil" (v. 22). With that the mortal experience of humankind began.

An Age of Contrasts

From our present-day perspective, the period of time between the fall of Adam and the ministry of Abraham is the most mysterious times in scriptural history. Although it lasted over two thousand years and many tremendous things occurred in it, it is the period concerning which our scriptures say the least. The Bible devotes only eight chapters to this period (approximately ten pages in modern translations), and three of those chapters are lists of genealogies, containing the familiar "begats." The Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the biblical account, found in the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, adds significant new information concerning one part of this period but still leaves us wishing that we knew much more. Another scriptural source is found in the Book of Mormon, in the brief record of Jared and his family contained in the first six chapters of Ether. The Doctrine and Covenants provides some important information concerning this period as well (see D&C 84:14-17; 107:40-55).

Though our scriptural information for this period is sketchy, we are nonetheless able to gain an overview of the people and events that made this early time in human history an important era. From the combined scriptural accounts of Genesis, Moses, and Ether, we can see that a most characteristic feature of this period was contrast—the everpresent contrast between God, his people and their works, and Satan, his people and their works.

From the beginning of human history, whenever the Lord has established his work, the adversary has established his own as well. Satan's counterfeit kingdom has been successful in creating sorrow and suffering, while the Lord's has led faithful individuals into happiness and eternal glory. Perhaps not long after the children of Adam and Eve grew to maturity, the adversary began to sow the seeds of sin and disbelief among many of them. The scriptures record that after Adam and Eve taught their children the gospel, Satan came among them and "commanded" them, saying: "Believe it not." And "they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish" (Moses 5:13). The sacred records give one specific early example of the nature of man when under the influence of the devil: for the lust of his brother's property and at the command of his satanic master, Cain introduced murder into the world.

Sadly, the scriptures teach us that this was not an isolated incident in history: "And thus the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men. And God cursed the earth with a sore curse, and was angry with the wicked, with all the sons of men whom he had made" (Moses 5:55-56). Amplified in many lives, evil increased into the days of Enoch, who saw in vision Satan and his works:

And he beheld Satan; and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced. . . .

And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept. . . .

The Lord said unto Enoch: Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency;

And unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood (Moses 7:26, 28, 32-33).

Because of the wickedness of men, Satan rejoiced and laughed, while God, in contrast, watched his children with sorrow and wept.

By the time of Noah, men had become so wicked, despite God's repeated calling upon them to repent, that the following unprecedented words are recorded concerning them: "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually" (Gen. 6:5). This generation was found to be so wicked that its people were no longer allowed to pollute the earth by their presence on it or to bring innocent spirits into its decadent environment (see Gen. 6:11-13). [^7] The Lord decreed that all living things on earth would be destroyed by flood, with the exception of a faithful few who would be spared so that God could begin anew his creative work and reestablish his covenant among men. The Flood was an act of mercy, not an act of vengeance. The generation of Noah was so wicked that only an act of cleansing of immense magnitude could allow the next generations a chance to live by higher principles. As it will be at the end of the world, evil must be eliminated, whether it be through repentance or through destruction. For almost all people in Noah's day, the option taken was destruction at the hand of the Lord.

Future generations, though never described as being as wicked as the generation of Noah, still persisted in many of the evil ways of those who preceded them. Among Noah's offspring were many who chose to do evil rather than good. In their arrogance they planned to build a city and tower whose top would "reach unto heaven." They vainly said: "Let us make us a name" (Gen. 11:4). God's punishment for this generation was not destruction by flood, but the destruction of their society through the confounding of their language.

The Establishment of Zion

While it is clear from the scriptures that the world as a whole in those ancient days could be characterized as extremely evil, still the sacred records tell us that at the same time there were people who were extremely righteous. It is, in fact, most interesting that the same generations that produced humanity at its lowest level also produced men and women whose disposition to obey and serve God is unparalleled in human history. It was between the days of Adam and Abraham that two entire societies, those of Enoch and Melchizedek, were found worthy to be taken from the earth as a group to escape its corruptions and enjoy the blessings of a more sublime sphere (Moses 7:69;JST Gen. 14:33-34; see also Moses 7:27).

Genesis 5 lists the genealogies of the lineage through whom the priesthood and the covenants of the gospel continued, beginning with Adam and ending with the sons of Noah. Little is given outside of the genealogical information. One can imagine that great things were manifest in the lives of those people whom we call the Patriarchs; yet the Lord has seen fit to withhold their histories from us. Concerning the ministry of the great patriarch Enoch, the biblical account states only the following: "And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him" (Gen. 5:24).

Among the foremost of the many inspired changes that the Prophet made in the Bible text was the addition of several pages of entirely new material that deals with the period between the fall of Adam and the ministry of Abraham. [^8] This material, found in the Book of Moses, tells us that in spite of the widespread wickedness of those days, the work of the Lord was continuing: "And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Moses 5:58). Moses 6 and 8 supplement the genealogies of the Patriarchs by adding information that is not found in the corresponding narrative in Genesis 5. The most substantial contribution of this section, however, is the large amount of material concerning the great prophet Enoch and his people. Whereas Genesis discusses Enoch and his works in only four brief verses (Gen. 5:21-24), the Joseph Smith Translation account, found in Moses 6 and 7, discusses the life, mission, and revelations of Enoch in 114 verses (Moses 6:25-8:2).

The account of Enoch's life and ministry stands in stark contrast to the record of most of his contemporaries. Enoch and his people established Zion; they created a society which was so in harmony with the Lord's will that it was called "the City of Holiness, even ZION" (Moses 7:19). [^9] The record states:

And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish.

And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them (Moses 7:17-18).

We read further:

And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, ZION IS FLED (Moses 7:69).

The glorification of Enoch and his city has provided the pattern for all other societies of Saints to follow. We know only of the city of Melchizedek which has succeeded in joining Enoch's people as a group (see JST, Gen. 14:32-34). Yet other individuals between the days of Enoch and Noah were also taken up, or translated, when found worthy to do so (JST, Gen. 14:32; Moses 7:27). In our day these things were revealed at the beginning of the history of the Church; thus they provide a pattern for Saints of the last days, who—under the direction of proper prophetic and apostolic authority—endeavor to establish Zion in accordance with the Lord's command. As Joseph Smith taught, "The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight." [^10]

In the days that followed the translation of the city of Enoch, the choice for all people was to join Zion or remain in the world. While Enoch and the Saints succeeded in establishing a community of peace on the principles of faith and righteousness, the people of the world continued in their unrepentant ways and reaped a harvest of sorrow and destruction. The history of humankind during this period demonstrates the results of obedience to Satan—warfare and tragedy—and obedience to God—peace and happiness. Sadly, the destruction levels of ancient ruins attest to the lifestyle that was chosen by many. Truly, as Alma taught, "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). For us today the circumstances have changed, but the issues of obedience and rebellion remain the same. We too live in an age of contrasts.

Genesis 10 contains what is often called "The Table of Nations," since it lists the nations that descended from Noah's sons. This list clearly was not written from the perspective of the narrative that precedes it and follows it; it was written instead from a much later timeframe, when Noah's descendants had filled parts of the Earth. Perhaps it reflects the ethnic divisions that characterized the world in Moses day, or perhaps it was included at a later time. The Tower of Babel incident begins chapter 11. Following it, the genealogy is given from Adam's son Seth to Abraham (Gen. 11:10-28). With that the stage is set for the extended account of the life of Abraham, the great patriarch through whom the covenants of God were extended to the people of Israel. Beginning with Gen. 11:29, the entire remainder of the book concerns Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their families. Clearly, the emphasis in Genesis is with the immediate ancestors of Israel. Genesis is Israel's prehistory—and the prologue to the history of God's dealings with that people.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The most complete examination of Joseph Smith's revision of the Bible is Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation: Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Ut.: Brigham Young University Press, 1975). A worthwhile overview is found in Robert L. Millet, "Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible: A Historical Overview," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Ut.: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 23-49.
[^2] For a discussion of the impact of the Bible revision on the Doctrine and Covenants, see Millet, "Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible and the Doctrine and Covenants," in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 132-43.
[^3] See the dates in the headings of the 1981 edition of the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.
[^4] Matthews, A Plainer Translation, p. 96.
[^5] In a letter to "the Brethren in Zion," 2 July 1833; HC 1:368.
[^6] For information regarding the contributions of the JST to other parts of the Old Testament (and the New Testament as well), see Nyman and Millet, eds., The Joseph Smith Translation.
[^7] From Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1985): Robert J. Matthews, "What is the Book of Moses," pp. 25-41; Rodney Turner, "The Visions of Moses," pp. 43-61; Monte S. Nyman, "The Fall of Adam and Eve," pp. 91-100, and "The Rise of the Kingdom of Satan," pp. 101-9; Robert J. Matthews, "The Doctrine of the Atonement: The Revelation of the Gospel to Adam," pp. 111-29; Robert L. Millet, "Enoch and His City," pp. 131-44; Alan K. Parrish, "The Days of Noah," pp. 145-59.
[^8] See H. Donl Peterson, "The Birth and Development of the Pearl of Great Price," ibid., pp. 11-23.
[^9] Baptism, according to the scriptures, is not a representation of washing, but a representation of death, burial, and rebirth (see Rom. 6:3-4; Col. 2:12; 3:1-2; Eph. 4:22-24). Thus sprinkling cannot be a valid ordinance, because it cannot represent these factors that are brought to bear when spiritual rebirth and its associated ordinance (baptism) take place.
[^10] This is the first mention of the age of accountability in modern revelation, coming sometime between December 1830 and April 1831. The revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that also gives eight years as the age of accountability (68:25), came several months later (November 1831).
