Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

4

INSPIRED ADDITIONS TO GENESIS (JST, Genesis)

KENT P. JACKSON

One of the most significant events in the history of the Church is also one of the least known and least appreciated. It is not recorded in the scriptures, and the date of its occurrence is unknown and can only be estimated within broad limits. Although few Latter-day Saints are even aware that it took place, it has touched profoundly all generations of believers in the restored gospel and continues to do so today. That event of tremendous significance was when God planted a revelation into the mind and heart of Joseph Smith, instructing him to begin the process of reading the Bible with the purpose of making inspired changes in it. [^1] Out of Joseph Smith's efforts came an abundance of revealed information—in the form of inspired changes in the biblical text and new revelations now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. [^2] Undoubtedly as significant as these things is the fact that it was while Joseph Smith was in the process of making the Bible revision that he received much of his education in the principles of the gospel, as a foundation for establishing the kingdom of God in the last days. Every member of the Church today benefits from the divine tutoring that the Prophet received while engaged in the process of revising the Bible.

The revelation to begin revising the Bible was likely received sometime in the late spring or early summer of 1830, perhaps only a short time after the publication of the Book of Mormon and the organization of the Church. In June the first revealed changes were made in the Old Testament. Moses 1, Moses' visions that begin the revelation of the creation account, was revealed then. Over the following months others followed. [^3] By 7 March 1831 the Prophet had made revisions through Gen. 19:35, [^4] at which point he made further revisions in Genesis but concentrated his efforts on the New Testament, as he had been instructed in revelation (D&C 45:60-61). Early in 1833, following his completion of the New Testament revision, Joseph Smith once again turned his attention to revising the Old Testament, which he declared finished early in July of the same year. [^5] Off and on throughout the rest of his life he made subsequent revisions in the manuscripts of the translation.

Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible (JST), sometimes called the Inspired Version, includes several significant corrections and additions to the text of the Old Testament, particularly in the book of Genesis. This essay will be a brief overview of seven major additions in that book. [^6]

The Book of Moses

The largest and perhaps the most significant single block of new material added by the JST to the text of the Bible is found in the first chapters of Genesis. Since this material is discussed well elsewhere, only a brief review is necessary here. [^7] Genesis 1-6 was revised very extensively, with the addition of many new things not found in Genesis of the Old Testament. Among the most important of the changes made in the Prophet's inspired revision is the addition of many verses of entirely new material concerning the career of Enoch. While Genesis only devotes four verses to the life and ministry of Enoch, the JST revision has one hundred-fourteen verses, covering his call, his visions, his ministry, and the translation of his city. In 1851, large portions of Genesis 1-6 of the inspired revision were included in the first edition of the Pearl of Great Price, along with a prefatory chapter that gives an account of Moses' glorious visions that took place at the beginning of the Genesis revelation. [^8] Genesis 1-6 of the JST is found today as the eight chapters of the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.

Noah and the Covenant

The inspired revision of the Bible teaches that even long after the translation of the City of Enoch, others looked upon that event as a model and as a goal. The Lord made reference to it in teaching his saints (see JST, Gen. 13:13, and the other biblical references cited below; for modern examples, see D&C 38:4; 45:12-14; 76:57, 67). Such was the case in the days of Noah; the Lord told Noah of covenants that he had made with Enoch regarding Noah and his descendants (JST, Gen. 9:15, cf. Gen. 9:9;JST Gen. 9:17, cf. Gen. 9:11).

In the Genesis account of Noah, the rainbow is presented as the token of God's covenant to Noah that the world would never again be destroyed by flood (Gen. 9:11-17). The Joseph Smith Translation adds a new dimension and teaches that the rainbow was the token of a covenant—made originally with Enoch and later reconfirmed with Noah—that Enoch's city would return, when people on earth would be worthy to receive it:

King James Translation Joseph Smith Translation

And the bow shall be in the And the bow shall be in the

cloud; and I will look upon it, cloud; and I will look upon it,

that I may remember the ever- that I may remember the ever-

lasting covenant lasting covenant, which I made

unto thy father Enoch; that, when

men should keep all my

commandments, Zion should

again come on the earth, the city

of Enoch which I have caught up

unto myself.

And this is mine everlasting

covenant, that when thy posterity

shall embrace the truth, and look

upward, then shall Zion look

downward, and all the heavens

shall shake with gladness, and the

earth shall tremble with joy;

And the general assembly of

the church of the first-born shall

come down out of heaven, and

possess the earth, and shall have

place until the end come. And this

is mine everlasting covenant,

which I made with thy father

Enoch.

And the bow shall be in the

cloud, and I will establish my

covenant unto thee, which I have

made between me and thee,

between God and every living for every living creature of all

creature of all flesh that is flesh that shall be upon the earth

upon the earth (Gen. 9:16). (JST, Gen. 9:21-25).

Melchizedek

One of the most dramatic additions to Genesis concerns the great prophet Melchizedek. In Genesis 14, Abram met with Melchizedek following his successful campaign to rescue his nephew Lot from capture. The Genesis account (14:18-20) tells us simply that Melchizedek, "the priest of the most high God" (v. 18), "brought forth bread and wine" (v. 18) and blessed Abram (vv. 19-20). Joseph Smith's inspired revision of Genesis 14 suggests strongly that the bread and wine was the sacrament (JST, v. 17), and it adds sixteen new verses regarding Melchizedek himself. We learn in them of his tremendous faith and spiritual power, how even as a child he "stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire" (JST, Gen. 14:26). Perhaps more significantly, we learn a great deal about the priesthood and its powers from the new information regarding the great High Priest (vv. 27-31). We also learn the following:

And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.

And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace.

And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world (JST, Gen. 14:32-34).

From this it appears that Melchizedek and his city were taken from the earth, enjoying the same blessing obtained previously by Enoch and his society.

Tokens and Priesthood Ordinances

In Genesis 17, God renewed his covenant with Abram (vv. 1-9), gave him the new name Abraham (v. 5) and his wife Sarai the new name Sarah (v. 15), promised them a son through whom the covenant would continue (vv. 15-19), and instituted the ordinance of circumcision. The JST supplies two very significant additions to the text. The first is a statement from the Lord regarding the apostasy of his people:

My people have gone astray from my precepts, and have not kept mine ordinances, which I gave unto their fathers;

And they have not observed mine anointing, and the burial, or baptism wherewith I commanded them;

But have turned from the commandment, and taken unto themselves the washing of children, and the blood of sprinkling;

And have said that the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins; and have not known wherein they are accountable before me (JST, Gen. 17:4-7).

Rather than describing pagan nations who never knew the truth, these verses describe people who had once been favored with the gospel but who had perverted its doctrines and ordinances. Among other things, they had changed the ordinance of the burial through baptism to a washing of children and "the blood of sprinkling" (vv. 5-6). [^9] In addition to this they had changed the doctrine of the Atonement of Jesus Christ to a doctrine of redemption through the blood of Abel (v. 7). Outside of a puzzling reference in Heb. 12:24, this idea is not found elsewhere in scripture or in history. It must have been a common doctrine among apostates of Abraham's day.

Genesis 17 is the first mention in the Old Testament of the ordinance of circumcision. Circumcision, which is the surgical removal of the skin on the front part of the male sex organ, was given to Abraham to be the token of the covenant that had been established between him and God. In modern societies it is common to wear clothing decorated with names or expressions that represent places or institutions with which we choose to identify ourselves. How much more poignant was the token of the Abrahamic covenant, which was not worn but was incised into the flesh of the believer. Yet is was not for public display but for a permanent, irreversable, personal reminder.

An inspired addition to Genesis 17 gives an additional insight concerning the purpose of this ordinance:

And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old (JST, Gen. 17:11).

It is clear from Gen. 17:4-7 in the JST (quoted earlier) that the concepts of baptism, redemption, and accountability were distorted in Abraham's day. The ordinance of circumcision, administered when a male child was eight days old, was a sign not only that the child was born into the covenant of Abraham, but also that he was born free of sin and unaccountable until eight years old, [^10] when he would receive baptism for the remission of sins—a sign of his taking part in the redemptive work of the Lord Jesus Christ. [^11]

Lot in Sodom

In Genesis 19, three angels, or holy men, entered the city of Sodom in order to rescue Abraham's nephew Lot and his family from the destruction that was about to be poured out on that city. While they were in his house, the men of the city surrounded it and demanded that the visitors be given over to them. According to the Genesis account, Lot offered to the mob his daughters in place of the visitors and invited them: "Do ye to them as is good in your eyes" (Gen. 19:8). The inspired correction differs significantly from that:

King James Translation Joseph Smith Translation

And they said among themselves,

This one man came in to sojourn among

us, and he will needs now make himself

to be a judge; now we will deal worse

with him than with them.

Wherefore they said unto the man, We

will have the men, and thy daughters

also; and we will do with them as

seemeth us good.

Now this was after the wickedness of

Sodom.

Behold now, I have two And Lot said, Behold now, I

daughters which have not known have two daughters which have

man; let me, I pray you, bring not known man; let me, I pray

them out unto you, and do ye to you, plead with my brethren that

them as is good in your eyes: only I may not bring them out unto

unto these men do nothing; for you; and ye shall not do unto

therefore came they under the them as seemeth good in your

shadow of my roof (Gen. 19:8). eyes;

For God will not justify his

servant in this thing; wherefore,

let me plead with my brethren,

this once only, that unto these

men ye do nothing, that they may

have peace in my house; for therefore

came they under the shadow of my roof.

And they were angry with Lot

and came near to break the door,

but the angels of God, which were

But the men put forth their holy men, put forth their hand

hand, and pulled Lot into the and pulled Lot into the house

house to them, and shut to the unto them, and shut the door

door (Gen. 19:10). (JST, Gen. 19:10-15).

Jacob's Prophecies of Joseph

Before his death in Egypt, the patriarch Jacob had Joseph bring his sons Manasseh and Ephraim to him to receive blessings from their grandfather (Gen. 48). Before the blessings were pronounced, Jacob announced to his son his intention to adopt the two boys as his own; they would be counted as his sons among the tribes of Israel. Hence the tribes of Israel included Manasseh and Ephraim, Jacob's grandsons, while all of the other tribes were identified by the name of one of Jacob's sons. At this point (v. 5) the Joseph Smith Translation inserts a significant expansion regarding Joseph's role as a temporal savior to Israel during his lifetime, and the role of his tribe as a spiritual savior to Israel in a much later day. [^12] Speaking to Joseph, Jacob's words read, in part, as follows:

Therefore, O my son, he hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death;

In delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore the God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house;

For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever;

For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin (JST, Gen. 48:8-11). [^13]

According to the prophecy, the time would come in which Joseph's descendants would be a light to the House of Israel, to deliver them from the bondage of sin. In the last days Joseph's two tribes are, for the most part, gathering first. It will be their calling to take the gospel to others of the House of Israel, and deliver them from their spiritual bondage. [^14]

Moses and Joseph Smith

One of the most significant of the inspired additions to the Genesis text is a lengthy expansion to the last three verses of the book. Gen. 50:24-26 is expanded in the JST to fifteen verses. It is a prophecy made by Joseph shortly before his death about two great prophets who would be called up to lead Israel in later generations—Moses and Joseph Smith.

Joseph prophesied to his people that they would be brought into bondage in Egypt but that God would provide a deliverer for them. The deliverer's name would be Moses (see JST, Gen. 50:24, , 34-35). He also foretold that they would be brought into bondage again later on, once again to be brought "out of darkness into light; out of hidden darkness" (v. 25). The latter-day deliverer would be a descendant of Joseph and would be named Joseph—like his esteemed ancestor (see vv. 25-29a; 32-33). This great latter-day seer, clearly the Prophet Joseph Smith, would bring forth the word of the Lord to Israel, and he would convince them of the scriptures which they would already have (v. 30). The descendants of Judah and the descendants of Joseph would each have a scriptural record. Under the direction of the latter-day Joseph, these records would "grow together unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to a knowledge of their fathers in the latter days; and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord" (v. 31).

Though this prophecy has not yet been fulfilled to its fullest extent, the process which it describes is well underway. The scriptures of Judah (the Old and New Testaments) have been brought together with the scriptures of Joseph (the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price). The unified force of these great scriptures will play a powerful role in the establishment of the kingdom of God. [^15]

It is significant that JST Genesis 50 is quoted to a great extent in the Book of Mormon. The prophet Lehi quoted much of Joseph's prophecy to his son Joseph, adding his own prophecies concerning the future of his people and the last days (see 2 Ne. 3). Joseph's last great prophecy, though lost or taken from the Bible in ancient times, survived on the Brass Plates, the Old Testament of the family of Lehi (see 2 Ne. 4:2). It was restored anew in the last days from two sources: the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the Bible. [^16]

Conclusion

There are other additions and changes that were made in the Prophet's inspired revision of Genesis. They add new insights into the biblical text or the events that it narrates. While each makes its own contribution to our understanding of the gospel and God's dealings with men in ancient times, those discussed above are perhaps the most significant. [^17]

The last days are the days of restoration. The restoring of the gospel in our time is not confined to priesthood and ordinances, it also includes the bringing back of doctrine and scripture. The Joseph Smith Translation makes major contributions in this divine effort. With significant additions concerning such great leaders of the past as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Joseph, and Moses, the Prophet's inspired revision of Genesis is among the gems of the Restoration. [^18]

Footnotes

The ordinance of circumcision remained in force until the mortal mission of Jesus, when baptism once again was operative as the token of entrance into the covenant, and circumcision was (and is) no longer required of members of the Lord's Church (see Acts 15:1-29; Gal. 3:27-29; 6:15; D&C 74; also Rom. 6:4).

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:148-49.
[^2] See Bruce R. McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," in Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet, ed., The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things (Provo, Ut.: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 1-22.
[^3] See TPJS, p. 354.
[^4] See ibid., pp. 300-1.
[^5] In a letter to "the Brethren in Zion," 2 July 1833; HC 1:368.
[^6] For information regarding the contributions of the JST to other parts of the Old Testament (and the New Testament as well), see Nyman and Millet, eds., The Joseph Smith Translation.
[^7] From Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1985): Robert J. Matthews, "What is the Book of Moses," pp. 25-41; Rodney Turner, "The Visions of Moses," pp. 43-61; Monte S. Nyman, "The Fall of Adam and Eve," pp. 91-100, and "The Rise of the Kingdom of Satan," pp. 101-9; Robert J. Matthews, "The Doctrine of the Atonement: The Revelation of the Gospel to Adam," pp. 111-29; Robert L. Millet, "Enoch and His City," pp. 131-44; Alan K. Parrish, "The Days of Noah," pp. 145-59.
[^8] See H. Donl Peterson, "The Birth and Development of the Pearl of Great Price," ibid., pp. 11-23.
[^9] Baptism, according to the scriptures, is not a representation of washing, but a representation of death, burial, and rebirth (see Rom. 6:3-4; Col. 2:12; 3:1-2; Eph. 4:22-24). Thus sprinkling cannot be a valid ordinance, because it cannot represent these factors that are brought to bear when spiritual rebirth and its associated ordinance (baptism) take place.
[^10] This is the first mention of the age of accountability in modern revelation, coming sometime between December 1830 and April 1831. The revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that also gives eight years as the age of accountability (68:25), came several months later (November 1831).
[^11] Israelite women had no such sign of their membership in the covenant family, but they shared in its blessings through their fathers and husbands.
[^12] For additional discussion of this matter, see George A. Horton, Jr., "Joseph: A Legacy of Greatness," herein, pp. 79-80.
[^13] Verse 11 supports the interpretation of Joseph in the last days given in the author's "Revelations Concerning Isaiah," in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants, pp. 326-34.
[^14] See ibid, pp. 329-30, and Horton, "Joseph: A Legacy of Greatness," herein, pp. 80-83.
[^15] Elder Boyd K. Packer has spoken frequently on the subject of the coming together of the scriptures of Joseph and Judah and the role of that union in building the kingdom of God in the last days. See Conference Report, October 1982, pp. 75-77.
[^16] For more on the prophecy, see Horton, "Joseph: A Legacy of Greatness," herein, pp. 82-83.
[^17] For other insights to the JST of Genesis, see Horton, "Insights into the Book of Genesis," in The Joseph Smith Translation, ed. Nyman and Millet, pp. 51-70.
[^18] For further study of the JST revisions in Genesis, the reader is encouraged to use the 1979 LDS publication of the Bible, wherein are numerous footnotes giving JST readings and larger excerpts in pp. 797-800 of the Appendix.
