Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

7

THE CALL OF MOSES AND THE DELIVERANCE OF ISRAEL (Exodus 1-19)

ROBERT L. MILLET

Introduction

The Book of Exodus is a masterpiece of ancient writing, but, more important, a marvelous collection of events and sayings which further attest to the Lord's infinite love and concern for his people, the house of Israel. The Hebrew title for this book is we elleh shemot ("and these are the names of"), inasmuch as the first chapter begins with a list of the names of the children of Israel who came into Egypt in the days of Joseph. The Greek Septuagint (LXX) and Latin Vulgate versions of the Bible called this book Exodus, from which, of course, we receive the present title in the King James Version. The theme of the book of Exodus, writes one scholar, "is the commencement of Israel as a covenant nation. It relates how God fulfilled his ancient promise to Abraham by multiplying his descendants into a great nation, redeeming them from the land of bondage, and renewing the covenant of grace with them on a national basis." [^1] The following outline may be helpful to the reader in gaining a broader perspective on the entire book.

I. Moses’ Call and Preparation (1:1-4:31)

A. A new king; Persecution of the Israelites (1:1-22)

B. Moses’ adoption and growth during the first forty years (2:1-14)

C. The character of a prophet prepared; the second forty years (2:15-25)

D. The Call from God (3:1-4:31)

II. Israel Delivered from Egyptian Bondage (5:1-18:27)

A. The Lord sends the ten plagues (5:1-11:10)

B. Deliverance from death (12:1-18:27)

III. Jehovah Begins Preparations for a Holy People (19:1-31:18)

A. "A holy nation, a peculiar people" (19:1-25)

B. The Decalogue (20:1-26)

C. Holiness in conduct toward others; three festivals (21:1-23:33)

D. Holiness toward God: The Priesthood and the Tabernacle (24:1-31:18)

IV. Apostasy and Repentance (32:1-33:23)

A. Idolatry and apostasy (32:1-35)

B. Chastisement, repentance, and intercession by Moses (33:1-23)

V. The Lord's Provision for Forgiveness—Sacrifice (34:1-40:38)

A. Warnings against idolatry (34:1-35)

B. Sabbath and the Tabernacle (35:1-19)

C. The people's pledge to follow Jehovah (35:20-39:43)

D. Types of worship accepted and hallowed by the Lord (40:1-38)

The Birth and Preservation of Moses

The book of Exodus begins on a note of tragedy. After naming the leaders of the twelve tribes who entered Egypt in the days when Joseph was a recognized leader under the Pharaoh (1:1-7), the account states simply: "Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph" (1:8). The Israelites had multiplied greatly in the land during the period from the death of Jacob, and the leaders of the country feared that the people of Israel—a power to be reckoned with—might choose to join themselves to the enemies of Egypt. It was determined by the Egyptians that life should be made more difficult for the Israelites, that perhaps the birth rate might decline thereby. "Therefore they set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens." The desired result, however, was not forthcoming: "But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew" (1:11-12). The Pharaoh gave explicit instructions to the Hebrew midwives that all male infants born thereafter were to be put to death, but the midwives feared the reproach of God more than that of Pharaoh and disobeyed the infanticidal order. The Pharaoh then sent forth a decree to "all his people" that "every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive" (1:15-22).

Why would the king insist upon the death of all male children? Certainly to put to death those persons which will ultimately grow up to sire other children seemed a "reasonable" alternative for the leaders of Egypt. But perhaps there was more to such a decision than is available on the surface. The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus has written concerning this period in Israel's history:

While the affairs of the Hebrews were in this condition [i.e., during the time of bitter bondage], there was this occasion offered itself to the Egyptians, which made them more solicitous for the extinction of our nation. One of those sacred scribes, who are very sagacious in foretelling future events truly, told the king, that about this time there would be a child born to the Israelites, who, if he were reared, would bring the Egyptian dominion low, and would raise the Israelites; that he would excel all men in virtue, and obtain a glory that would be remembered through all ages. Which thing was so feared by the king, that, according to this man's opinion, he commanded that they should cast every male child, which was born to the Israelites, into the river, and destroy it. . . . He enjoined also, that if any parents should disobey him, and venture to save their male children alive, they and their families should be destroyed. [^2]

Another collection of Jewish legends gives a similar prediction: "A son will be born unto Israel, who will destroy the whole of our land and all its inhabitants, and he will bring forth the Israelites from Egypt with a mighty hand." [^3]

These non-scriptural traditions are particularly interesting in light of the prophecies of Joseph. "For a seer will I raise up to deliver my people out of the land of Egypt; and he shall be called Moses." Further: "And a rod shall be in his hand, and he shall gather together my people, and he shall lead them as a flock, and he shall smite the waters of the Red Sea with his rod. . . . And I will make a spokesman for him, and his name shall be called Aaron" (JST, Gen. 50:29, 34-35; cf. 2 Ne. 3). Moses was surely foreordained and foreknown. It may well be that the traditions concerning his mission of deliverance were also known by those who had access to these prophecies and legends.

To Amram and Jochebed was born a "goodly child," one which was "exceeding fair" (Ex. 2:2; Acts 7:20). Hidden and thus preserved from the decreed death, providentially directed to the daughter of Pharaoh, and drawn from the Nile, this child was given the name of Moses.

Concerning Moses' development from birth to the age of forty the scriptures are almost silent. From Stephen, the Christian disciple, we learn simply: "And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds." Stephen continued: "And when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel." Whether this verse is an indication that Moses had a spiritual impression to visit the Israelites is not completely clear. The following verses are, however, enlightening in this regard: "And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian: For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not" (Acts 7:22-25). The possibility seems to exist—at least according to Stephen—that Moses knew by the age of forty of his eventual mission as deliverer.

When Moses learned that word of his killing of the Egyptian had reached the Pharaoh (and that the Pharaoh sought his life), he left the area and "dwelt in the land of Midian" (2:15), where he became acquainted with Jethro (Reuel), the priest of the land of Midian. Jethro was a descendant of Abraham through Keturah (Gen. 25:1-4). Moses married Jethro's daughter Zipporah, had two sons—Gershom and Eliezer, and settled in the area for the next forty years of his life (Ex. 2:16-22; 18:3; Acts 7:29-30). We suppose that it was in Midian that Moses began to be taught the true gospel and to be introduced to the teachings of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for we know also by modern revelation that Moses received the higher priesthood from Jethro (D&C 84:6).

The Call of Moses

As Moses tended the flocks of his father-in-law at the base of Mount Horeb (— Sinai, Ex. 3:12; 19:11), "the presence of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed" (JST 3:1-2). Here was a manifestation to Moses of God's divine nature, an evidence of his glory and power. "Who among us," Isaiah would ask eight hundred years later, "shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?" (Isa. 33:14). Who is it, the prophet was asking, that shall qualify to be with (and ultimately be like) the Almighty God? Moses was instructed that the ground whereon God chose to descend was a hallowed spot: "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the ground whereon thou standest is holy ground" (3:5).

The Lord Jehovah introduced himself as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and gave particular instructions (according to the Book of Moses) to worship the Father in the name of the Son. Moses spoke of this latter directive on a subsequent occasion. Moses had been confronted by Satan and sought to dismiss him, saying: "Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten. And he also gave me commandments when he called unto me out of the burning bush, saying: Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten, and worship me" (Moses 1:16-17). The Lord further indicated that he had heard the cries of his people in bitter bondage and that he had chosen Moses to lead them from Egypt into a promised land, a "land flowing with milk and honey" (Ex. 3:6-10).

Moses' response to the Lord's call is typical of the response of most of the humble servants of God. Moses asked: "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" (3:11). Both Enoch (Moses 6:31) centuries before Moses, and Jeremiah (Jer. 1:6) centuries after, demonstrated great concern over their inadequacies when called to the work of the Lord. But the heavens compensate for those who will be taught and will allow the powers of the Spirit to work a mighty change. Indeed, marvelous miracles are wrought by those who acknowledge their own nothingness, while, at the same time, acknowledging and relying upon the Lord's omnipotence. Jehovah assured Moses that He would be with him and would give to him whatever strengths or powers would be needed to accomplish what surely seemed to be an almost insurmountable task; it would only be a matter of time, Moses was assured, before the whole house of Israel would be able to worship the Lord on that very mountain (3:12).

Moses' self-consciousness and feelings of inadequacy seem now to have turned to a quest for credentials: "When I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" (3:13). It appears that Moses felt he needed to know the personal name of the God of the fathers in order to demonstrate to the leaders of Israel that he had indeed been in the presence of Deity. [^4] "In the ancient world," one biblical scholar has observed, "where man's life was surrounded by many divine powers, it is important to know what kind of God men were dealing with."

For unless the god's name were known, it was impossible to enter into relationship with him and invoke him in worship. As late as the prophetic period it was believed that each people walks and acts in the name of its god, just as Israel walks in the name of its God (Micah 4:5).

But more is involved here than polytheism. To understand Moses' question, we must consider the psychological significance of a personal name in antiquity. In modern usage, names are convenient labels by which we differentiate one thing from another, one person from another. But in the ancient world Shakespeare's question: "What's in a name?" would have been taken very seriously. For a person's self was expressed and contained in his name. Analagously, God's self, his real person, is concentrated in his name. [^5]

The Lord had been known by the fathers from the beginning. He would later remark to Moses: "I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?" (JST, 6:3; cf. Abr. 1:16; 2:8). And he would hereafter be known by Moses and the children of Israel, for he answered: "I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you" (3:14).

The Hebrew expression, 'ehyeh 'asher 'ehyeh, rendered "I AM THAT I AM" in the King James translation, is a penetrating statement, and one which has received much attention over the centuries. The word 'ehyeh is a conjugation of the verb hyh, "to be," and is thus closely related to the concept of being. The personal name of the Lord in Hebrew is given in transliteration by the four letters (tetragramaton) YHWH and was probably pronounced Yahweh, also a conjugation of the verb "to be." There are obviously many possible meanings or explanations for the phrase. [^6] It is the opinion of this writer that the expression represents what is known as a Hiphil construction, a causative form of the verb; in short, the Lord's words would mean "I cause to exist," or "I cause to be." This form expresses continuous duration, and so it implies that God maintains or sustains.

We know the tetragramaton YHWH in the anglicized form, JEHOVAH, a word that is written out in full only four times in the King James Translation (Ex. 6:3; Ps. 83:18; Isa. 12:2; 26:4). It would seem that the true principle and commandment to avoid taking the name of the Lord in vain (Ex. 20:7) was adulterated by many over the centuries, until, by the time of the Savior in the meridian of time, the Jews had come to believe it blasphemous to even speak the personal name of the Lord. Thus Jesus was attacked and almost stoned because he declared his divine sonship in these words: "Before Abraham was, I AM," or, stated another way, "Before Abraham was I, Jehovah." [^7] The King James translators, presumably desiring to hallow the sacred name, substituted "the LORD" (with capital letters) for YHWH, in all but the four cases mentioned above.

As further confirmation that the Lord would be with him, Moses was shown signs—physical manifestations—of God's power and given additional evidence that Moses, as servant and representative of the Lord, would have the ability to draw on the powers of heaven and thus to transcend the limits of finite man (see 4:1-9).

Moses, like Enoch and Jeremiah, was concerned with his limited powers to communicate effectively the word and will of the Lord: "O my Lord," he said, "I am not eloquent . . . but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." God assured Moses that He who had the power to create man and thus to create mouths, also had the power to fill and quicken and inspire those mouths to speak: "Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say" (4:10-12). Because Moses was still nervous and hesitant, the Lord appointed his older brother, Aaron, as a spokesman for Moses, thus fulfilling the prophecy of Joseph and realizing the foreordination of Aaron (see JST, Gen. 50:35; cf. 2 Ne. 3:17).

Aaron learned by revelation that he was to meet Moses in the wilderness, and the two of them—after a warm greeting and healthy discussion of Moses' wondrous call and assignment—made their way to Egypt to meet with the elders of the children of Israel. After Aaron had delivered the will of the Lord to the elders (and had performed the appropriate miracles in their presence), "the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped" (4:27-31).

The Hardening of Pharaoh's Heart

There are a number of lessons for life which emerge from the narrative of Moses' encounter with Pharaoh. For one thing, the enthusiasm and righteous zeal of the Lord's servant may have little or no impact upon one who has chosen to remain untouched by spiritual things; agency is an eternal and inviolate principle, and persons may forever choose—evidence to the contrary notwithstanding—to do what they will. Secondly, and in a related manner, miracles, signs, and wonders confirm the faith of the faithful but have minimal if any effect upon the faithless. "Faith cometh not by signs," the modern revelation states, "but signs follow those that believe" (D&C 63:9). Moses and Aaron approached Pharaoh and boldly insisted that he set the Israelites free. They represented God; surely the king of Egypt would comply, they supposed. But, as we learn repeatedly from the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of the book of Exodus, Pharaoh hardened his heart and refused to either yield to the wishes of the God of gods or to be motivated by the miraculous. Indeed, the JST clarifies the matter in Exodus (and elsewhere) regarding God hardening people's hearts. James taught us in the New Testament: "Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man" (James 1:13). The Prophet seemed to recognize in the King James Translation the doctrinal error of predestination and reprobation, the notion that men are saved or damned before ever coming to earth, and that one simply evidences his election to eternal life (or his reprobation to perdition) by his actions on earth. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "Every soul coming into this world came here with the promise that through obedience he would receive the blessings of salvation. No person was foreordained or appointed to sin or perform a mission of evil. No person is ever predestined to salvation or damnation." [^8]

To convince the Pharaoh that the true God was behind them, as well as to expedite the deliverance, Moses and Aaron called down upon Egypt a number of plagues, as described in chapters 7-11. These included:

In some cases Pharaoh gave in temporarily and consented to the Israelites going into the desert for three days to offer acceptable sacrifices to their God; soon thereafter he hardened his heart again and recanted on his word. In some cases, the Pharaoh called upon his wise men and counselors to perform similar supernatural feats. President Joseph Fielding Smith has written concerning men's abilities to draw upon the mystical and occult powers of the world:

All down through the ages and in almost all countries, men have exercised great occult and mystical powers, even to the healing of the sick and the performing of miracles. Soothsayers, magicians, and astrologers were found in the courts of ancient kings. They had certain powers by which they divined and solved the monarch's problems, dreams, etc. One of the most striking examples of this is recorded in Exodus, where Pharaoh called "the wise men and the sorcerers" who duplicated some of the miracles the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron to perform. When Aaron threw down his rod, it became a serpent. The Egyptian magicians threw down their rods, and they also became serpents. . . . Beyond this point the magicians of Egypt could not go. The magicians failed in the days of Joseph to interpret the dream of Pharaoh because it was a dream from the Lord, but Joseph, because he held the priesthood, interpreted it.

President Smith thereby observed: "It should be remembered that Satan has great knowledge and thereby can exercise authority and to some extent control the elements, when some greater power does not intervene." [^9]

It was only after the final and most deadly plague—the death of the firstborn in Egypt—that Pharaoh conceded defeat: "And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead. And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said. Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also" (12:30-32).

"See the Salvation of the Lord"

Again and again the Lord demonstrated to the children of Israel that he—the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—had power to preserve and prosper his chosen people; there was almost no limit to which a loving God would go to win the affections of his children. All that they needed to do was to reciprocate his covenant love and loyalty. We will now note the particular means by which Jehovah demonstrated his powers as Deliverer.

The Passover. The children of Israel were given specific instructions on how to avoid the grip of the angel of death upon the firstborn: they were to take a lamb without blemish, "a male of the first year," sacrifice it, and then "take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses" in which Israelites were eating the sacrificed lamb. The "Feast of Unleavened Bread" was instituted on this occasion, the celebration of the Passover. In the words of the Lord: "And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt." And thus was instituted what was to become one of the most solemn holy days in the history of Israel: "And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever" (12:13-14). The symbolism associated with the eating of unleavened bread (in remembrance of the haste with which the people would leave Egypt) and bitter herbs (in remembrance of the bitterness of Egyptian bondage) would forevermore be an integral part of one's religious life, and would tie all generations—past and present—into an eternal now; simply stated, the celebration of the ritual of Passover would create a group memory and allow subsequent generations to participate in the historic. Christians would come in time to see the grand typology associated with the power of the blood of Christ to cause the angel of death to pass over the believers.

Crossing the Red Sea. In the miracle of crossing the Red Sea on dry ground, [^10] Jehovah again demonstrated what was humanly impossible. With their backs literally against the wall, and with the dust clouds of the approaching Egyptian armies now clearly visible, the people fell back into their complaining posture: "It had been better for us," they pitifully observed, "to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness." But the ever-patient and ever-trusting Moses said unto the people: "Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day" (14:12-13). Moses knew by revelation what move to make next. In counsel to Oliver Cowdery the Lord explained: "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground" (D&C 8:2-3). after the Israelites had crossed the sea, "the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them." And for at least a short time "the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses" (14:28, 31).

Food and Water Provided. Jehovah had no intentions of bringing his chosen people into the wilderness to starve to death. After the Israelites had begun to complain and to reminisce regarding the regular rations of Egypt, the Lord literally "rained bread from heaven" in that he sent the miraculous manna. The delivery of manna, described in chapter 16, was a most unusual phenomenon, again an evidence that the Lord would use means above and beyond the scope of mortal man to accomplish his purposes. Manna was a fine, flake-like substance, "like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey" (16:31). The account in Exodus summarizes some of the extraordinary properties of this substance: e.g., it could be cooked, but if not gathered by a certain time would melt; it could be stored indefinitely in some cases (such as later, within the Ark of the Covenant), but in other cases would spoil if too much were gathered; twice as much manna was sent and could be obtained on the sixth day, in order that the Israelites would not labor on the Sabbath. "And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan" (16:35). In the meridian of time the same Jehovah—now incarnated as Jesus of Nazareth—taught the people at Capernaum of the greater reality of which the manna in the wilderness was but a type: "I am that bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world" (John 6:48-51). In addition (and, of course, to add variety to the diet of Israel), the Almighty sent meat in the form of quails. The Israelites had bread (manna) provided in the mornings and meat (quails) in the evenings (16:13).

As the children of Israel journeyed in the Wilderness of Sin, they discovered the drought-like conditions about them. The murmurings began again: "Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?" (17:3). Once again the God of all creation provided: he instructed Moses to smite a nearby rock with his rod, after which the water gushed forth, enough and to spare for the people and their animals (17:5-6; cf. Num. 20).

The Apostle Paul spoke centuries later of the Exodus and wanderings as types of a greater reality:

Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;

And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

And did all eat the same spiritual meat;

And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ (1 Cor. 10:1-4).

Two Great Priesthood Lessons

A very brief account of Israel's battle with the Amalekites in Rephidim is contained in chapter 17. As the Israelites fought, Moses positioned himself on the top of the hill, so as to be within view of his warriors. "And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. And Joshua [the military leader of Israel] discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword" (17:8-13). What a lesson for both ancient and modern Israel! Only as we keep our eyes upon the presidency of the Church will we be assured of victory over our enemies in the world. Also, we note the need for strong and able assistants to our leaders when they become weary from the burdens of leadership or their arms become heavy from advancing age. In referring to his role as a counselor to President Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee commented upon the experience of Aaron and Hur holding up the arms of Moses:

I think that is the role President Tanner and I have to fulfill. The hands of President Smith may grow weary. They may tend to droop at times because of his heavy responsibilities; but as we uphold his hands, and as we lead under his direction, by his side, the gates of hell will not prevail against you and against Israel [see D&C 21:4-7]. Your safety and ours depends upon whether or not we follow the ones whom the Lord has placed to preside over his church. He knows whom he wants to preside over his church, and he will make no mistake. . . .

Let's keep our eye on the President of the Church and uphold his hands as President Tanner and I will continue to do. [^11]

Moses learned a lesson from his father-in-law, Jethro, that proved to be a blessing to him as well as all of the house of Israel. Jethro observed as "Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening." Being the Lord's anointed and thus the legal administrator and judge for the people, Moses felt the need to adjudicate every issue among and between people, based upon inspired decisions. It was obvious to Jethro that such a situation, though well intended, would in the long run be to the detriment of Moses and Israel. "The thing that thou doest is not good," Jethro explained. "Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee" (18:13-18).

The wise Midianite priest recommended that Moses first teach the people correct principles ("teach them ordinances and laws"), in order that they might eventually be able to govern themselves (that they might know "the way wherein they must walk"). Next, Jethro asked that Moses consider a major program of delegation, a hierarchy of judges made up of "able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness." He recommended that Moses place such men over the people—under his own ultimate leadership—"to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens." These were to "judge the people at all seasons," reserving grave or weighty matters for Moses, but attending to all other decisions. Moses adopted the suggestions (18:20-26). Not only would this provide a manageable judicial load for the Lawgiver, but it would also provide numerous growth opportunities for those other judges called to serve.

"A Kingdom of Priests and an Holy Nation"

Within three months from leaving Egypt the children of Israel had come to the base of Mount Horeb in the wilderness of Sinai. The Lord gave instructions to Moses: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (19:5-6). The Lord instructed Moses to sanctify and prepare Israel, for on the third day he had a marvelous blessing in store for his covenant people: he would appear unto them, even as he had appeared to their prophet-leader, Moses. Israel was to enjoy the "rest" of God—that is, be partakers of the fulness of the glory of God (D&C 84:24). Theirs would be the transcendant blessing enjoyed by such sublimely righteous societies as Enoch and Melchizedek (Moses 7:16-21, 69;JST Gen. 14:25-34). Jehovah desired to create Zion and take her unto his bosom, even as he had done so many times among all his creations from the beginning ( Moses 7:31).

But this was not to be. As has been observed before, it was one thing to get Israel out of Egypt, and another thing entirely to get Egypt out of Israel! Indeed, the compelling drama of the deliverance, exodus, and wanderings of Israel proved to be a tragedy, a story of lost opportunities—a saga of things as they might have been. It would be over a millennium before the fulness of gospel blessings and the fulness of priesthood ordinances would be available to the generality of the people. In the meantime, the Lord had commandments and spiritual structure for a people he still loved: the word from Sinai was about to be given.

Footnotes

(a) I AM WHO I AM. Perhaps Ex. 3:14 is similar to 33:19, in which we are told that God "will be gracious to whom [he] will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom [he] will show mercy."

(b) I AM HERE, I AM REALLY PRESENT. This approach would have the Lord saying, in effect, "I am here, really present, ready for help," or "I am he who really is," as opposed to the idol-gods of the nations.

(c) I AM EXISTENCE. This might be translated "I am who is," or "I am Being."

---
Notas:
[^1] Those who wish to follow the divergent scholarly opinions of the Exodus can consult such a work as Gonzalo Baez-Camargo, Archaeological Commentary on the Bible (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1984).
[^2] A History of Israel, 3rd ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1981), Chronological Chart IV.
[^3] For a somewhat eccentric view of the Exodus that places it in the Egyptian 18th Dynasty, see Hershel Shanks, "The Exodus and the Crossing of the Red Sea, According to Hans Goedicke," The Biblical Archaeology Review 7 (1981):42-50.
[^4] For a discussion of the 1438 B.C. problem, see Roland de Vaux, The Early History of Israel, trans. David Smith (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1978), pp. 388-89.
[^5] For a thorough study of the Hyksos, see Donald B. Redford, "The Hyksos Invasion in History and Tradition," Orientalia 39 (1970):1-51.
[^6] R. de Vaux, The Early History of Israel, pp. 291-320.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 317-18.
[^8] Ibid., p. 389.
[^9] Sir Alan Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs (New York: Oxford University Press 1966), pp. 247-48.
[^10] Ibid., p. 274.
[^11] Manfred Bietak, Tell el-Dab'a II (Vienna: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1975), pp. 180-83.
