Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

8

THE EXODUS (Exodus 13-15)

JOHN M. LUNDQUIST

As is the case with so many of the main and formative episodes in the history of ancient Israel, the Exodus, detailed in Exodus 1-15, cannot be directly attested in contemporary, non-Biblical sources. Chief among such sources would be, of course, Egyptian ones, and these are uniformly silent, not only on the details of the Exodus itself, but on the very presence of Israelites in Egypt over a period of many generations. Furthermore, the Bible itself does not give a unified view of the Exodus, particularly with regard to chronological problems. The purpose of this article will be to adopt a unitary view of the Exodus, without relating the account to the many divergent opinions that exist on the various points. [^1] I will adopt a certain point of view for the Exodus, attempt to explain the chronological problems of the Bible in the light of that point of view, and suggest a possible route for the Exodus that has received remarkable support in recent years from excavations at the site of Tell el-Daba, located in the eastern Delta region of Egypt.

The Chronology of the Exodus

The first problem that we must face in trying to reconstruct the Exodus is the problem of chronology, in other words, when did these events take place? Those who know the Bible well will know that this question is not easily answered. Certain solutions do, however, present themselves. Let us begin with the fourth year of the reign of King Solomon, set at about 958 B.C. by John Bright. [^2] This date is important because the Biblical text states that that date fell 480 years following the Exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt (1 Kgs. 6:1). That should immediately solve our chronological problem, yielding the date of 1438 B.C. for the Exodus. Unfortunately, however, such is not the case. Very few mainstream scholars, whether liberal or conservative, accept this date, which would fall in the reign of the Egyptian Pharaoh Amenhotep II, during the 18th Egyptian Dynasty. [^3]

The main problem with the 1438 B.C. date is that there seems to be little additional evidence to support it, while there is much additional evidence to support the range of dates accepted for the Exodus by the majority of scholars, to which I will come shortly. [^4] But let us continue with a discussion of the biblical chronology. If we continue from the date of 1438 B.C., we run into the figure of 430 years, which is given in Ex. 12:40 as the number of years Israel was resident in Egypt. But 430 years is given in Gal. 3:17 and in the Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, the Septuagint, as the number of years which lapsed from the time that Abraham received the covenant from God as a 75-year-old man in Canaan. This latter interpretation then yields a date of 1943 B.C. for the birth of Abraham (958+480+430+75). If we now begin with Abraham's birth date, as reached through this method of calculation, and count forward, we will find that we arrive at a possible date for the Exodus which is in keeping with the additional supporting evidence that I referred to in the beginning of this paragraph.

According to the Hebrew text of the Bible, Isaac would have been born about 1843 B.C. (Gen. 21:5), and Jacob about 1783 B.C. (Gen. 25:26). The individual whose dates are most important to us in a consideration of the date of the Exodus is Joseph. If we calculate the information given for Joseph's age at the time he was sold into Egypt (seventeen: Gen. 37:2), at the time of his ascension to a position of power in Egypt (thirty: Gen. 41:46), with his age at death (one hundred ten: Gen. 50:26), and compare it with the information on his father's age at his descent into Egypt (one hundred thirty: Gen. 47:9), along with the duration of his father's stay in Egypt before his death (seventeen years: Gen. 47:28), then we can arrive at the date of about 1690 B.C. for Joseph's birth. He would have become a powerful man in Egypt in 1660, Jacob and his family would have descended into Egypt about 1653, and Joseph would have died about 1580 B.C. It is widely accepted by scholars that Joseph's rise to power in Egypt must have been associated with the rise to power in Egypt of the Hyksos, the Semitic rulers who probably originated in Palestine, who ruled Egypt from the eastern Delta region during the Second Intermediate Period, or between about 1750 and 1550 B.C. The Hyksos were in any case driven out following the siege and defeat of their eastern Delta capital city, Avaris, by the first Pharaoh of the 18th Dynasty, Ahmose I, about 1558 B.C. [^5]

Although there is nothing in Egyptian or other ancient records contemporary with the events to associate Joseph and the Israelites with the Hyksos' presence in Egypt, this is widely assumed to have been the case on the basis of much circumstantial evidence, such as the Egyptian flavor of the Joseph stories in Genesis, the presumed Semitic background of the Hyksos themselves, which would have made possible the rise of Joseph, a fellow Semite, and the general chronological match that we seem to have, as I have outlined it above. [^6]

Let us now return to the internal biblical chronology. Once we have arrived at the approximate date of Jacob/Israel's entry into Egypt with his family, we confront the traditions, according to which Israel would spend about four hundred years in Egypt. Gen. 15:13 implies a four-hundred-year affliction of Israel in a strange land, although v. 16 of the same chapter converts the four hundred years into four generations, which leads many scholars in any case to regard the scheme of so many hundred years as an equivalent number of human generations, reckoned on the average life span of ancient times. [^7] And again, Ex. 12:40 gives the figure of 430 years as the amount of time Israel was resident in Egypt. If, in spite of the use that I made of this same figure above in attempting to arrive at the date of Abraham's birth, we can take the figure of 400 years as referring to a chronological reality associated with the sojourn of the house of Israel in Egypt, and if we can reckon this number of years approximately from the time that Jacob/Israel entered Egypt during the famine (1653 B.C.), then we arrive at a date during the 19th Egyptian Dynasty, in all probability during the reign of Rameses II, as the probable period during which the Exodus occurred. And this brings me to the date that is accepted by the great majority of scholars, which they arrive at, not necessarily by the means that I have used here (namely through the evaluation of the internal biblical chronology), but rather through what de Vaux calls the "only one reliable datum in the Bible which can help us to date the exodus." [^8] This datum is the information given in Ex. 1:11, that the Israelites built treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses, for the Pharaoh. For a wide variety of reasons related to Egyptian history this reference places the Exodus events in or just after the reign of Rameses II (1290-1224 B.C.).

According to this view, the famous passage in Ex. 1:8, that a Pharaoh arose who did not know Joseph, would mean that the biblical record passes over in silence the entire 18th Dynasty and the first king of the 19th, going directly to the reign of Rameses II, the "Pharaoh of the oppression." This means that the Bible passes over almost 300 years of history (between approximately 1550 and 1290 B.C.). The Ramesside pharaohs do indeed provide the best and most probable backdrop for the events narrated in the first fifteen chapters of Exodus. The main line of 19th Dynasty pharaohs, several of whom bore the name Rameses, sprang from an obscure military man whose native territory was the east Delta region of Egypt. This man had been called on by the great military leader of the 18th Dynasty, and its last Pharaoh, Horemheb, to assist in clearing the country of the influences of the religious heresy of the Akhenaten period. [^9] Excavations carried out at the great site of Tell el-Daba, now known to have been both the site of the Hyksos capital city, Avaris, as well as of Pi-Ramesse, the Raamses of Ex. 1:12, have shown the place to have been abandoned during the entire 18th Dynasty, but to have been reoccupied at the beginning of the 19th, the time of the ascension of the Ramesside family to power over all Egypt. Furthermore, it is known that Rameses II and his successor, Merneptah, built cities identified in Egyptian records as Pi-Ramesse (the Raamses of Ex. 1:11), and Pi-Tum (the Pithom of the same verse). The location of the latter is somewhat debated, but it was in all probability located in the Wadi Tumilat, [^10] while the identity of Pi-Ramesse/Raamses is now virtually assured as modern Tell el-Daba, as a result of the recent Austrian excavations there. Thus, the ultimate choice of a time and of a place within Egyptian history to fix the Exodus account is based not on inner Biblical chronology, although it can be understood to fit this choice, as I tried to explain above, but rather on the close match of Exodus details with known details of Egyptian history.

The Route of the Exodus

The key to understanding the route of the Exodus is to determine the location of as many of the place names mentioned in the biblical narratives as possible. As I will attempt to show shortly, two of these, Raamses of Ex. 1:11; 12:37 and elsewhere, and Baal-zephon of Ex. 14:2 have been positively identified in their ancient Egyptian setting with a high degree of probability, based on present levels of understanding of ancient geography, texts, and recent excavations in the eastern Delta region of Egypt. The identification of these two alone provides us with an enlightening and credible understanding of the route of the Israelites out of Egypt and into the Sinai wasteland. Of these two, Raamses is by far the most important.

Raamses of Ex. 1:11, one of the treasure cities built up by the Israelite slaves for the Egyptian Pharaoh, and of Ex. 12:37, the point of debarkation for the escaping Israelites, is generally assumed to have been the same as Egyptian Pi-Ramesse, the alternate Egyptian capital built during the 19th Dynasty by Rameses II, to serve as capital of Egypt along with the traditional city of Memphis. A second basic assumption of scholarship is that Rameses built his Delta capital on the same location as the by then long-abandoned Hyksos capital of Avaris. Scholars have for many years debated over which of the many tells (ruin mounds) of the eastern Delta hides the remains of Avaris and of Raamses. Until just recently the choice had largely rested on Tell san el-Hagar, ancient Tanis, known in the Bible as Zoan (Num. 13:32, Ps. 78:12). Tanis, perhaps the largest and most impressive ruin mound in Egypt, is located on the Tanitic branch of the Nile, directly west of the swampy area known as Lake Manzala. The fame of Tanis as the probable location of Avaris and of Pi-Ramesse was due to the success its early excavator, Pierre Montet, had in excavating numerous monuments at the site that could be identified from their inscriptions as having originated in Avaris and in Pi-Ramesse. [^11] For some years though, the alternate view has persisted as a minority opinion, that the Hyksos and Rameside monuments found at Tanis had been transported there from the great sites of Tell el-Daba/Qantir, just eleven miles to the south, and that this great complex of ruin mounds should rather be given the honor of hiding the remains of these great cities. [^12]

More recent excavations at the site of Tanis by Jean Yoyotte have in fact demonstrated that, based on excavated remains, no in situ building level exists at Tanis that was built earlier than the beginning of the 21st Dynasty, about 1085 B.C. According to this view, the Pharaohs of the 21st Dynasty, seeking to recover some of the lost glory of the Egyptian past for themselves, transported numerous monuments from the nearby, and by then decaying, city of Pi-Ramesse to Tanis, in order to bolster up its prestige and antiquity. [^13] Thus, based on present knowledge, it is inappropriate to continue the view that Tanis was the location of the Exodus city of Raamses. (For an excellent representation of the route of the Exodus as I have presented it here, see Map #3—The Exodus—in the LDS publication of the King James Version. The only problem with this map is that it represents Raamses at Tanis, instead of at Tell el-Daba/Qantir, as I believe should be the case. Tell el-Daba would be located just to the southwest of Tanis, due west of Baalzephon.) [^14]

Excavations carried out in recent years by Austrian archaeologists at Tell el-Daba, along with knowledge derived from previous explorations at Qantir, have gone far toward identifying this vast, interrelated series of ruin mounds with the ancient cities of Avaris and Pi-Ramesse, and thus with the Raamses of the Exodus. The site of Tell el-Daba/Qantir occupies an area of some 1000 acres, approximately eleven miles to the south of Tanis, on the Pelusian branch of the Nile in the east Delta region of Egypt. [^15]

The excavations carried out at Tell el-Daba have produced a considerable amount of impressive evidence to support the contention that this series of ruin mounds corresponds to the ancient cities of Avaris and of Pi-Ramesse. One of the factors that united both ancient cities was their devotion to the Egyptian god Seth, a temple of whom has been excavated in the Ramesside levels at Tell el-Daba. The Hyksos levels of the tell give striking evidence for the Palestinian nature of the Hyksos rulers. The excavators speak of a "pure Asiatic people" operating within a typically Syro-Palestinian Middle Bronze II type of culture. They also indicate extensive evidence of the military nature of the Hyksos city, including the excavation of many soldier burials in the graves. During the Ramesside period the site of Tell el-Daba was a vast administrative city, the mid point on the route between Egypt and Asia. Numerous palaces, temples and administrative buildings existed at the site during this period. The titles of numerous bureaucrats have been found at the site dating to the Ramesside period, including "Royal Minister of Foreign Lands," and "Leader of the Low Lands." There is abundant evidence for extensive military troops stationed at the site during this period. [^16]

Having thus, for the purposes of this article, eliminated Tanis as the location of biblical Raamses, we can also eliminate the body of water with which it was most closely associated in antiquity, Lake Manzala, as the candidate for the sea that the Lord miraculously led the Israelites through soon after their flight from Raamses. And having established Tell el-Daba/Qantir as the probable contemporary location of ancient Raamses, we can begin to examine the biblical evidence for the route of the Exodus and attempt to establish that route on the map of ancient Egypt. The route of the Exodus as it is described in the Bible is the following: The Israelites departed from Raamses and journeyed to Succoth (Ex. 12:37); from Succoth they moved to Etham, "in the edge of the wilderness" (Ex. 13:20); at this point they "turned about," and journeyed to a point just opposite "the sea," where they were to camp "before Pihahiroth between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon" (Ex. 14:2). It was from this point that the Israelites crossed the sea. The Egyptian charioteers had pursued them, reaching their camp, which, again, was located "by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon" (Ex. 14:9). The Israelites went through the sea, which had been parted by an east wind brought about by the Lord through the instrumentality of Moses' priesthood power (Ex. 14:21).

I mentioned above that two of the place names of the Exodus account are known with a fair degree of certainty: Raamses and Baalzephon. The Exodus account indicates that the Israelites were encamped "over against" or "before" or "in front of," Baal-zephon, "by" (or "just opposite") the sea. In other words, if we can identify the location of Baal-zephon, we have a good opportunity to identify the body of water that the Israelites were able to pass through by means of the Lord's power. Based on identifications given in a sixth-century-B.C. Aramaic letter, Baal-zephon (see Map #3 in the LDS publication of the King James Bible) was located in or in the vicinity of a place called Defenne (ancient Daphnai), which is about ten miles directly west of Sile (spelled Zilu on Map #3—The Exodus—in the LDS publication of the King James Version) the ancient military post at the northwest corner of Lake Ballah. Lake Ballah is a brackish lake about six miles wide by about twelve miles long, whose mid-point stands about 22 miles due east of Tell el-Daba. As the passable land narrows between Lake Ballah and the southern reaches of Lake Manzala, to its north, one approaches the narrow pass which gave ancient travelers access into and exit out of Egypt. Sile and its military garrison controlled this point of access, after passing through which the eastbound traveler would enter onto the "Way of Horus," the Egyptian equivalent of the "Way of the Philistines" (Ex. 13:17), the Via Maris or the route which followed the Mediterranean Sea into Palestine, the road the Lord led Israel away from. (The marshy Lake Manzala is represented on Map #3—The Exodus—in the LDS publication of the King James Bible, although its southern reaches extend much closer to Sile/Zilu. Lake Ballah, not represented on Map #3, extends southwest from Sile/Zilu. Map #3 does in fact represent the route of the Exodus as I have explained it here, with the exception of the problem of Raamses/Tanis as I pointed out above.) [^17]

This line of reasoning therefore suggests that the "sea," or "Sea of Reeds" Hebrew yam suph—see Ex. 15:4) that the Israelites passed through was Lake Ballah, the geographical position of which fits most remarkably the actual biblical narrative itself. In other words, the Israelites were encamped "before Pihahiroth . . . over against Baalzephon . . . by the sea" (Ex. 14:2). As the Egyptians approached, the Israelites were cut off from taking the natural route of exist from Egypt, through the narrow neck of land described above, which would have led them into confrontation with the Egyptian garrison at Sile but through which they were in any case forbidden to pass by the Lord himself (Ex. 13:17). The Lord then led them directly through Lake Ballah, as the Exodus account describes.

Lake Ballah was actually known in ancient Egyptian texts as p3 twfj, "Papyrus thicket," where the second word in the phrase actually came into Hebrew as a loan word, standing etymologically behind Hebrew suph, presumably "reed." Of course, twfj means "papyrus," while suph is usually thought to mean "reed." Papyrus grows best in fresh water, while reeds can grow in brackish water, so we are dealing with the borrowing of a phonetic unit from one language to another, not with its precise accompanying meaning. [^18] The term "Red Sea" came into the English Bible from the Greek translation of the Hebrew, where Hebrew yam suph was translated into Greek as Erythra Thalassa, "Red Sea." Similarly in the Vulgate or Latin translation, yam suph became Mare Rubrum, "Red Sea." The newer Bible translations usually translate yam suph as "Sea of Reeds," or something similar, or at least give a footnote referring to this idea. [^19]

The discussion here makes two conclusions, one of which is obvious, the other not so obvious, which diverge from traditional understandings of the Exodus account. The first of these, the obvious one, rejects the geographical location of the "Red Sea," that is, the northern extension of the historic Red Sea that we know today as the Gulf of Suez, as the body of water crossed by the Israelites. This body of water is simply too far distant and, in itself too wide, to fit the requirements of the Biblical narrative. The common understanding of the Gulf of Suez as the "sea" of the book of Exodus is related more to Hollywood interpretations of the Exodus than to the biblical text. The second assumption here, not so obvious, is that the numbers of Israelites involved in the Exodus are greatly inflated in the English translation. The several million Israelites implied by the English translation creates a parody rather than corresponding to any ancient reality, and inhibits our ability to understand the scriptures. [^20]

Some object to the exclusion of the Gulf of Suez as the body of water through which Moses led the children of Israel on the grounds of D&C 8:3, which states, in part, "Behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground." It seems to me that the explanation for this passage is the same as for those parts of Isaiah that appear in the Book of Mormon in the King James Version: the Lord, working through his prophet, Joseph Smith, used the biblical language of the version best known to his hearers. Surely no one would claim that any ancient person would have used the English phrase "Red Sea." This English phrase has come to us through a process of translation of ancient words. The Lord would have used these same ancient words himself as He spoke with His people anciently. It appears that many of the Red Sea passages in later books of the Bible actually refer to the body of water that today bears the same name (in English). The Exodus account, however, from a much earlier period, very early in ancient Israel's experience, before Israel was actually settled in the promised land, refers to a different body of water, reflected in the Hebrew phrase discussed above. Our duty is to try and find out which body of water, and which route, from which Egyptian city or cities is referred to in the account. To find exact information on these questions, drawing on the discoveries of archaeology and of linguistic scholarship, in no way detracts from the miraculous way in which the Lord led his people but rather adds new dimensions to our understanding of the scriptures.

There is one additional very interesting and important support for Lake Ballah from the biblical text, one which has been pointed out by Bietak. The text in question is Ex. 10:19, the casting of the locusts into the "Red Sea." As Bietak points out, this entire sequence surely took place around the royal residence in Pi-Ramesse, although the effects of the plagues were doubtless felt throughout Egypt. The point is that the west wind that deposited the locusts directly in the Red Sea fits the geographical requirements outlined above perfectly: the west wind picked up the locusts from Pi-Ramesse (Tell el-Daba), and deposited them directly in the Red Sea (Lake Ballah). [^21]

Some final comments on the date of the Exodus are necessary at this point. Earlier in the article I pointed out evidence indicating the likelihood that the Exodus took place during the reign of Rameses II. Is it possible to be more specific than this, especially considering the exceptionally long reign of this Pharaoh (1290-1224 B.C.)? Furthermore, a rather serious problem for the choice of the period of Rameses II appears in Ex. 2:23, which relates the death of the Egyptian king. To take up this latter problem first, if the Pharaoh who died was indeed Rameses II, then the Pharaoh of the Exodus would have been his son, Merneptah, who reigned between 1224 and 1214 B.C. But here there is an additional problem. In the fifth year of his reign, Merneptah experienced a major military victory over Libyans. As part of the victory stele he had composed for this occasion, he also included references to victories over other enemies, many of whom are well known Palestinian names of cities and people. Among these is "Israel," thus giving us the only occurrence of this name in Egyptian records. The phrase in the so-called Merneptah Stele is "Israel is laid waste; his seed is not." [^22] It is commonly known that the Egyptian determinative for "People" rather than for "Land" is included in the phrase. This is commonly taken to mean that Israel was not yet settled in the promised land in the fifth year of Merneptah, or at around 1219 B.C. [^23] Since we must insert the forty years of wandering between the Exodus and the entry into the land, it would be difficult to see Merneptah as the Pharaoh of the Exodus, since he only reigned for ten years. The Merneptah Stele simply gives us the date around which Israel was ready to enter the land, and thus assists us in dating the conquest. If we add forty years to this date moving backward, then we have the Exodus taking place around 1259 B.C., in the reign of Rameses. [^24] But what of the Pharaoh who died, according to Ex. 2:23? De Vaux simply edits this text away. [^25] A logical solution would be to see the Pharaoh who died as the predecessor of Rameses II, Seti I, who reigned between 1309 and 1291 B.C., [^26] who would thus count as the Pharaoh whose oppression of Israel begins the book of Exodus. This would not affect our chronological conclusions since we are not in any case dealing with exact years. [^27]

Conclusion

The problems that have surrounded the interpretation of the Exodus over many years can certainly not be claimed to have found their final solution here, but I hope that readers will have gotten a flavor for what some of the difficulties are, what some of the ways of solving these have been, and what the exciting potential is that has come from archaeology in recent years in helping to increase our understanding of the Exodus account. This is perhaps a classic instance of where the biblical account has been illuminated through archaeology and through ongoing textual study. The kind of increased understanding of the Bible that can come through this union can only enlarge our appreciation of the scriptures and provide us with a wider vision of the realities that lie behind the biblical text, especially when the text deals with events in such remote places as the eastern Delta of Egypt. As one author has stated it, such research helps "pinpoint events and . . . supply a wider view of the Biblical past, discovering phenomena in ancient Israel not preserved in its literature." [^28]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The term "Decalogue" comes from Greek and means "ten words." It is based on Ex. 34:28, which reads in part: "and he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten words." The KJV renders the last clause, "the ten commandments."
[^2] TPJS, p. 327.
[^3] For the reading of Exodus as a unified text, see U. Cassuto, A Commentary on the Book of Exodus (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1951), and B. S. Childs, The Book of Exodus (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974). In Childs, this type of reading of Exodus is found in the sections called "Old Testament Context." The weakness of a purely contextual reading (as I am attempting here) is that at many places it has to resort to a certain amount of eisegesis (i.e., reading into the text a solution not explicitly or implicitly suggested) or harmonizing discrepancies which really cannot be harmonized (see Childs, p. 586).
[^4] See David P. Wright, "The Laws and the Sanctuary," found herein, pp. 143-52.
[^5] Quotations from the Bible will be my own translation. References to scripture without my designation of book will refer to Exodus.
[^6] The term "theophany," from Greek, means "divine appearance," or "appearance of God."
[^7] On ritual purity and impurity in the Bible, see my book, The Disposal of Impurity in the Priestly Writings of the Bible with Reference to Similar Phenomena in Hittite and Mesopotamian Cultures, soon to be published in the Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation Series (Atlanta, Ga.: Scholars Press).
[^8] See Mishnah, Zebahim 14:4.
[^9] On the meaning of these commandments, see Wright, "The Laws and the Sanctuary," found herein, pp. 143-49.
[^10] On the fear and danger of contacting the divine sphere, see 19:12-13, 16, 21-24; 24:11; 33:3, 5, 20; 34:30; Gen. 32:30; Lev. 10:1-4; Num. 4:15, 17-20; 16:25-35; Deut. 5:25-26; Judg. 6:22-23; 13:22; 1 Sam. 6:19-20; 2 Sam. 6:6-7.
[^11] In D&C 84:23-25 this response seems to be considered a negative thing. Compare the phrase in v. 24, "to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God," with the themes in Ex. 19 of sanctifying the people (vv. 10, 14), and seeing God (vv. 9, 11). But despite this correspondence of themes, the specific historical situation or event(s) to which D&C 84:23-25 refers is difficult to determine from the history presented in the Pentateuch.
[^12] For the specific content of this legal section, see Wright, "The Laws and the Sanctuary," herein, pp. 143-49.
[^13] On the sanctuary prescriptions, revealed while Moses was on the mountain, see ibid.
[^14] On intercession or prayer with the purpose of getting God to stop or not to bring on punishment, see Gen. 18:23-33; Num. 11:2; 12:13; 16:44-50; 21:7-9; 2 Kgs. 20:1-7.
[^15] On God sending plagues as punishments, see Num. 11:1-2, 33; 12:10; 14:12; 17:8-15; 21:6-9; 25:4-9, 18; 1 Sam. 5; 2 Sam. 24; on other similar punishments from God, see Lev. 10:1-3; Num. 16:28-35.
[^16] This solution is adopted by The Torah: The First Five Books of Moses (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1962).
[^17] On the historical-critical solution to these problems, see M. Haran, Temples and Temple Service in Ancient Israel (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978), pp. 149-74 and passim; R. de Vaux, Ancient Israel (New York/Toronto: McGraw Hill, 1965), pp. 294-97; G. H. Davies, "Tabernacle," The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962, 1976), 4:498-506; I. Abrahams, "Tabernacle," Encyclopaedia Judaica (Jerusalem: Keter Publishing House, 1972), 15:679-87.
[^18] In Joseph Smith's revision of the Bible, Ex. 33:20 is changed almost completely, to read as follows:
[^19] On the content of these stipulations, see Wright, "The Laws and the Sanctuary," herein, pp. 144-45.
[^20] The Joseph Smith Translation adds significant new information to Ex. 34:1-2, explaining that the content of the second set of tablets differed in important ways from that of the first set. This distinction is not found in any form in the Exodus account, nor elsewhere in the Bible:
[^21] Bietak, Tell e-Daba'a II, p. 137.
[^22] James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1955), pp. 378-79.
[^23] See the footnote in John A. Wilson's translation in Pritchard, Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, p. 378, note 18, and the discussion in Roland de Vaux, The Early History of Israel, 390-91.
[^24] Roland de Vaux, The Early History of Israel, pp. 390-91.
[^25] Ibid., pp. 389-91.
[^26] See Bright, A History of Israel, p. 123.
[^27] Seti I did build in the area covered by the city of Pi-Ramesse: See Hermann Kees, Ancient Egypt, A Cultural Topography, trans. Ian F. D. Morrow (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1961), p. 201.
[^28] Gaalyah Cornfeld, Archaeology of the Bible: Book by Book (New York: Harper and Row, 1976), p. 122.
