Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

12

LESSONS IN THE WILDERNESS (Numbers)

ROBERT L. MILLET

Since about A.D. 160 the five books of Moses have been known collectively as "the Pentateuch," i.e., "the fivefold book." The Semitic custom anciently was to use the first word(s) of a book as its title; for example, bereshith, "in the beginning," is the Hebrew title for Genesis, the first book of the Pentateuch. The first words in the Hebrew text for what we know as the book of Numbers are wayedabber, "and he spoke." Unfortunately, these are similar to the opening words in Deuteronomy, and so we turn to the fifth word of the text: bamidbar, "in the desert," a title quite descriptive of the journeys of ancient Israel. The translators of the Greek version of the scriptures (the Septuagint or LXX), however, wanted the title to be even more descriptive of the content of the book and chose to label it "Arithmoi," "Numbers," because of the repeated use of census figures and counting of the Israelites. In reality, and as we shall see, chapters 1-4 and 26 contain many numbers; the majority of the story in this phase of Israel's dramatic exodus involves the people's encounter with their God and his prophet, and with lessons painfully learned "in the desert."

The book of Numbers takes the children of Israel from Sinai to Canaan. The period of wilderness wanderings described in the book of Numbers lasted for about thirty-eight years and nine months. Why such a long period to transverse such a relatively short distance? One group of scholars has written: "The journey from Sinai to Kadeshbarnea by way of the Gulf of Aqaba takes only eleven days (Deut. 1:2). The direct route would be but a few days less, and by way of Edom and Moab hardly more than a couple of weeks. Numbers makes clear that the thirty-eight-year period was punishment for lack of faith, so none of the unbelieving generation would enter the land (cf. Deut. 1:35f.)." [^1]

One of the more obvious lessons to be learned through Moses' experience with wayward Israel is that signs and wonders do not insure conversion or obedience. God saw fit to perform miracle after miracle to deliver Israel from Egyptian bondage, and to preserve his chosen people from death in the deserts. But the people were hardened in their hearts and were neither moved nor motivated for any length of time by the supernatural. A modern revelation has affirmed that "faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe" (D&C 63:9). In a sense, the story in Numbers is a dramatic but tragic drama, a story of unrequited love. On the one hand we witness the hesed of the Lord, his infinite kindness and covenant love for his covenant people; he literally would not let Israel go (see Jacob 6:4-5). On the other hand, we witness Israel's difficulty with receiving and appreciating God's offer to make of her his peculiar treasure, his holy nation of kings and priests, queens and priestesses (see Ex. 19:5-6). In addition, Jehovah straitened his people for their rebellion and chastened them for their failure to heed his word and the directives of his anointed servants.

Since neither time nor space will permit a detailed treatment of all significant aspects of the Book of Numbers, this article will focus largely upon the lessons learned in the wilderness, lessons which are both timely (i.e., have contemporary relevance) and timeless (i.e., have everlasting relevance). The following outline of Numbers may be helpful to the reader in gaining an overall perspective of the book.

I. Preparation for the journey from Sinai (1:1-10:10)

A. Numbering the army and organizing the march (1:1-2:34)

B. Numbering the Levites; assigning Levitical duties (3:1-4:49)

C. Laws regarding leprosy; restitution; jealousy (suspicion) concerning adultery (5:1-31)

D. The law of Nazarites (6:1-27)

E. Leaders of Israel make offerings for the tabernacle (7:1-89)

F. Consecration and setting apart of Levites (8:1-26)

G. Israel again commanded to observe Passover (9:1-14)

H. Israelites follow the cloud (9:15-10:10)

II. From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea (10:11-14:45)

A. The march begins (10:11-36)

B. The miracle of quails; seventy elders prophesy (11:1-35)

C. Miriam and Aaron rebel (12:1-16)

D. The spies and their report (13:1-14:45)

III. From Kadesh-barnea to Moab (15:1-21:35)

A. Sacrifices and offerings; penalties for blasphemy and Sabbath breaking; fringes on clothing (15:1-41)

B. Rebellion of Korah (16:1-17:13)

C. Priests and Levites (18:1-32)

D. Laws of Purification; the red heifer (19:1-22)

E. Moses and the waters of Meribah; deaths of Miriam and Aaron (20:1-29)

F. Moses and the brazen serpent; arrival at Moab (21:1-20)

G. Conquests over Amorites (21:21-35)

IV. Balaam and the Moabites (22:1-25:18)

A. Balak approaches Balaam (22:1-41)

B. Balaam prophesies of Israel's triumph (23:1-24:25)

C. The sins at Baal-peor (25:1-18)

V. Making Preparations to Enter Canaan (26:1-36:13)

A. Preparing for conquest; assigning inheritances (26:1-27:23)

B. Sacrifices and vows (28:1-30:16)

C. Midianites destroyed; distribution of spoils (31:1-54)

D. Reuben, Gad, Manasseh receive Transjordanian areas (32:1-42)

E. In summary: Egypt to Moab (33:1-56)

F. Plans for the division of Canaan (34:1-36:13)

The Census Taken

Chapter one of the book of Numbers begins with the Lord's command to Moses to number the males in all the tribes of Israel over twenty years of age; this would represent the potential army of Israel, the fighting force needed to face the enemies of the people of God. If the figures are to be taken literally, the average number of fighting males per tribe was a little over 50,000, with the tribe of Judah furnishing the greater number (74,600) and the tribe of Manasseh the least (32,200). The total figure for all tribes of Israel was 603,550. If the men of military age represented about 20-25 percent of the population—based upon what might be found in other nations—then the total population of all Israelites would number from two to three million people. This would indeed present a formidable challenge for Moses! [^2] Because of their particular religious functions among all the house of Israel, the Levites were not numbered. Chapter two contains a description of the camp of Israel with the particular locations of the tents of the twelve tribes, with the tribe of Dan on the north, Reuben on the south, Judah on the east, and Ephraim on the west.

After thirty-eight years (and after a generation of wayward Israelites have died) another census was taken (chapter 26), this time showing a total male fighting age population of 601,730, just a slight decrease in numbers from the original total. "The purpose of the census prior to the failure of Kadesh (Num. 1-4)," writes Gleason Archer, "and of the census of the later generation at the plains of Moab (Num. 26) was to show that they were not kept out of Canaan by their insufficient numbers. It was not the size of their army that mattered, but only the size of their faith." [^3]

The Priests and the Levites

As has been discussed earlier in the Pentateuch, Aaron and his sons were called by the Lord to administer in the priest's office and to initiate a new order of priesthood. As far as is known, from the days of Adam to the time of Moses and the exodus, all priesthood was Melchizedek and was administered in patriarchal fashion. Those holding the priesthood during the 2,500 year period were called "high priests," i.e., holders of the high priesthood (see Alma 13:9). "The patriarchal priesthood," observed Joseph Fielding Smith, "was handed down from father to son, and . . . the keys of it belonged to the oldest son by right of primogeniture; but notwithstanding this, all of the faithful men who obtained the priesthood had this patriarchal office from the days of Adam down to the days of Moses. This order of the priesthood was the one conferred upon these ancient prophets and teachers, whether they were the first-born or the last-born, if they were faithful." [^4] When the children of Israel proved unworthy and unwilling to receive the highest of spiritual possibilities, the Lord took away the keys of the higher priesthood in the form of Moses, and thereafter the Aaronic Priesthood became the priesthood of administration. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained:

When the Lord took Moses out of Israel, he took the higher priesthood also and left Israel with the lesser priesthood which holds the keys to the temporal salvation of mankind—the temporal gospel—which deals with repentance and baptism particularly, but does not have to do with the higher ordinances which have been revealed in the dispensation in which we live.

Therefore, in Israel, the common people, the people generally, did not exercise the functions of priesthood in its fulness, but were confined in their labors and ministrations very largely to the Aaronic Priesthood. The withdrawal of the higher priesthood was from the people as a body, but the Lord still left among them men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, with power to officiate in all its ordinances, so far as he determined that these ordinances should be granted unto the people. [^5]

According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, Aaron and his sons (Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar) all "held the Melchizedek Priesthood," but were "called of God to preside over the lesser priesthood, which ever thereafter would bear" the name of Aaron. Aaron "was the presiding bishop of the Church, as it were, and the office was ordained of God to be hereditary, to go from father to son, and to be the rightful inheritance of the oldest man in direct descent among the sons of Aaron." [^6] Because they "offered strange fire" before the Lord and thus did not attend to the sacrificial ordinance with the dignity and single-mindedness that ought to characterize consecrated servants, Nadab and Abihu were devoured by fire (Lev. 10:1-2; Num. 3:4). Thus Eleazar was the lineal heir to the office of "high priest" or presiding priest in the Aaronic order of priesthood, following his father, Aaron.

It was obvious that the two remaining sons of Aaron could not attend to all duties which would thereafter devolve upon holders of the priesthood. They needed assistance. The Lord therefore "chose the tribe of Levi to assist Aaron in the priestly functions, the special duties of the Levites being to keep the instruments and attend to the service of the tabernacle. . . . The commission thus given to the Levites is sometimes called the Levitical Priesthood; it is to be regarded as an appendage to the Priesthood of Aaron, not comprising the highest priestly powers." [^7] The Levites, numbering 22,000 ("all the males from a month old and upward"—Num. 3:39), were thus called to serve in a sacred assignment "instead of all the firstborn" of the children of Israel. Regarding the preparation of the Levites for their service, the biblical account explains:

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,

Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.

And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.

Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.

And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together:

And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites:

And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord.

And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, unto the Lord, to make an atonement for the Levites.

And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for an offering unto the Lord.

Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be mine (Num. 8:5-14).

The Levites received no land inheritance in Canaan (Num. 18:23-24) and were supported by the tithes of the people (Num. 18:21).

Various Laws and Ordinances

The book of Numbers supplements what had already been given to the children of Israel with regard to laws and ordinances associated with daily living. The following are brief summaries of some of those statutes.

Leprosy. The people of Israel were given specific directions regarding the treatment of those unfortunate persons afflicted with leprosy (Num. 5; cf. Lev. 13-15). Such were to be put outside the camp of Israel to avoid defilement. Similar regulations pertained to those who had made physical contact with a dead body (Num. 5:2; 19).

Suspicion, Jealousy. The strict warning against and penalty for adultery had already been given to Israel (Ex. 20:14; Lev. 20:10). But what was to be done in a situation where a man only suspected his wife to be guilty of immorality? Chapter five of Numbers deals with this matter. "The rite which has become known to scholars as the 'jealousy ordeal,"' R. K. Harrison has written, "is of some interest because it was not entirely unknown among other peoples of antiquity. In this enactment Numbers supplemented the prescriptions of Leviticus, for where the latter had pronounced the death penalty upon both participants in an adulterous act, the former outlined the procedure to be followed when a man suspected his wife of adultery that he was actually unable to prove." [^8]

After the suspect woman was brought by her husband to the priest and after an offering was made (the details are given in 5:15-31), the priest presented a vial of bitter liquid to the woman with an "oath of cursing" should she be guilty of the stated offense: "The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell." One scholar has observed:

It is not quite clear to what the "swelling of her abdomen" and the "wasting away of the thigh" refer; some think of dropsy, or a similar disease of the ovaries that would cause the woman to look continually pregnant while she slowly wastes away. Or, perhaps we must understand this to mean that the guilty woman is pregnant, but her pregnancy results in a miscarriage because the bitter water destroys the fetus that was conceived in adultery. In any case, the law of retribution applies if the woman is guilty; if she is innocent she will become pregnant and be blessed with children. [^9]

Vows. A vow was a solemn promise or form of devotion or dedication. Vows generally were of two kinds: (1) vows of dedication, wherein a person or thing was consecrated to the Lord (Lev. 27:1-24); and (2) vows of abstinence, wherein a person promised to refrain from what would normally be lawful and enjoyable (Num. 6:3). Nothing that was either already declared holy or blemished could be offered as a vow (Lev. 27:26; Deut. 23:18). Vows were frequently offered as an appeal or entreaty to God, offered to obtain his favor and blessing (Gen. 28:20; 2 Sam. 15:7-8). Most important, a vow was considered by the Lord to be a sacred agreement: "If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth" (Num. 30:2).

In a patriarchal society like that of ancient Israel, regulations concerning women's vows were also to be found. If a young woman (of marriageable age, but still in her father's home) made a vow, her father heard the vow and did not object in any way, then the vow would stand. If, however, the father heard the vow and objected to his daughter's involvement, the contract was voided and the daughter was released immediately from the bond and "forgiven" forthwith by the Lord. The same situation held for a married woman; the husband could allow or annul the vow. Widows and divorced women (who, naturally, had no fathers or husbands to object to their vows) were under obligation to keep any agreement made in the form of a vow (Num. 30:1-9).

A specific example of a vow was the Nazarite consecration. The Nazarite, literally one "separated" or "set apart," was a person (male or female) who took a vow of holiness, an oath of abstinence from the world. Such a vow could last anywhere from a short period to an entire lifetime. Abstinence from fruit of the vine (e.g., grapes, grape juice, wine, raisins) was enjoined on the initiate. In addition, he was not to cut his hair nor touch a dead person (even a family member) during the time of separation (Num. 6:1-18). Notable Nazarites include Samson (Judg. 13:5), Samuel (1 Sam. 1:11), and John the Baptist (Luke 1:15). It appears that Paul the Apostle also participated in vows of this sort (Acts 18:18). [^10]

Passover. The Israelites were again commanded to observe the Passover ritual and to commemorate the night in Egypt when the angel of death spared the chosen of the Lord, those upon whose door posts was found the blood of the lamb (Ex. 12; Num. 9:1-14). The spiritually sensitive among the children of Israel would surely recognize the remarkable typology in the celebration of this event and the accompanying week of feasting: the blood of the "lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Rev. 13:8) would deliver all the obedient and observant from the universal commonality—death. All persons within the walls of the camp of Israel—the ceremonially unclean, the stranger, and the observant—were to take part in the celebration of the Passover: the Lord had established "one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land" (Num. 9:9-14).

Sacrifices and Offerings. The principle and ordinance of sacrifice antedated Moses or Aaron: the meaning of simple sacrifice was taught to Adam after he was driven from the garden of Eden by an angel of God, who explained that such an offering was "a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth" (Moses 5:7). In the days of Moses the Lord revealed the "law of carnal commandments" (Heb. 7:16; D&C 84:27), and with it an intricate and detailed system of sacrifices and offerings. [^11] Paul referred to the Law as a "schoolmaster [tutor, guardian] until Christ" (JST, Gal. 3:24), and Abinadi spoke of it as "a very strict law," a "law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him" (Mosiah 13:29-30). Certain chapters in the book of Numbers (chapters 15, 19, 28-29) supplement what has already been given in Exodus and Leviticus and thus affirm the critical place of animal sacrifice in the religious life of the children of Israel.

The Lord explained the difference between "sins of ignorance" and willful sin: "And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is ignorance." Further, "if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she goat of the first year [a one-year-old] for a sin offering. And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the Lord, to make an atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him." On the other hand, "the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people" (Num. 15:25, 27-28, 30). Such rituals were perfectly directed toward the truth that the Lord Jehovah is more than willing to offer the healing powers of his atoning blood for those who in sincerity seek to repent and be forgiven. In the words of Abinadi, those who "have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them" (cf. Num. 15:31) are those "that have no part in the first resurrection," for the "Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such; for he cannot deny himself; for he cannot deny justice when it has its claim" (Mosiah 15:27).

Chapters 28 and 29 of Numbers contain specific direction regarding different sacrifices and affirm that offerings were to be made (among other times) each morning and evening, on the Sabbath, at the first of each month, during Passover, and at the time of Pentecost, the feast of firstfruits. Chapter 19 is a manual or guide for understanding the sacrifice of the red heifer and thus the means for purification whenever one has come in physical contact with a dead body. [^12] All of this was, of course, anticipatory to the ministry of the true high priest in the meridian of time, the "high priest of good things to come" (Heb. 9:11). As Paul wrote to the Hebrews:

For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh:

How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

And for this cause he is the mediator of the new covenant, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first covenant, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

For where a covenant is, there must also of necessity be the death of the victim (JST, Heb. 9:11, 13-16).

Laws of Inheritance. In chapter 27 a legal issue is raised by the daughters of Zelophehad. In chapter 26 a census had been taken, the figures listed including only male persons. One implication of such a census is the assumption that only male members of a family might own land. Zelophehad had died leaving no male offspring, and his daughters expressed their concerns: "Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath no son?" Their proposal? "Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our father" (Num. 27:1-4). Moses presented the matter to the Lord for divine counsel. In commenting on the nature of the issue raised by the daughters, Noordtzij has observed:

The manner in which they present their question is in more than one respect remarkable. First, because of what they say about their father: they emphasize that, although many of the leaders followed Korah (16:1-2), their father had not supported him, even though he was one of the leaders according to 26:33. The fact that he has died toward the end of the wilderness journey is, they say, unrelated to the judgment of God on Korah and his followers. He died "for his own sin," i.e., he has fallen under the general judgment on rebellious Israel (14:18 ff.; see also Deut. 24:16). There is thus no special reason why Zelophehad's name should "disappear" (lit. "be taken away," used in this sense only here; "erased," Ex. 17:14; Deut. 9:14; et al.; "blotted out" Deut. 25:6; 29:20). This statement reflects the importance placed on a name, not only in Israel, but in the entire ancient Near East. A name is not merely a designation, but an integral part of existence: only that which has a name exists. The perpetuation of a name is therefore a matter of importance; only a son can ensure that a name will not "disappear" (cf. Deut. 25:6 ff.), because only a son has the right of succession. The name of a man who has no son will be "remembered no more" (Jer. 11:19), because it has ceased to be connected with an inheritance. This reflects a concept that was prominent in Israel: a name is linked with landownership, and it is therefore important to prevent any land from being removed from the family, clan, or tribe to which it originally belonged. . . His daughters now ask that they be allowed to inherit. [^13]

The Lord's decision in the matter was important, as it appears that such a question may not have been raised publicly before. The announcement thus set a legal precedent and had lasting consequences. The word of Jehovah was clear:

If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.

And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.

And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father's brethren.

And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses (Num. 27:8-11).

This divine directive had an implication which is not discussed here but which arose later: What of a situation where a daughter inherited land, as did the daughters of Zelophehad, and then married a man from another tribe? By right her property would be counted among that of her husband's tribe, since she would then become part of that tribe herself. [^14] Because of the complications arising thereby, the Lord commanded concerning Zelophehad's daughters: "Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry. So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe." Further, "and every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers" (Num. 36:6-8). Outside of this unique circumstance, where daughters inherited their fathers' property, marriage between members of different tribes was not prohibited.

Moses and the Spirit of Prophecy

If ever there was a person who deserved exaltation strictly on the basis of patient endurance, such a one was Moses the Lawgiver. The children of Israel had spent centuries in Egyptian bondage and had become accustomed to the ways and whims of their taskmasters. Slavery was an abominable life, but it did have advantages: life was simple, daily bread was provided, and one could easily predict the events to transpire. Deliverance from captivity was glorious, but (to the Israelites) it did have its drawbacks: "Who shall give us flesh [meat] to eat? We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks [onion-like plants], and the onions, and the garlik: But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing at all, beside this manna, before our eyes" (Num. 11:4-6). The patience of both Moses and Jehovah was certainly tried to the limit during the wilderness wanderings. Moses began to ask: Why have you given me such burdens? Are these my children? Have I borne them, and if not, why am I responsible to take them to the land of their inheritance? Bending under the weight of their murmurings, Moses sighed: "I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me" (see Num. 11:5-14).

The Lord wisely determined to share the burden of leadership. Moses was instructed to select seventy elders of Israel and "bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee." The Lord continued: "And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone" (Num. 11:16-17). The Lord then assured Moses that he would provide meat for the Israelites the next day. Moses gathered the seventy elders about the tabernacle. "And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease" (Num. 11:25). Two of the men, Eldad and Medad, presumably two of the seventy selected—remained in the camp, only to find themselves filled with the same spirit of prophecy. Joshua, perhaps unduly concerned and a bit possessive of Moses' position as spiritual leader, came to Moses. "My lord Moses," he said, "forbid them." And then there came from the lips of the Lawgiver one of the greatest utterances of the ages, a statement evidencing both Moses' spiritual maturity and his elegant vision of the plan of the Lord for his people: "Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11:28-29).

Joseph Smith was asked on one occasion: "Do you believe Joseph Smith, Jun., to be a prophet?" He answered: "Yes, and every other man who has the testimony of Jesus. For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." [^15] On a later occasion Joseph Smith explained: "No man is a minister of Jesus Christ without being a Prophet. No man can be a minister of Jesus Christ except he has the testimony of Jesus; and this is the spirit of prophecy." [^16] The Kingdom of God is established on the earth in all dispensations to make of its citizens—all of its citizens, and not only those with administrative responsibilities—recipient of and participants in the gifts, signs, and wonders that always accompany faithful obedience. "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph," the modern seer proclaimed, "but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^17]

Indeed, "would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" When every man or woman—whether ancient or modern Israelite—has the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy burning within his or her soul, then the work of the Lord moves forward by leaps and bounds. The strength of the kingdom of God at any time is not to be found alone in the power and strength of its leaders, but more important in the individual testimonies of the members. Members who gain the witness and enjoy the gifts lift heavy burdens from the shoulders of the leaders, for they now perform their labors in the Church with intelligent obedience. They are more converted and more motivated. President Brigham Young observed: "I am like Moses when a messenger came to him saying, 'The people are prophesying in their tents.' Said Moses, Well, what of that? I would to God that the Lord's people were all prophets! I would to God that they all had revelation! When they receive revelation from heaven the story is told, they know for themselves." [^18]

The Complaint of Miriam and Aaron

One sign of spiritual maturity is the capacity to receive revealed truths and act upon them in a balanced and appropriate manner. The children of Israel had just learned of the importance of every man and woman becoming a prophet within his or her own sphere and that it is the privilege of each person to be guided and enlightened by the Spirit of God. Now they needed to learn order in the matter of revelation, and the significance of sustaining the one person given keys—directing power, the right of presidency—over the whole Church. Miriam and Aaron, Moses' older sister and brother, began to find fault with their prophet-brother. First of all the twosome "spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married." [^19] "And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it" (Num. 12:1-2). Miriam and Aaron are about to learn a sobering lesson: God calls prophets, God molds his prophets, and God alone stands in judgment upon his prophets. The prophet's word is to be received as if from the very mouth of the Lord, and the Saints are to receive it in all patience and faith (see D&C 21:4-6).

It is in chapter 12 that we gain a keener insight into Moses' character, an insight obtained first from a verse presumably written by Moses himself: "Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth" (Num. 12:3). [^20] The Lord descended in a cloud, summoned Miriam and Aaron before him, and continued to expand our understanding of Moses' greatness and unusual prophetic stature: "If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream" (Num. 12:6). One would suppose that such divine manifestations (visions or dreams) on a regular basis would be commendable and laudatory, even for prophets. But Moses was unusual: "With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold" (Num. 12:8). All revelation is marvelous, but some is more direct than others. In some cases "the Spirit speaketh expressly" (1 Tim. 4:1), implying that sometimes it does not speak quite so clearly. Joseph Smith spoke of the "still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest" (D&C 85:6). As it is with revelation, so it is with prophets: some prophets enjoy a greater intimacy with the Lord than others. Moses spoke with the Lord face to face (cf. Moses 1:2; Ex. 33:11).

"Wherefore then"—given the high and holy position of Moses in regard to the Eternal One—the Lord inquired of Miriam and Aaron, "were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" (Num. 12:8). The Lord's anger was kindled against the two, for these (above all others, being closest to Moses) should have known better; the heavens expected finer things from them. Miriam was stricken with leprosy, [^21] in this case an outward evidence of inward uncleanness. After pleadings by Aaron, intercession by Moses, and the prescribed seven days outside the camp, Miriam was released from the dreaded disease (Num. 12:10-16). And no doubt she and Aaron were released from the more serious disease—rebellion. Presumably they came to appreciate in a dramatic way that one "is not truly converted until he sees the power of God resting upon the leaders of this Church, and until it goes down into his heart like fire." [^22]

The Spies and the Land of Canaan

As the people of Israel approached the land of Canaan the Lord commanded that men be sent into the promised land as spies (Num. 13:1-20). One representative from each tribe received the assignment to "see the land, what it is; and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; And what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong holds" (Num. 13:18-19). They were told to discover whether the land was productive, and, further, to "bring [back] of the fruit of the land" (Num. 13:20).

The spies returned after forty days. All twelve seemed to agree on the productivity of the land: "Surely it floweth with milk and honey" (v. 27). They also agreed that the land was well guarded, and all the people of the area were "giants," that is "men of great stature" (vv. 32-33). There was, however, a major area of disagreement: ten of the spies felt the people of the land of Canaan too formidable to be conquered; Caleb of the tribe of Judah and Joshua of the tribe of Ephraim, on the other hand, said: "Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it" (Num. 13:30). The congregation of Israel, lacking in faith, accepted the report and recommendation of the ten spies, began to murmur again against Moses, and cried out: "Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!" (Num. 14:2). The people began plans to return to Egypt. Caleb and Joshua—men of both faith and courage—cried out in response: "If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey. Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the land" (Num. 14:8-9). This was a spirit of faith, an attitude akin to that of Nephi, son of Lehi, who remarked: "If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them" (1 Ne. 17:50). In the same vein Ammon, the son of Mosiah, exulted after marvelous missionary success: "I do not boast in my own strength, nor in my own wisdom. . . . Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things" (Alma 26:11-12; cf. Phil. 4:13). The response of the people of the house of Israel to Caleb and Joshua's appeals? "All the congregation bade stone them with stones."

"How long will this people provoke me?" the Lord asked Moses, "and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shewed among them?" (Num. 14:11). Again we have confirmed the fact that faith in God and a quiet trust in his purposes do not necessarily follow on the heels of signs and miracles (see D&C 63:9). The Lord Jehovah became so irritated with Israel that he proposed to disinherit them as his chosen people and cause his holy nation (in keeping with the promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) to come through Moses and his posterity. Again the greatness and magnanimity of Moses became evident as he pleaded and interceded: "Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now" (v. 19). The Lord granted pardon so far as the notion of disinheritance was concerned, but promised instead that no one of the children of Israel over twenty years of age—with the exception of Caleb and Joshua—would live to enter the promised land. "Your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness" (v. 33). In addition, the ten spies who brought "the evil report" died in a plague sent by the Lord. The language of a Proverb points up this lesson in the wilderness: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths" (Prov. 3:5-6).

The Rebellion of Korah

In chapter 16 we are introduced to Korah, the great-grandson of Levi, and witness the learning of a lesson which proves to be a variant of that experienced by Miriam and Aaron in chapter 12. Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and 250 leaders gathered together against Moses and Aaron and spoke: "Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?" (v. 3). Moses likewise responded: "Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi" (v. 7). Further: "Seemeth it but a small thing, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel [as Levites, special assistants to the priests], to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them? And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the high priesthood also?" (JST, Num. 16:9-10). [^23]

The Lord threatened to destroy the entire congregation. Moses and Aaron again pleaded: "O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?" (v. 22). Some Latter-day Saint commentators have used this verse as evidence of a doctrinal understanding on the part of ancient Israel of the role of God as the Father of spirits; as such it may provide an insight to us that many particulars of the Plan of Salvation were had millennia before the coming of Christ. This is consistent with what we find in the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price: marvelous theology among the ancients. [^24] The Lord thereafter instructed the people (through Moses) to place distance between themselves and those sponsoring the rebellion. He also made known in a dramatic manner his own feelings in the matter at hand: on the next day all of the offenders were destroyed by earthquake and fire. Then came the bitter irony of the occasion—the congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron (!), saying: "Ye have killed the people of the Lord" (v. 41). A plague ensued. Moses then asked Aaron to "make an atonement" for the people—an offering in their behalf to turn away the anger of Lord. And then Aaron—standing as mediator and intercessor, and as a type of the Mortal Messiah to come—"stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed" (v. 48). To further demonstrate that Aaron was his appointed servant (and that he had placed his power upon Aaron and his sons), the Lord caused the rod of Aaron to blossom and bud (in a miraculous manner), while no such wonder was associated with the rods of the other eleven tribes (Num. 17:1-10).

Joseph Smith "spoke of the disposition of many men to consider the lower offices in the Church dishonorable, and to look with jealous eyes upon the standing of others who are called to preside over them; that it was the folly and nonsense of the human heart for a person to be aspiring to other stations than those to which they are appointed of God for them to occupy; that it was better for individuals to magnify their respective calling, and wait patiently till God shall say to them, 'Come up higher."' [^25] Indeed, the lesson to be learned was stated simply by Paul centuries after the exodus: "And no man taketh this honour [the honor of high priest] unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb. 5:4).

Moses and the Waters of Meribah

The opening verses in chapter 20 of Numbers provide a transition to the third part of our record—the journey from Kadesh-barnea to Transjordan. As the story unfolds, the children of Israel found themselves in the desert of Zin. Miriam died there and was buried. The people began again to complain and contend with Moses, saying: "Would God that we had died when our brethren died before the Lord!" (v. 3). Their concern this time? It was an "evil place" ["terrible place"], an area wherein was found no "figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;" most important, "neither is there any water to drink" (v. 5). After supplicating the Lord at the door of the tabernacle, he appeared and gave specific instructions to Moses: "Take the rod, and gather the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink" (v. 8).

There are very few occasions in the Pentateuch when weakness in Moses surfaces in the narrative. Chapter 20 represents one of those occasions: "And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock? And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice; and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also" (vv. 10-11). The words and deeds of Moses offended the Lord. First, he seems to have failed to give God the honor and praise for the working of the miraculous ("must we fetch you water . . .?"), a power which God alone grants to the obedient and the humble. Second, Moses chose his own way to bring forth the water; he "smote the rock twice" with the rod, rather than uttering the verbal command as Jehovah had directed.

It would seem appropriate to keep some things in perspective. Soon hereafter the Lord indicated his true feelings toward his servant Moses; he translated him—took him to heaven without Moses being required to taste of death! [^26] Further, it was important that Moses be taken from the midst of the children of Israel when he was. The people had proven unworthy of the fulness of the blessings associated with the new and everlasting covenant (see JST, Ex. 34:1-2; Deut. 10:1-2), and therefore unworthy of the blessings associated with the higher priesthood, the keys of which were held by Moses. If a people is not willing or desirous of attaining the rest of the Lord, of what benefit is the holy priesthood? A modern revelation explains:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John (D&C 84:19-27). [^27]

A final incident worthy of consideration at the close of chapter 20 is the death of Aaron. For forty years now Aaron had been beside his brother as aide and spokesman, positions to which he had been foreordained and about which a prophet had spoken centuries before (see JST, Gen. 50:35; 2 Ne. 3:17). And now it was time for him to "be gathered unto his people," that is, to be reunited with loved ones who had already passed through the veil separating this sphere from the next. Thus it was on Mount Hor, "in the sight of all the congregation," that Moses removed the priestly garments from Aaron and placed them upon Eleazar, the rightful heir to the office of high priest. According to the account, "Aaron died there in the top of the mount," following which "they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel" (Num. 20:23-29). [^28]

Moses and the Brazen Serpent

As the children of Israel "journeyed from Mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea" to go around Edom, the murmurings of the people began again: "Wherefore have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light bread [manna]" (Num. 21:4-5). The divine response to the perpetual problem was: "And the Lord sent fiery [poisonous] serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died" (v. 6). After the people realized their plight they pled with Moses to intercede for them. "And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: And it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live" (v. 8). Moses obeyed, and those who looked to the brazen serpent lived.

The brazen serpent, like so many incidents in Israel's wanderings and religious life, was a type, an actual historical reality which pointed beyond itself to a greater and more powerful reality. What is remarkable is that these things were known long before Calvary. Nephi the son of Helaman, approximately twenty years before the coming of Christ to earth, spoke of the testimony of Moses regarding the Redeemer. "Yea, did he [Moses] not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come." Nephi continued: "And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal" (Hel. 8:14-15). Alma (ca. 75 B.C.) had made reference to the messianic prophecies of Zenos and Zenock and then affirmed that "these are not the only ones who have spoken concerning the Son of God. Behold, he was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it might live. And many did look and live. But few understood the meaning of those things, and this because of the hardness of their hearts. But there were many who were so hardened that they would not look, therefore they perished. Now the reason they would not look is because they did not believe that it would heal them" (Alma 33:18-20).

We see from the above that the Book of Mormon is not only an additional witness of the historical veracity of this ancient event, but also a remarkable doctrinal commentary on it, whereby additional details are made known, presumably from the more complete account on the brass plates (1 Ne. 13:23). One final Book of Mormon testimony of this Old Testament episode is noteworthy. Nephi the son of Lehi (ca. 590 B.C.) spoke to his brothers concerning Israel being led out of Egyptian bondage: "And [the Lord] did straiten them in the wilderness with his rod; for they hardened their hearts, even as ye have; and the Lord straitened them because of their iniquity. He sent fiery flying serpents among them; and after they were bitten he prepared a way that they might be healed; and the labor which they had to perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished" (1 Ne. 17:41). Nephi added the interesting detail that the venomous snakes were fiery flying serpents. One non-LDS scholar has explained:

We are . . . told of the result of the Lord's anger: venomous snakes are sent (lit. "fiery serpents," cf. KJV; their bite caused the burning sensation of a serious infection). Many kinds of snakes whose bite is dangerous to man and beast are still found in the Sinai peninsula and in the desert south of Palestine. . . . Among the venomous snakes is also the "flying serpent" of Isaiah 14:29; 30:6 (NIV: "darting serpent"), a tree serpent that is still found in Arabia and Egypt, and which in the popular imagination has become some kind of dragon. [^29]

One question that naturally arises out of this biblical situation pertains to the nature of the type; specifically, why would a serpent be chosen as the symbol of healing? One commentator has observed:

The serpent played a prominent role in the thinking of the ancient Near Eastern world. . . . On the one hand it was feared as the monster from the nether world that guards its gates, on the other hand it was worshipped as representing life. The latter is expressed in an ancient Babylonian text: "If a serpent falls on a sick person, who has been ill for many days, the sick person will live long." . . .

In this section the snake is on the one hand the carrier of evil that kills many, on the other hand it represents life. But this duality is very different from that generally found in the ancient Near East: the life-giving aspect of the serpent is not inherent in the animal itself. The snake on the pole can give life only because of the Lord's gracious will, and its curative effect is experienced only by those who see in this snake the symbol of the Lord's grace that forgives and delivers from death. Only thus could the snake point forward to the coming Christ (John 3:14-15; 1 Cor. 10:9). [^30]

A further explanation has been offered by Ellis Rasmussen:

It is probably more than coincidental that the serpent-motif became symbolic of both the coming of death and of life in various cultures, including the Mayan and Aztec. In a sense, a pattern of relationships may exist, that as the serpent in Eden was related to the serpent on a pole, even so was the man in Eden related to the Man on a Cross, Moreover, even as the first death brought also the capacity for reproduction of life, so also the other death (Christ's) brought about resurrection and eternal life. [^31]

Perhaps it is most appropriate that we preserve until last the Savior's own testimony of the theological significance of the story told in Numbers 21. In speaking to Nicodemus Jesus pointed out that "no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life" (John 3:13-15). [^32]

Balaam the Prophet and Israel

In chapter 22 we are introduced to Balaam, a man of prophetic stature who lived independent of Moses and the children of Israel. [^33] Balak, the king of the Moabites, became aware of the numbers of people constituting the army of Israel and also began to recognize that the strength of Israel was supplemented by divine favor (see, for example, Num. 21:21-35). Balak called upon Balaam and made an unusual request: "Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people [Israel] . . . for I wot [know] that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed" (Num. 22:6). Balak made an attractive offer to Balaam in terms of money and prestige, but Balaam insisted that he could only speak that which the Lord put into his mouth. The Lord repeatedly let Balaam know that Israel was his chosen people and was entitled to blessings and not cursings. Balak continued to plead with Balaam, and Balaam continued to weary Jehovah with a request that he (the prophet) knew to be inappropriate. Balaam gave in eventually to Balak's temptations. He thereby offended the Lord and prevented himself from enjoying the spiritual manifestations that might have been his had he only continued steadfast in what he knew to be the divine will. In spite of Balaam's insistence to Balak that Israel was the Lord's and thus the object of rich blessings, Balaam eventually lost the Spirit and led away many into transgression (Num. 22-24; 31:16).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has summarized the lessons to be learned in the story of Balaam in the following way:

What a story this is! Here is a prophet of God who is firmly committed to declare only what the Lord of heaven directs. There does not seem to be the slightest doubt in his mind about the course he should pursue. He represents the Lord, and neither a house full of gold and silver nor high honors offered by the king can sway him from his determined course, which has been charted for him by that God whom he serves.

But greed for wealth and lust for honor beckon him. How marvelous it would be to be rich and powerful—as well as having the prophetic powers that already are his.

Perhaps the Lord would let him compromise his standards and have some worldly prosperity and power as well as a testimony of the gospel. Of course he knew the gospel was true, as it were, but why should he be denied the things his political file leader could confer?

I wonder how often some of us get our direction from the Church and then, Balaam-like, plead for some worldly rewards and finally receive an answer which says, in effect, if you are determined to be a millionaire or to gain this or that worldly honor, go ahead, with the understanding that you will continue to serve the Lord. Then we wonder why things don't work out for us as well as they would have done if we had put first in our lives the things of God's kingdom.

What are the rewards of unrighteousness? Do they not include seeking for worldly things when these run counter to the interests of the Church?

And don't we all know people who, though they were once firm and steadfast in testimony, are now opposing the Lord's purposes and interests on earth because money and power have twisted their judgment of what should or should not be.

Balaam, the prophet, inspired and mighty as he once was, lost his soul in the end because he set his heart on the things of the world rather than the riches of eternity. [^34]

There are lessons to be learned from chapters 22-24 of Numbers other than the fact that "many are called, but few are chosen" (D&C 121:34, 40). These chapters also contain a powerful testimony of God's love and hope for the house of Israel. In poetic and prophetic power Balaam spoke:

How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!

As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side,

As the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.

He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters,

And his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted (Num. 24:5-7).

Perhaps this has reference to the living water of the gospel message that goes to all the world through the medium of Abraham's descendants. Abraham was told by Jehovah that his posterity should "bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations" (Abr. 2:9). Further, Balaam's prophecies of Israel included messianic utterances: not only did he speak of Israel's king being higher and greater than the leader of the mightiest of nations, but he also declared: "There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel" (Num. 24:17). This prophecy was certainly fulfilled in David and will be fulfilled ultimately in the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.

Settling the Land of Canaan

The Book of Numbers draws to a close with specific instructions regarding the settlement of the land of promise. Inasmuch as Moses would not accompany Israel into Canaan, the Lord commanded that another be called in his stead. The son of Nun, Oshea (more accurately Hoshea, meaning "He saves") had his name changed to Jehoshua or Joshua ("Jehovah is salvation") earlier in the narrative (Num. 13:16). Moses was instructed that the prophetic "mantle" should be transferred to Joshua, "a man in whom [was] the spirit" (Num. 27:18). In the sight of all the congregation Moses laid hands upon Joshua and set him apart for his challenging mission. The Lord also instructed that Joshua should seek counsel at the hand of Eleazar the high priest, who in turn would seek the mind and will of God through the Urim and Thummim (Num. 27:21).

Before the body crossed the Jordan, the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half of the tribe of Manasseh—impressed with "the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle" (Num. 32:1)—requested that they be permitted to settle east of the Jordan, promising to provide military assistance to the other tribes when such was necessary to drive out the inhabitants of the land of Canaan. Moses granted their request.

In the plains of Moab (near Jericho) the Lord spoke to Moses:

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;

Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their pictures [stone figures], and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places;

And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein: for I have given you the land to possess it.

And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families (Num. 33:50-54).

The particulars of land settlements and inheritances are given in chapters 34 and 35. Forty years had now passed from the time of deliverance. A new generation had arisen and was ready to enter the promised land. Israel now awaited further light and knowledge from Him who had led their fathers. Moses would soon deliver his final three discourses (Deuteronomy) before being translated and leaving the people in the hands of a younger successor. Indeed, a new day was dawning on Israel.

Footnotes

R. K. Harrison has suggested an interesting possibility regarding the Ethiopian (Cushite) woman: "The term 'Cushite' is usually taken as the equivalent of 'Ethiopian,' and as such the woman concerned may have left Egypt among the Israelites and their followers. If, however, 'Cushite' is to be derived from Kushu and the Hebrew 'Cushan,' associated with Midian (Hab. 3:7), the woman could conceivably have come from a family stock related to that of Jethro and Zipporah" (Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 626-27).

---
Notas:
[^1] "Teach them diligently unto thy children, . . ." See Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:107-11.
[^2] "Talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. . . ." For further discussion, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Law of Moses and the Atonement of Christ," herein, pp. 156, 160-61.
[^3] "Bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates" (6:6-9). This is the basis for the Jewish use of phylacteries and mezuzoth—spiritual reminders to keep them in remembrance of God. God knows how quickly his children tend to forget him and how slow they are to remember him. Of necessity, he uses various means—including sacraments and Sabbath days—to help them keep him in remembrance. Moses knew that like attracts like and that those who yearn for God eventually find him. "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy" (D&C 88:40). Those who love God inevitably embrace him. Thus, said he: "It will be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us" (6:25).
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66), 2:174; cf. Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:104.
[^5] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:78; cf. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 412.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 books (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 1:245-46.
[^7] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), pp. 204-5. Note the following instructive observation from Joseph Fielding Smith: "The Aaronic priesthood is divided into the Aaronic and the Levitical, yet it is but one priesthood. This is merely a matter of designating certain duties within the priesthood. The sons of Aaron, who presided in the Aaronic order, were spoken of as holding the Aaronic Priesthood; and the sons of Levi, who were not sons of Aaron, were spoken of as the Levites. They held the Aaronic Priesthood [cf. Deut. 18:1; Josh. 3:3] but served under, or in a lesser capacity, than the sons of Aaron" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:86). See also M. Russell Ballard, "The Aaronic Priesthood," in Priesthood (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), p. 74.
[^8] R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 623-24.
[^9] A. Noordtzij, Numbers: Bible Student's Commentary, trans. Ed van der Maas (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Publishing House, 1983), p. 57.
[^10] An excellent discussion on the requirements of the Nazarite is in Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 624-26.
[^11] See Kent P. Jackson, "The Law of Moses and the Atonement of Christ," herein, pp. 153-54, 159-72.
[^12] See Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 1:136, 152 for a discussion of the sacrifice of the red heifer.
[^13] Noordtzij, Numbers, p. 253.
[^14] See ibid., p. 254.
[^15] TPJS, p. 119; see Rev. 19:10.
[^16] Ibid., p. 160.
[^17] Ibid, p. 149.
[^18] JD 13:336.
[^19] According to the Jewish historian, Josephus, Moses had married Tharbis, the daughter of the king of the Ethiopians at a time when Moses was a commander of the Egyptian armies, Antiquities 2:10; in Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1960), p. 58.
[^20] A frequent approach (verse) used to question Mosaic authorship of Numbers is 12:3. How, critics ask, could Moses possibly be the author of the book, be as meek as this verse asserts, and at the same time be so bold and egocentric as to state these things in the text? "A good answer to this," writes Gleason Archer, "is found in the New Bible Commentary: 'Writing under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Moses did not hesitate to record his own sins and weaknesses in the clearest of language. It would be contrary to the remarkable objectivity of the Bible if he did not also record his strongest point, his meekness. . . . [The contents of this verse] are necessary to a true understanding of this chapter'" (New Bible Commentary, ed. F. Davidson, A. M. Stibbs, and E. F. Kevan, p. 177b; cited in A Survey of Old Testament Introduction, pp. 249-50).
[^21] Noorditzij has suggested regarding Miriam's punishment: "The [Hebrew] word sara'at, which we usually render 'leprosy,' refers to a number of skin diseases, several of which are unrelated to our 'leprosy.' The nega', the 'stroke' or 'plague' the Lord has sent, is in this case leukodermia, caused by the cessation of the normal pigmentation of the skin; the skin is finally entirely covered with white flakes that gradually fall off, which marks the end of the disease (Numbers, p. 110).
[^22] Harold B. Lee, Ensign, July 1972, p. 103.
[^23] It is difficult to tell whether the JST clarification ("seek ye the high priesthood also?") is making reference to the Melchizedek Priesthood, the keys of which were held by Moses (see Daniel H. Ludlow, A Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981], p. 178; George A. Horton, Jr., "Insights into Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet [Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1985], p. 84), or the high priesthood or position of Aaron, the keys of which were held by Aaron (note the chapter heading to chapter 16 in the LDS edition of the KJV, prepared by Elder Bruce R. McConkie: "Korah, Dathan, and Abiram and 250 leaders rebel and seek priestly offices").
[^24] See Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October 1973, pp. 5-6. See also the author's article, "A Small Book that Spans Eternity," in Millet and Jackson, eds., Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 3-9.
[^25] TPJS, pp. 223-24.
[^26] See Deut. 34:6; Alma 45:19; Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:110-11; Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 515 for discussion on the translation of Moses.
[^27] Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained that "when the scripture [D&C 84:25] says the Lord took Moses and the holy priesthood out of the midst of Israel, it means that he took from them the prophet who held the keys and who could authorize the priesthood to be conferred upon others. Any who thereafter held either the keys or the Melchizedek Priesthood gained them by special dispensation. The Aaronic Priesthood thus became the priesthood of administration; it was in effect the priesthood of Israel; it handled the affairs of the Church and officiated in the offering of sacrifices. However, there were at many times and may have been at all times prophets and worthy men who held the Melchizedek Priesthood" (The Promised Messiah, p. 412). Cf. also TPJS, pp. 180-81.
[^28] It is worthy of note that the Lord said unto Moses later in Numbers: "And when thou hast seen [the promised land], thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered" (Num. 27:13). But we know that Moses was translated (see note 27). One LDS author has suggested the possibility that Aaron also was translated. See Oscar W. McConkie, Jr., Aaronic Priesthood (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 21.
[^29] Noordtzij, Numbers, p. 186; emphasis added.
[^30] Ibid., p. 187.
[^31] Ellis T. Rasmussen, Introduction to the Old Testament, 2 vols. (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1972), 1:119.
[^32] Among the contributions of righteous King Hezekiah (ca. 70 B.C.) are the following: "He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he called it nuhushtan [snake]" (2 Kgs. 18:4). It appears that what had been established as a type or symbol of a saving reality began (during centuries of apostasy) to have value in itself and to be worshipped by those without eyes of faith.
[^33] "Precisely how the narratives relating to [Balaam's] oracles came to be in written form is unknown. It seems difficult to imagine that they could have been recorded by an Israelite scribe, since no Hebrews were present when the incidents described took place. It may be that a disciple of the Mesopotamian seer was responsible for the survival of the narratives, although this cannot be regarded as being any more than purely conjectural. What is evident, however, is that the traditions concerning Balaam were well known in oral form by the time of Joshua (Josh. 13:22), and if the written narratives were not already extant by then, they could hardly have been delayed much beyond the period of the Judges" (R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 620).
[^34] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Story of a Prophet's Madness," New Era, April 1972, p. 7.
