Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

19

SAUL AND THE INSTITUTION OF KINGSHIP IN ISRAEL (1 Samuel)

R. SCOTT BURTON

The Ark and the Tabernacle in 1 Samuel

As the curtain rises, the Ark is found with the tabernacle in the important religious center at Shiloh, where Eli the Priest ministered before the Lord with his two rebellious sons, Hophni and Phinehas, and where Samuel's career as a judge in Israel began. To the great consternation of Eli, the Ark was removed from its resting place in Shiloh and led, with the Israelite army, into battle against the Philistines at Eben-ezer, where it was captured and then transported to the cities of the hated enemy (1 Sam. 4:10-5:12). Finally, after a seven-month period among the Philistines, the Ark miraculously found its way back into Israelite hands and was placed by Levites at Kirjath-jearim, where it remained for twenty years (1 Sam. 6:1-22). While located at this site, it appears to have been separated from the tabernacle. [^1]

During the twenty years that the Ark remained in this Levite city, it appears not to have been used by Saul's administration; its only mention during Saul's reign comes in 1 Sam. 14:18, in which Saul called for the ark and then chose, for some reason, not to utilize it in the anticipated battle. It is not heard of again until David moved the ark from Kirjath-jearim to his city, Zion (2 Sam. 6). [^2] 1 Chronicles provides a clue that in addition to Saul's numerous other faults, he added one more against the Ark of the Lord. States David, "And let us bring again the Ark of our God to us: for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul" (1 Chron. 13:3).

The Institution of Israel's Monarchy

Throughout much of the 11th century B.C. the loose tribal federation of Israel had dealt, more or less successfully, with the aggressions of her neighbors—most notably the Ammonites and Moabites in the east, the Philistines to the west, and the Canaanites within her borders—by relying upon a part-time militia which was called to arms in times of crisis by a charismatic leader untrained in military strategy but aroused to valor by the Spirit of the Lord. The Ammonites and the Moabites had long inhabited land in the Transjordan, are said to have descended from Lot, and possessed military capabilities roughly equal to those of the twelve tribes. The Philistines, on the other hand, were newcomers to the region, having entered Palestine (named after the Philistines!) around the same time as the Israelites. They were part of a larger group known as the Sea Peoples, who had wreaked havoc over much of the eastern Mediterranean coastal region at the beginning of the century; they were a very militaristic people, possessing, unlike their neighbors, not only a professional army equipped with the most modern of weapons—horse-drawn chariots and iron over which they had a monopoly in the region—but also a king well schooled in the tactics of warfare (see 1 Sam. 13:19-22).

The first book of Samuel introduces the reader to this world at a time—the end of the 11th century B.C.—when both the Philistines and the Ammonites were exerting tremendous pressure upon the borders of Israel. The federation of tribes was fighting a battle of survival and was, apparently, losing. While Eli still officiated before the Ark of the Lord located at Shiloh, the Philistines invaded and defeated the armies of Israel, taking the Ark as spoil of war and annexing portions of Israelite territory (1 Sam. 4:10, 11). The Ark was later recovered and the Philistines expelled, resulting in a certain balance of power between the two nations. The Philistine problem was all but solved. At about the same time the Ammonites were menacing Israel from the east (1 Sam. 11).Their forays caused such concern that many Israelites evidently became convinced that drastic changes were needed if Israel were to survive. Their solution for dealing with the threats of their neighbors, according to 1 Sam. 12:12, was the institution of the monarchy, which did indeed radically and permanently alter Israelite society. [^3]

Two attitudes regarding kingship are found in 1 Samuel. They have been joined so well in our present account that it is now impossible to isolate clearly one from the other, though many have undertaken the venture. [^4] However, the main distinction between the two can be discerned easily.

The most prominent attitude concerning kingship is vigorous and lucid in its dictum that Israel's acceptance of, or more accurately, its demand for, kingship was another of its numerous and infamous steps away from the proper worship of the Lord and toward the futile and polluted worship of Baal. This tradition maintains that kingship was instituted over the revealed objection of the Lord and the prophet who represented him, Samuel. Upon hearing Israel's request for a king, "that we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles" (1 Sam. 8:5, 20), the Bible records that Samuel was "displeased" (1 Sam. 8:6). Samuel sorrowfully reported to the Lord Israel's tragic request and received a most disturbing reply:

They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee (1 Sam. 8:7, 8).

At the coronation of Saul (according to 1 Sam. 12), Samuel protested against Israel:

Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a king.

So Samuel called unto the Lord; and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.

And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king (12:17-19; see also 1 Sam. 9:18, 19).

While Samuel softened his condemnation of kingship, this polemic against Israel's abandonment to kingship ideology endured throughout Israel's and Judah's history and can be detected throughout the Old Testament. [^5] The book of Judges recounts how Gideon, responding to Israel's petition that he be a ruler over the tribes, refused to be made a king, cautioning, "I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the Lord shall rule over you" (Judg. 8:22, 23). This is a clear avowal that God and only God was "King of Israel." The two functions of the king mentioned in 1 Sam. 8:20, i.e., judging (being the lawgiver) and commanding the armed forces, had always belonged to the Lord. When Israel had been in danger of being driven into the Red Sea by an Egyptian force bent on renewing Israel's subjugation, Moses delivered the authoritative message: "Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day. . . . The Lord shall fight for you" (Ex. 14:13, 14). Moses' successor, Joshua, reaffirmed: "One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lord your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you" (Josh. 23:10). Nearer to home, it had only been a few short years since the very people who were asking for a king to deliver them from the foe had been provided a wondrous testimony that the Lord was more than able to fight Israel's battles.

The Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel.

And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Beth-car (1 Sam. 7:10, 11).

Hosea, a great Israelite prophet of the eighth century, recorded one of the Lord's many grievances against his chosen people: "They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I knew it not" (Hos. 8:4). Thus, Israel's desire to have a mortal fight its battles and deliver her laws not only demonstrated a characteristic lack of faith but was also a direct and grave violation of Israel's inspired charter.

Samuel's speech recorded in 1 Samuel 8 concerning "the manner of the king that shall reign" (1 Sam. 8:11) indicates additionally that Samuel held reservations about kingship, largely due to a king's habit of exacting taxes from his subjects. Samuel warned against a king by reminding Israel that he would tax all their resources: people, produce of the land, livestock, and money (cf. Mosiah 11:3-4).

The second attitude in 1 Samuel regarding the monarchy is a bit more positive in its view. It suggests that the Lord, not the people, initiated the process which resulted in Saul's coronation as king of Israel, and that God appointed kings in Israel as a blessing in response to faithful prayer—not as an act of wrath in response to rebellion (cf. Hos. 13:11). The Lord told Samuel:

To morrow about this time I will send thee a man . . . and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me (1 Sam. 9:16).

In 1 Samuel 11, Saul appears as another in a long line of charismatic leaders. Upon hearing the news of the Ammonite invasion of Jabeshgilead,

the Spirit of God came upon Saul . . . and his anger was kindled greatly.

And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel . . . saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen (1 Sam. 11:6, 7).

Israel did indeed gather themselves unto Saul, and as a result the Ammonites were soundly defeated. Upon returning from their victory, the Israelites were summoned to Gilgal by the Lord's prophet, Samuel, to "renew the kingdom there. And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal" (1 Sam. 11:14-15).

This more positive outlook of kingship can be found throughout the Old Testament and finds its ultimate expression in the hope of a Messiah ("anointed one") developed fully in the intertestamental period and so dominant in the New Testament.

The book of 1 Samuel not only contains two contrasting views of the monarchy—one positive and the other negative—but also demonstrates how they were able to coexist. Both Saul and David began their reign with an air of promise; yet neither was able to fulfill that promise. Both were true to Israel's pattern of piety: short periods of repentance and obedience, followed by stubborn rebellion during which they did exactly as they pleased, regardless of prophetic counsel. Throughout her history, Israel was neither able to abandon the desire for a humble king, nor able to fully and comfortably embrace the kingship of a mortal man.

Saul's Call, Coronation, and Fall

The call, coronation, and fall of Saul, [^6] who is described as a "choice young man, and goodly . . . [being] from his shoulders and upward . . . higher than any of the people" (1 Sam. 9:2), seem to derive from several sources—sources combined with such extreme competence that to separate each narrative from the others is impossible. Indications of this collecting and joining of accounts by a later historian/editor abound, a few examples of which follow.

There are several other features of the narrative that lead to the conclusion that an editor/historian brought together several different early sources in order to provide a unified and consistent account of the beginnings of the monarchy. The history of the Bible's composition and transmission is extremely complex. Though the exact nature of Saul's rise to kingship is not totally clear, the text in its final edited form is well thought out, purposeful, and ingenious. The following literary outline may be observed:

Saul is accepted by Samuel 9:18-10:1 Saul is accepted by the prophets 10:2-13 Saul is accepted by Israel 10:17-11:13 Saul is accepted by the Lord 12:13, 14 CORONATION OF SAUL 11:14-12:25

Saul displeases Samuel 13:8-15 Saul displeases the prophets 14:18, 19 fn Saul displeases Israel 14:24-46 Saul displeases the Lord 15:1-15 REJECTION OF SAUL 15:16-35

Samuel's Coronation Deposition

As others have pointed out, the events and discourses associated with the coronation of a king seem to be fairly standard throughout the ancient Near East. [^8] It is most interesting to note the numerous parallels between the events and words associated with the coronation of Mosiah in the Book of Mormon with those of Saul's coronation. Below is a comparison of the two accounts.

1 Samuel Mosiah

(12:2) (2:16, 26) "I am old and grey-headed" "I am old"

(12:2) (2:12) "I have walked before you from "I have been suffered to spend my childhood unto this day" my days in your service"

(12:3-5) (2:12-14, 27) This is a declaration of a just This is a declaration of a just and and innocent reign innocent reign

(12:6-12) (2:4) God's help in history reviewed: God's help in history reviewed: deliverance from bondage of deliverance from Jerusalem and Egypt and victory over all victory over all enemies enemies

(12:13) (2:30) A king is provided, "The Lord A king is provided: "God . . . hath set a king over you" hath commanded me . . . that my son Mosiah is a king and a ruler over you"

(12:14) (2:31) Blessing is given for obedience Blessing is given for obedience

(12:15) (2:32-40) Curse is given for disobedience Curse is given for disobedience

(12:16-18a) (Mosiah 3) A divine manifestation A manifestation: message of an angel

(12:18b) (4:1) "All the people greatly feared "The fear of the Lord had come the Lord and Samuel" upon them"

(12:19) (4:2) Mercy is requested: "Pray for Mercy is requested: "O have thy servants . . . that we die mercy" not"

(12:20) (4:3) Forgiveness promised: "Fear not Forgiveness granted: "Having . . . but serve the Lord" received a remission of their sins"

(12:21) (4:6-30) "Turn ye not aside . . . after vain "Trust in the Lord . . . unto the things, which cannot profit" end . . . of the mortal body. . . . There is none other salvation," etc. (any other is vain)

(12:22) (5:7) "It hath pleased the Lord to "Ye shall be called the children make you his people" of Christ"

(12:23) (6:3) "I will teach you the good and "Benjamin . . . appointed priests the right way" to teach the people, that thereby they might hear . . . the commandments of God, and to stir them up in remembrance"

(12:24) (5:15) "Fear the Lord, and serve him "Be steadfast and immovable, . . . Consider how great things always abounding in good he hath done for you" works" (see also 2:20, 21)

(12:25) (5:12) "If ye shall still do wickedly, "Remember to retain the name ye shall be consumed" . . . that ye are not found on the left hand of God" (cf. 2:36-39)

Conclusion

The Samuel and Saul narratives of 1 Samuel are of extreme theological significance for people of all ages and especially for those of the house of Israel. By acceptance of God's covenant, Israel became a "peculiar people" who simply could not be "like all the nations." Israel learned, or should have learned by experience, to look not to the "arm of flesh," but to God for deliverance from adversity—he was their God, Father, Judge, and King who could and would fight their battles if they only would be obedient. The Lord demanded strict observance to and compliance with all he commanded. Whenever evil came upon the nation, the word of the Lord taught Israel that they were to look to their own deeds to explain the reason for the Lord's departure. The words of an inspired Paul echo in the ears of all faithful followers of the Lord:

Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall (1 Cor. 10:11-12).

Footnotes

The received text of Samuel contains a progression in which Saul was accepted first by an individual, Samuel, and then by increasingly larger groups until the Lord accepted him as king. After his coronation, Saul lost the confidence first of Samuel, then of increasingly larger portions of the population until he was rejected by the Lord.

Thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.

And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

And Samuel said unto him, The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day. . . .

And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the Lord repented that he had made Saul king over Israel (1 Sam. 15:26-28, 35).

---
Notas:
[^1] H. H. Rowley, The Rediscovery of the Old Testament (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1946), p. 175.
[^2] "The name of Saul's son, Ish-bosheth, was originally Ishbaal. Hebrew names were regularly compounded from ba'al when the word meant master and was innocently applied to the Lord as a title of dignity. Because the word was peculiarly associated with the Canaanite fertility gods and their immoral worship, this practice was discontinued (Hos. 2:16). Consequently, editors systematically substituted for ba'al, wherever it occurred in a proper name, the bosheth, meaning "shame." Mephibosheth (2 Sam. 4:4) is an example of a double disguise. The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1952-57), 2:1051.
[^3] John Bright, A History of Israel, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1976), p. 192.
[^4] Ancient city gates were the gathering place of the city. There were rooms adjacent to the gate itself which often had built-in benches. "Here people could sit as they carried out commercial transactions or conducted judicial proceedings" (Edward F. Campbell, Jr., Ruth, Anchor Bible 7 [Garden City: N.Y.: Doubleday, 1978], pp. 154-55).
[^5] For more see Hershel Shanks, The City of David (Washington, D.C.: Biblical Archaelogy Society, 1973, pp. 34, 91 for photographs of the tunnel; pp. 32-37 for the account of the taking of the city by David's troops.
[^6] Ellis Rasmussen notes: "The meaning of the word [Zion] in Hebrew has been much discussed but not yet satisfactorily analyzed. Some earlier uses of the word may be seen in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:18-69; in the Book of Mormon, Alma 13:17-19; and also in the JST, Genesis 14:18-39 and 24:2-10. It was used as the name of Enoch's city of the "pure in heart." Could the name anciently have been attached also to Melchizedek's city of Salem (later Jerusalem)? In some of the references above it seems so. The name has gone on to gain many earthly uses and some heavenly connotations." (An Introduction to the Old Testament and Its Teachings, Part 2 [Provo, Ut.: Brigham Young University Press, 1969], p. 34).
[^8] The story also includes insights into the hospitality rules of the time, like the custom of killing an animal to eat when a stranger came; cf. Genesis 18:7.
