Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)

20

DAVID, THE KING OF ISRAEL (2 Samuel)

ANN N. MADSEN

"How are the mighty fallen!" (2 Sam. 1:19). These were the words David used as a refrain in his exquisite lament over the father and son whom he had reverenced as the "Lord's anointed." It is ironic that the same words could characterize his own later life.

H. H. Rowley considers the prose account of the reign of David to be "one of the oldest pieces of historical narrative in the world." [^1] The lament over the death of Saul and Jonathan, the beautiful historical poem in the midst of this prose history, may be compared to some of the loveliest psalms. David's reputation as poet would be secure if this were the only example of his work.

We learn that David was both loyal and decisive as he responded to the young Amalekite who reported Saul's death. Although the young man was likely lying, mistakenly thinking that he would gain David's favor if he were Saul's murderer, still David ordered his immediate death. His loyalty and respect for "the Lord's anointed" never wavered.

Soon his own tribe of Judah anointed David king. He had been anointed earlier by Samuel (see 1 Sam. 16:13). Abner, Saul's cousin and the captain of his army (see Chart 1), made Saul's surviving son, forty-year-old Ishbosheth, [^2] king over the ten northern tribes. He ruled the territories of Gilead, Jezreel, Ephraim, and Benjamin, while David ruled various tribal elements in the south, including the Simeonites, Calebites, Othnielites, Jarahmeelites, and Kenites in addition to Judah. [^3] This division foreshadowed the future split between northern and southern tribes into separate kingdoms at the death of David's son, Solomon.

Civil War

The historical narrative relates: "Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker" (2 Sam. 3:1).

At the pool of Gibeon a contest was held which was similar to those staged by knights in the middle ages. Twelve champions were chosen from the tribe of Benjamin (Ishbosheth or Saul's house) and another twelve from the servants of David. They were all killed, and since the contest was indecisive "a very sore battle" was fought. Abner's forces (Ishbosheth or Saul's house) were beaten and retreated. David's nephew, Asahel, son of Zeruiah and brother of Joab and Abishai (see Chart 2), refused to let Abner escape, following him from the battle. When Abner realized his pursuer was Joab's brother he tried but failed to evade a confrontation. Abner, the more experienced soldier, unwillingly fought with and killed Asahel. When Joab and Abishai came upon the scene Abner, now surrounded by his troops, pled: "Shall the sword devour forever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?" (2 Sam. 2:26). Although Joab relented and sent home the army, he never forgave Abner, and continuing vengeance resulted. Such blood-for-blood vengeance is still common in the Middle East; one family carries on the feud until blood has been paid for blood.

Several sons (and likely daughters, though they are not named) were born to David at his headquarters in Hebron. He arrived in Hebron with two wives but married several others during his seven and one-half years there. (See Chart 3.)

It became increasingly clear that Abner was the power behind the throne held by Saul's family. When Ishbosheth accused Abner of taking one of Saul's concubines, he protested his innocence. A dead king's wives and concubines were held to be the property of the next king, indeed the man seeking the throne might prove his right to the throne by appropriating them. Ishbosheth likely suspected that Abner was seeking the throne. The rift that followed marked the end of Saul's family's governance. Abner determined to make an alliance with David which would reunite the feuding tribes of Israel (2 Sam. 3:6-16). David's one stipulation was that Saul's daughter Michal be returned to him. Against her husband's protests, and presumably against her own will, Michal was sent to David (2 Sam. 3:14-16).

David welcomed Abner to Hebron with a feast. Alliances were often sealed with feasts in ancient times. A "league" is an alliance or covenant. Sometimes the practice was to cut up an animal designated for a sacrifice and then eat it together. The customs for hospitality and peace-making often overlapped. After agreeing to "gather all Israel" to David, Abner left Hebron in peace. Joab, who had been absent during the negotiations with Abner, returned from a raid bringing great spoils. David likely planned his meeting with Abner while Joab was away, knowing of the blood feud between the two leaders. Joab was incensed that his Uncle David had let Abner go free and sent messengers to bring him back without David's knowledge. On his return, Joab met him "in the side of the gate" [^4] and stabbed him, "that he died for the blood of Asahel, his brother." Blood revenge was taken traditionally by the nearest kinsman.

The situation was a delicate one, given the rules of blood revenge. David, as uncle to Asahel, was justly asked by Joab why he had let Abner go. Yet the reuniting of the nation depended on Abner's good will and cooperation. David evidently acted with the national interest in mind, though some consider the possibility that he also acted in his own interests. Joab's vengeance almost destroyed the uniting process which Abner had initiated. Had David been unable to convince the northern tribes of his innocence in the death, the two factions might have split once more. His mourning and lament over Abner did convince them. He spoke as one great warrior concerning another when he lamented that Abner died, not at the battle front but trusting a recent alliance, "as a fool" ensnared by "wicked men" (2 Sam. 3:33-34).

Abner's death was the beginning of the end of the northern tribes' resistance to David. Ishbosheth was weak and frightened when he heard of it. Two of his military leaders murdered him as he was taking his noonday rest. They cut off his head, taking it triumphantly to David at Hebron. Evidently the news of David's response at being told of Saul's death had not reached their camp. David explained to them the difference between killing in battle and killing "a righteous person in his house upon his own bed" and had them executed.

Thus David inherited the monarchy which Saul had begun. His own acumen and diplomacy enabled him to claim the kingship over a united Israel. During the two years when Ishbosheth reigned over the northern tribes, no all-out war was staged. The one important skirmish at this time was not militarily significant. It became so because it was the setting of the death of Joab's brother Asahel at the hands of Abner. Yet David was able to maneuver through this crisis. He also made alliances with other surrounding nations which stabilized his kingdom. Alliance marriages have often sealed agreements between countries, both in ancient and modern times. The royal houses of Europe attest to this. David married Maacah, princess of Geshur, a small state just east of the Sea of Galilee (2 Sam. 3:3). He also befriended the people of Ammon (2 Sam. 10:2). In his earlier days, fleeing from Saul, he established friendly ties with various Philistine leaders. David's handling of the murderers of Ishbosheth also furthered his cause. Although the death cleared the way for his uncontested kingship and was to his obvious advantage, his execution of the murderers cleared him in the eyes of the people from any complicity in the act itself. Once again he made his way safely through troubled waters.

With no northern king remaining to claim the throne, the people came to Hebron to make a "league" with David and there anointed him king over all Israel at the tender age of thirty.

The City of David

In preference to Hebron, David chose a more central location for his capital. The Canaanite Jebusites held a small city on a hill called Jebus, which bordered between Judah and the northern tribal areas. Joshua had been turned away by the Jebusites (Josh. 15:63), and Saul—who had maintained his capitol, Gibeah, only three miles north—had never attempted to capture the city. Because of its strategic location and fortification, it had gained the reputation of being impregnable. Its water system, which has been uncovered recently by archaeologists, was an essential part of the city's defenses. It included a sheer shaft rising from the Gihon Spring. David suggested to his troops that by getting up the water shaft (gutter) they might capture the city (2 Sam. 5:8). The Jebusites taunted David by saying that even the lame and the blind could defend their city. The shaft must have been steep and the fortress formidable for them to feel secure taunting a proven military leader in such a way. David responded by offering a prize to his troops: "Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief" (1 Chron. 11:6). [^5]

It was a wise move for David to make his capital a city which had been neither a northern nor southern tribal possession but had long been an enclave of foreigners in their midst. Ridding the area of another foreign element was a definite bonus. The Bible explains: "Nevertheless, David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David" (2 Sam. 5:7). Here we find the first mention in the Bible of the word Zion. [^6] It is equated directly with the city of David, which was an eleven-acre finger-shaped hilltop south and east of the present city of Jerusalem.

Hiram, King of Tyre, sent messengers to David, together with building materials and artisans, "and they built David a house" (2 Sam. 5:11). The Phoenicians were Israel's northern neighbors along the coast which is now Lebanon. Tyre and Sidon were their principal cities. This friendly relationship, begun with David, was to endure through the reign of his son Solomon and would prove essential as they would assist in the building of the Temple at Jerusalem.

David Extends His Kingdom

The Philistines, on hearing of David's anointing as king, came to the valley of Rephaim seeking to kill him. After assurance from the Lord that he would "doubtless deliver the Philistines" into his hand, David went to battle and won, burning the images of the Philistines' gods which they left behind. The Philistines regrouped and returned to the battle field. This time, upon inquiry of the Lord, David was told to circle behind them to attack. He did and won again, giving the Lord full credit for the victory. It is interesting to note that later Philistine mercenaries are found in David's service (2 Sam. 8:18; 15:18). The term Cherethites refers to Philistines.

David's small private army of about six hundred was expanded to thirty thousand as the men from the tribes of Israel flocked to join him. The numbers cited vary but the enlarged army is certain (see 1 Chron. 11, 12). He proved himself not only a wise diplomat but an able leader and military strategist—often with the Lord's direct help. He expanded Israel's borders to include the land promised to Abraham almost one thousand years before, stretching from the Euphrates River in the north to the borders of Egypt in the south. The Philistine threat was finally ended, and other Canaanites were either driven out or conquered, coming under direct Israelite rule.

David eventually brought the Ark of God from the house of Abinadab in Gibeah by way of Obed-Edom's house to the tent which he had prepared for it in the City of David: "And David danced before the Lord with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod. [^7] So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet. And as the ark of the Lord came into the city of David, Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the Lord; and she despised him in her heart" (2 Sam. 6:14-16). David and Michal argued, and the writer informs us cryptically: "Therefore, Michal, the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death" (2 Sam. 6:23; cf. 1 Chron. 16:7-36 for a long prayer which is additional). Note in 2 Sam. 6:17-18 where David, dressed in a priestly ephod, "offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord. . . . [And] he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts." Here we see David in the role of priest as well as king.

Only occasionally in the world's history do we find one man having the impact David had on his nation in so brief a time. In the years to follow, that nation would never again reach such heights. David would be revered as the greatest king of Israel—until the Messiah. Indeed, the Messiah, like David, would be called the Lord's Anointed and the Savior of his people. The King of Kings would come through the lineage of King David.

The Davidic Covenant

When David asked Nathan the prophet to inquire of the Lord if he could build a permanent house for the Ark of the Lord, he received an answer which stunned him. To the related question about building a temple he was told that his descendant would build it (2 Sam. 7:12-13). But the Lord went on to promise David: "Thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever" (2 Sam. 7:16). This has come to be known as the Davidic Covenant and is reiterated in many other places (see 2 Sam. 23:5; Isa. 9:7; 55:3-4).

The idea that the Lord had established an eternal Davidic dynasty became popularized later into the belief that the kings of Davidic descent and by implication, the holy city of Jerusalem, were invincible regardless of the people's righteousness. Such a notion was in direct opposition to the warnings of Jeremiah, Lehi, Nephi, and other later prophets who pled with both the kings and the people to repent and return to righteousness that the promises might be fulfilled. Nephi (and many of the prophets whose words are preserved in the Old Testament) taught of a scattering of Israel's people and a later gathering and restoration. They also taught of a Messiah of the lineage of David who would indeed reign eternally (see especially Isa. 11, where the stem of Jesse is described; also, 2 Ne. 25:9-30, comparing the everlasting promise made to Joseph's seed found in 2 Ne. 25:21 to the Davidic Covenant). The promise was indeed an eternal covenant. But such covenants rest on the righteousness of the covenanters. After the idol-worshiping subjects of King Zedekiah were carried away into a Babylonian captivity, rule by the Davidic dynasty ended. It would require a future "son of David" to restore it to the glory it had once known. The concept of a warrior-king in the image of David was also abroad when Jesus entered the scene. It may have contributed to his rejection as the Messiah of the Jews when he did not gather an army and free his nation as his ancestor David had done so masterfully.

David's prayer of praise (2 Sam. 7:19-29) voiced some of his stunned response to the promise made to him by the Lord: "Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house [family] that thou hast brought me hitherto?" (2 Sam. 7:18).

David's Government

David was victorious wherever he went—over the Philistines, the peoples of Moab, Damascus [Syria], Edom, and Ammon. These were the countries surrounding Israel (see Map 7 in the LDS publication of the Bible). He established garrison outposts throughout the conquered territories. His chief government officers are listed in 2 Sam. 8:15-18; 20:23-26. David, himself, was the head of state. His officers included: Joab, as commander of the army; Benaiah, who commanded the foreign mercenaries (which included Philistines, as mentioned above); Jehoshaphat, who was the recorder; Seraiah, who was the secretary (Sheva is mentioned in the other list as scribe—Adoram is also mentioned there as "over the tribute," which would likely mean the taxes paid by conquered peoples). Two priests are mentioned in both lists—Zadok and Abiathar. 2 Sam. 8:18 also adds that David's sons were priests. KJV incorrectly reads "chief rulers." The Hebrew has kohanim, which has the straightforward meaning of priests and is the exact word translated in the verse before referring to Zadok and Abiathar as priests.

We know very little of how David administered his state. Much less is recorded than we have concerning his son, Solomon. In the second list a supervisor is mentioned over the corvee, or the forced laborers on David's building projects. Although begun by David, this kind of labor was later to be widely utilized by Solomon.

David paid his government's expenses from the tribute received from subjugated territories. Only at the very end of his reign is any mention made of a census, which would include the feasibility for conscription into the army and/or taxation. Solomon inherited the problem and never really solved it, piling up his own massive debt by gigantic building programs, including the temple.

Legal matters were handled locally; however, abuses could be appealed to the king. An example is found in the case of Absalom (2 Sam. 14:1-24). Absalom's plea to the people in 15:1-6 to make him their judge demonstrates that David's judicial system was ineffective.

The shrine [tent] in Jerusalem where the Ark was kept was an official institution of the state. Its presence there centralized worship in Jerusalem. David carefully combined church and state. Jerusalem quickly became both the political and religious center of Israel. Just as the early Israelites under Moses had welcomed the Lord's tenting among them, so these later relatives of that ancient people did the same. The Ark represented the presence of the Lord in the midst of his people. Nothing could have unified them more.

Although we saw David officiating as a priest in earlier passages, he utilized his two chief priests, Zadok and Abiathar, to administrate religious affairs. There was an interesting balance of power set up among the king, the priests, and the prophets. The monarchy changed the relationship among these three entities. In theory, no one had the sovereign power. They worked interdependently, affording checks and balances in the government. In the reign of Saul, the prophet Samuel had wielded the ultimate power, but with David this changed. Possibly because he was so adored by his subjects, he could do no wrong in their eyes. Many of his acts were seen by the people to be compassionate. His treatment of the lame son of Jonathan, Mephibosheth (Saul's grandson), is an example of this. In the minds of the people it showed David as a covenant-keeper. It was also politically astute to keep Saul's heir nearby, where he could be under constant surveilance (2 Sam. 9:1-13).

"Thou Art the Man"

The bitingly honest account of David's tragic sin is typical of the Old Testament record. A beloved king is also a man. Although the writer of Chronicles deletes any mention of David's flaws, the record in 2 Samuel tells in a matter-of-fact way and in the simplest language, the story of a great man's temptation and compounding sins (see 2 Sam. 11, 12). No excuses are offered, no rationalizations after the fact. The simple, straightforward story is told in language no one can misunderstand. We could profit by viewing our own sins in such a bright, truthful light, leaving aside the overlay of excuse and rationalization. Forsaking our sins would come sooner if we could only acknowledge them dispassionately. Perhaps we all need the forthright rebuke of a Nathan. David's sad story may be all we require to understand better our own temptations.

The story, from tempting thought to accomplished act, is told in four verses. David walked, he saw, he looked, he sent, he took, he lay with her. She conceived and sent a message: "I am with child." David then used all his cleverness to try to avoid responsibility for his actions. Uriah, Bathsheba's husband, was brought home from the battle field. He is mentioned earlier as one of David's hand-picked thirty mighty men (1 Chron. 11:41). The tragic irony of the situation is obvious. While Uriah, David's loyal soldier, was fighting for his master in enemy territory, David was taking Uriah's wife. This irony was heightened by Uriah's refusal to sleep with his wife when he returned home. When Israel went to war the warriors consecrated themselves to continence. While the war lasted they remained consecrated in this way. Even after David tried to overcome his resistance by drink, Uriah would not go in to Bathsheba. Uriah's loyalty foiled David's strategy for covering his adultery, so David arranged for Uriah's death. This, too, is told in a simple, uncluttered way. David sent the order for Uriah's death to Joab by the hand of Uriah himself: "Set Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten and die" (2 Sam. 11:15). The messenger who returned after the battle was carefully briefed by Joab: "If so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached thee so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall? . . . why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah, the Hittite is dead also" (2 Sam. 11:20-21).

To the prophet Nathan, not even this popular monarch was above God's laws. Appearing one day in the court where David sat to judge, his rebuke was subtle and took the form of a parable which appeared to David to be an appeal for judgment between two men in his kingdom. [^8] In the parable the rich man had many flocks and herds while the poor man had but one, a little ewe lamb. Yet the rich man chose to take away the poor man's one little lamb to feed his guest. "And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this shall surely die: and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity. And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man" (2 Sam. 12:5-7). Could any four words have found their mark more surely or cut more deeply?

Then Nathan reminded David of his generous blessings from the Lord, inferring that anything he would have asked would have been graciously granted him. His sins were numbered with equal care and clarity:

Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? thou has killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

Now, therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. . . . Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house (2 Sam. 12:9-11).

Nathan also told David that the child Bathsheba was carrying would die. This one incident became the pivotal point around which David's life evolved.

David married Bathsheba. When the child was born, it became very sick and on the seventh day died. This experience allows us to see yet another facet of David's personality. So earnestly had he fasted and pled with God for the child that his servants were afraid to tell him of its death. They feared his added suffering. They may also have feared for themselves, knowing of his previous reactions at the deaths of those he loved. His response shocked them. When they told him, "The child is dead," he arose from the earth, washed and anointed himself, "changed his apparel," and went into the sanctuary and worshipped. Then he went to his own home and ate for the first time in many days. When his servants asked why he had fasted and wept for the child while it lived but discontinued these actions upon its death, he answered: "While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me" (2 Sam. 12:22-23).

God and his power were real to David. This instance illuminates David's desire for a blessing from God even at a time of shame and remorse of which this death would always be a painful reminder.

"Evil Against Thee Out of Thine Own House"

As the remainder of David's life unfolds before us, it becomes clear that the record includes exact fulfillment of Nathan's words rebuking David. One of David's sons, Amnon, loved his beautiful half-sister, Tamar, who was the sister of Absalom. When his friend and cousin Jonadab (or in some places, Jonathan) suggested a ruse of feigned illness to entrap her, he readily agreed and raped her against her strenuous objections, with her pleading, "Speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee" (2 Sam. 13:13). Marriage between children of the same father was strictly forbidden (see Lev. 18:9). It is interesting to observe that Tamar assumed that their father might circumvent the law. One wonders if the Bathsheba incident influenced her judgment of what David might do. The sin of the father had its effects in the lives of his children. All of the participants in this tragic drama were blood relations and perhaps were influenced by David's adultery with Bathsheba. One could also ask the question, Why would a careful father grant a son's request which had obvious inherent pitfalls? Through the ages many guilt-ridden parents have indulged their children in a mistaken attempt to win back their love and loyalty.

The Septuagint version adds a significant line at 2 Sam. 13:21. It reads: "Yet he [David] did not punish Amnon, his son, for he loved him because he was his first-born" (cf. Eli and his sons; 1 Sam. 3:13).

Tamar was immediately rejected by Amnon, who commanded that she be put out and the door bolted against her. She "remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house." Although Absalom urged her to forget the incident, he had no intention of doing so himself: "Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar" (2 Sam. 13:22). Patience in righteousness is often less dependable than patience in vengeance!

Absalom invited all his brothers, the sons of David—and not, incidentally, the heirs to the throne (see Chart 3 for presumed order of succession)—to his sheep-shearing, which was celebrated with a feast. When Amnon came, Absalom's servants killed him as they had been instructed. "Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled" (2 Sam. 13:29). Since Amnon had been the immediate heir to the throne, it was immediately assumed this was more than a sheep-shearing celebration but instead, Absalom's bid for the throne of his father. The elimination of all other heirs was already a Near Eastern tradition. Absalom fled for asylum to his maternal grandfather, Talmai, King of Geshur, and remained in Geshur for three years, while his father, David, mourned for both of his sons—the murdered and the murderer.

When he saw David's continual mourning, Joab arranged, by artifice, for Absalom's return, but the King did not see him for two years after his arrival. Growing impatient, Absalom tried to talk to Joab but could not get his attention until he set Joab's field on fire. Finally, David welcomed his son back home. But the long wait may have engendered the bitterness in Absalom which later resulted in his becoming his father's avowed enemy.

David's reign was marred by many attempted revolts. Probably the most tragic was the one led by this same son, Absalom. After returning to Jerusalem, Absalom outfitted himself with a personal bodyguard befitting an heir to the throne and stationed himself at the city gate. As the people came to appeal for justice he insisted that there was no appointee of the king to judge them. As men came to the king for judgment, Absalom was there, eager to serve everyone. As a result, "Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel" (2 Sam. 15:6).

The time came when Absalom, confident in his following, feigned piety to travel to Hebron, conspiring to carry out a secret plan to overthrow his father and take the kingdom. There he had himself anointed king and planned a march on Jerusalem. But David still had loyal followers who informed him of the ruse just in time for him and his retinue to escape from Jerusalem, leaving Zadok and Abiathar, the priests, and Hushai, his wise counselor, behind to spy for him. Also left behind was the crippled Mephibosheth, Saul's grandson. His servant Ziba brought David provisions, and David allocated all that had been Mephibosheth's to the servant. Along the way, Shemei, a man of Saul's clan, cursed David, calling him "a man of blood" and threw stones at him and his men. When Abishai wanted to silence the man, David stopped him by saying:

Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord hath bidden him.

It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day (2 Sam. 16:11-12).

Ahithophel, who had been a close friend and advisor to David, shifted his allegiance to Absalom's cause. When Absalom had entered Jerusalem, he advised him to prove his claim to the throne by taking for his own ten of his father's concubines, whom David had left behind to care for the palace.

Absalom was unaware that some of his present advisors were spies for his father. He took Hushai's advice over Ahithophel's and did not take immediate action to kill David. Hushai sent word to David, apprising him of his son's plans. The messengers barely missed detection by hiding in a well. When David learned Absalom's strategy, he divided his troops into thirds: one-third under the faithful Joab, one-third under Abishai, Joab's brother, and one-third under Ittai, the Gittite. David planned to march out at their head but the people protested. "Thou art worth ten thousand of us," they cried, so he remained by the city gate of Mahanaim and watched the troops march by in units of hundreds and thousands. With precision he instructed his three commanders, "Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even Absalom." From a strategic point of view, a foolish request when attempting to put down a revolt. All the troops heard the king give this order to his commanders (2 Sam. 18:3-5).

The battle was fought in the forest of Ephraim. Absalom's troops were soundly defeated by David's men. Twenty thousand men died in that battle. The battle spread all across the countryside, and the "forest claimed more lives that day than the sword," as the retreating forces looked for escape. As if to underline this idea, the record tells of the tragic end of Absalom. Earlier we have been told that "in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him" (2 Sam. 14:25), and his hair was unbelieveably heavy. With this description in mind one may visualize this handsome, ambitious young man, caught in the branches of a tree, perhaps by his famous hair, helpless before his captors. Joab and ten of his armor bearers came upon Absalom, and as he hung helplessly above them, Joab killed him. Joab thus took matters into his own hands, openly disobeying the direct order of his cousin, the king. As was his custom, he did what he felt was best for the king and kingdom, often overruling King David.

The setting as David waited to receive word of the battle is full of suspense. A lookout saw two messengers approaching. The messenger delivered the good news that the war had been won. David, oblivious to the larger picture, asked only, "Is the young man Absalom safe?" The second messenger delivered the same message of victory but answered David's query with a curse to the effect, "May all your enemies be as that young man," and the King realized that his son was dead. David's lament at his son's death embodies the emotion that he felt at the time: "O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!" (2 Sam. 18:33).

David's mourning was so bitter and long that Joab finally came to the palace and bitterly chided David:

Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;

In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.

Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the Lord, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now (2 Sam. 19:5-7).

So David arose and sat in the gate to thank the people; they restored him to the throne out of necessity, since Absalom, whom some had wanted for their king, was dead. There must have been many more who still had affection for their aging, charismatic king.

When another rebellion erupted, David replaced Joab with Amasa, partly because he could not forgive him for killing Absalom. The move also helped reunite his people again, since Amasa had been Absalom's general. When Amasa was slow to act against Sheba and the rebels, David sent his personal guard to remedy the situation. Abishai had official command but his brother Joab was with him. Joab killed Amasa and took over as head of the army again. He and Abishai pursued Sheba and his forces, who fled to Beth Maacah where a woman of the city arranged with Joab to behead Sheba. The death of Sheba ended the insurrection.

The sword did not depart from David's house. The killing of his nephew, Amasa, by his other nephew, Joab, added to the list of David's kin who killed or were killed. In 2 Sam. 21 the sword was again unsheathed. David avenged the Gibeonites for the oath of peace that had been made with Joshua and broken by Saul. To obtain vengeance because of Saul's actions, David gave the Gibeonites seven of Saul's descendants to kill. "But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan" because of his own oath with Jonathan (2 Sam. 21:7). The seven were killed and buried with Saul and Jonathan in the tomb of Saul's father, Kish, in Zela of Benjamin. Since it was against God's law to punish people for the crimes of their ancestors (Deut. 24:16), many believe that David's actions were self-serving efforts to solidify his kingship even more by destroying all potential rivals to his throne from the house of Saul.

Another Philistine battle is recorded but likely out of sequence chronologically, since the Philistines had earlier been conquered. David led the attack and "waxed faint." He was nearly killed by Ishbi-benob (whose resemblance to Goliath is apparent) when Abishai killed his assailant and thus saved David's life (2 Sam. 21:15-17). "Then the men of David sware unto him saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel" (2 Sam. 21:17).

2 Sam. 22 is a long psalm of thanksgiving in which David recounted the Lord's protection which had preserved his life. The placement of this psalm directly after the near death of David may be significant. The words of faith and hope in a living God who delivers his child(ren) are typical of David, who continually urged his people to trust God. We have no record of any bitterness in him, even after God's stern rebuke after the murder of Uriah (see D&C 132:38-39 for latter-day revelation concerning this matter). The last line of the poem reiterates the Davidic covenant: "[The Lord] is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore" (2 Sam. 22:51). The whole psalm is a glorious hymn of praise to God.

"How Are the Mighty Fallen!"

The last few chapters of 2 Samuel seem to be afterthoughts, recounting several instances in David's life which needed to be preserved, but with little interest in chronology, much as we might string together significant experiences using different criteria than time sequence in our telling. It may also be that the last of his days were so much less glorious than the first that it was reassuring to recall the great times, in or out of time sequence.

One moving incident is recounted in 2 Sam. 23:13-17. David expressed his longing for a drink from the well of Bethlehem. Three of his "mighty men" made their way through the enemy lines and brought David a drink from that well, risking their lives. But David would not drink it, rather, he poured it out as an offering to the Lord. He explained why when he said: "Is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?" (2 Sam. 23:17).

In the last chapter David took a census of his fighting men. It is interesting that they are listed as 800,000 in Israel and 500,000 in Judah, foreshadowing the divided kingdom which David had tried to keep together during his many years of civil war and rebellion. The people hated a census because it traditionally meant the drafting of men for the army and the levying of taxes. According to 2 Sam. 24, David "sinned greatly" in taking the census, yet rather than take personal responsibility for it, he allowed seventy thousand of his people to die of a pestilence before he was willing to repent and take the blame and punishment himself (2 Sam. 24:10-17).

The book ends fittingly as David was commanded by Gad, the prophet, to "rear up an altar unto the Lord in the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite," so he could make offerings unto the Lord that the plague might be stayed from his people. David's great desire to build a temple was never granted. The closest he came was this altar (see 2 Sam. 24:18-25). David's death is not recorded until 1 Kgs. 2. While he was old and close to death, the family tragedies that had plagued him for many years continued. His son Adonijah sought to succeed his father on the throne, yet David chose his much younger son Solomon instead (see 1 Kgs. 1:11-35), causing a rift between the brothers that ultimately led to Adonijah's death (1 Kgs. 2:13-25). David's dying counsel to his successor Solomon included admonitions to serve the Lord and keep his commandments (1 Kgs. 2:1-4), as well as to make reprisals against some who had offended David during earlier years (see 1 Kgs. 2:5-6, 8-9). This later instruction resulted in the death (under Solomon's direction) of Joab, who had played such a significant role in the career of David (1 Kgs. 2:28-34).

David's last words included sage counsel to his descendants, the kings he fully expected to rule after him forever. They are lofty words full of idealism which only a poet, "the sweet psalmist of Israel," could frame. He delivered them directly through the "Spirit of the Lord" and in the manner of a prophet. "The God of Israel said":

He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain (2 Sam. 23:3-4).

Only one King would fit his vision, a glorious descendant of David. He would rule in perfect justice. He would be the Light of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] H. H. Rowley, The Rediscovery of the Old Testament (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1946), p. 175.
[^2] "The name of Saul's son, Ish-bosheth, was originally Ishbaal. Hebrew names were regularly compounded from ba'al when the word meant master and was innocently applied to the Lord as a title of dignity. Because the word was peculiarly associated with the Canaanite fertility gods and their immoral worship, this practice was discontinued (Hos. 2:16). Consequently, editors systematically substituted for ba'al, wherever it occurred in a proper name, the bosheth, meaning "shame." Mephibosheth (2 Sam. 4:4) is an example of a double disguise. The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1952-57), 2:1051.
[^3] John Bright, A History of Israel, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1976), p. 192.
[^4] Ancient city gates were the gathering place of the city. There were rooms adjacent to the gate itself which often had built-in benches. "Here people could sit as they carried out commercial transactions or conducted judicial proceedings" (Edward F. Campbell, Jr., Ruth, Anchor Bible 7 [Garden City: N.Y.: Doubleday, 1978], pp. 154-55).
[^5] For more see Hershel Shanks, The City of David (Washington, D.C.: Biblical Archaelogy Society, 1973, pp. 34, 91 for photographs of the tunnel; pp. 32-37 for the account of the taking of the city by David's troops.
[^6] Ellis Rasmussen notes: "The meaning of the word [Zion] in Hebrew has been much discussed but not yet satisfactorily analyzed. Some earlier uses of the word may be seen in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:18-69; in the Book of Mormon, Alma 13:17-19; and also in the JST, Genesis 14:18-39 and 24:2-10. It was used as the name of Enoch's city of the "pure in heart." Could the name anciently have been attached also to Melchizedek's city of Salem (later Jerusalem)? In some of the references above it seems so. The name has gone on to gain many earthly uses and some heavenly connotations." (An Introduction to the Old Testament and Its Teachings, Part 2 [Provo, Ut.: Brigham Young University Press, 1969], p. 34).
[^7] A linen ephod is "an ornamental part of the dress worn by the Hebrew priests. It was worn above the tunic and the robe, was without sleeves, and open below the arms on each side, consisting of two pieces, one of which covered the front of the body and other the back, joined together on the shoulders by golden buckles set with gems, and reaching down to the middle of the thigh. A girdle was inwoven with it, by which it was fastened around the body, Exod. 28:6-12. There were two kinds of ephod: one plain, of linen, for the priests, 1 Sam. 22:18; another embroidered, for the high-priest (International Bible Dictionary [Plainfield, N.J.: Logos International, 1977], p. 139).
[^8] The story also includes insights into the hospitality rules of the time, like the custom of killing an animal to eat when a stranger came; cf. Genesis 18:7.
