Página web, de Citavi 4.1 convertida a PDF 27/08/2013 12:16 p.m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto al original.

Salt Lake City: Scattered Clouds 67°

Login/Register Mobile

Deseret News

Search or keyword

News Sports Moneywise Opinion Faith Family Obituaries Classifieds Cars Jobs Deals

Featured Faiths Mormon Times LDS Church News More Faith

Advertise with us

Report this ad

LDS First Presidency members launch Google+ What You May Have Missed

pages, Facebook in the future

A warning to parents: Older men seeking

young girls on Web is increasing

By Sarah Petersen, Deseret News

Print Font [+] [-] 10 Comments » Red-band trailers: Why parents should

Published: Wednesday, June 12 2013 5:05 p.m. MDT

know what they are, and how easy they

are to access

Religious vs. spiritual: Study says the

truly 'spiritual but not religious' are hard

to find

View 4 photos »

Sign up for Mormon Times updates

First Presidency members

Sample Mormon Times edition email

of The Church of Jesus

Christ of Latter-day Saints

recently launched their

own Google+ pages.

President Thomas S.

Monson, President Henry

B. Eyring and President

Dieter F. Uchtdorf will

soon have their own

Facebook accounts.

LDS.org

First Presidency members of The Church of Jesus Christ

Summary of Latter-day Saints recently launched their own Advertise with us Report this ad

First Presidency members of The personal pages on Google's social networking site, Most Popular Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-

day Saints recently launched their Google+. President Thomas S. Monson, President

own Google+ pages. President Henry B. Eyring and President Dieter F. Uchtdorf will Thomas S. Monson, President

In Faith Across Site

Henry B. Eyring and President also have their own Facebook accounts in the future. Utah missionary dies after being hit by car... Dieter F. Uchtdorf will soon have

their own Facebook accounts. Dale Jones, spokesperson for the LDS Church, released Returned Mormon missionaries in 2013 FBS...

a statement regarding the new social media activity. Mormon apologetics group announces new name

More Coverage "The church has recently created Police arrest 1 in robbery by 2 posing as...

21 ways to connect with the LDS Church on Google+ pages for senior leadership Why LDS Church's President Monson and

Mormon...

Facebook

and will launch similar pages on Parents 'couldn't be more proud' of late LDS...

Facebook in the near future. These What's new: Brad Rock shares tales from the...

pages will act as an official social media Family history mission leads to family, ward...

presence for these leaders, where the

church will post links to talks, articles,

videos and other relevant content on their Get The Deseret News Everywhere

behalf," Jones said.

Google+ is a relatively new platform Subscribe Mobile Facebook Twitter RSS Email

launched by Google Inc. in June 2011.

According to ZDNet.com, Google+ has Most Commented

become the second largest social

How the church is using social media networking site in the world.

In Faith Across Site

Ask Angela: I will not date girls in my... 45

Due to the creation of these Google+ pages, individuals Mormon apologetics group announces new...

who search for members of the First Presidency will 42

begin to notice President Monson's, President Eyring's Utah missionary dies after being hit by... 34

and President Uchtdorf's profile pictures appearing next Elder Rasband breaks ground for Fort... 13

to their content in Google search results.

Why LDS Church's President Monson and... 10

Articles discussing Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and Police arrest 1 in robbery by 2 posing... 5

other official church social media platforms can be Mormon Parenting: Getting older? Change... 4

LDS young man in Oklahoma receives... 4

found on LDS.org.

Earlier this year, Shalyn Back of the Mormon Channel

and Fernando Camilo, a social media specialist,

appeared in a video on the Mormon Channel discussing

how the LDS Church is using several different social

media platforms.

Links to the new Google+ profile accounts can be found

here: President Monson, President Eyring and

President Uchtdorf.

Related Stories

• 21 ways to connect with the LDS Church on Facebook

Advertise with us

Report this ad

Recommended Stories

LDS leaders on Facebook Church's mobile apps Mom kicked out of cafe

The pages will be maintained Fernando Camilo, a product Washington mom Kellea

on behalf of church leaders manager for the church, gave Poore took her 3- and 1-year-

and will act as an official a presentation Wednesday. old sons to the Rainy Day

social media presence.

Caffe in Lake Stevens last

week.

Popular

See all 10 comments »

Comments

curlingsteel Eagle Mountain, UT

Hey, I'm "following the prophets!" :)

8:23 a.m. June 13, 2013 Top comment

BYRWoods Cross, UT

I highly doubt the First Presidency is really making comments on Google+, Facebook,

etc. Someone is assign to do this for them and it will be rare when a post or comment is

made. They have better things to do with their time. But, I do think it is More..

3:05 a.m. June 13, 2013 Top comment

Whoa NellieAmerican Fork, UT

Good to know it's just a presence on those sites. This solidifies my choice not to have

an account on social media.

9:35 a.m. June 13, 2013 Top comment

Comments

Leave a comment »

DeseretNews.com encourages a civil dialogue among its readers. We welcome your thoughtful comments. — About comments

About the Author

Sarah Petersen

Sarah Sanders Petersen writes for the Faith and Family sections on

DeseretNews.com. She completed internships with the Mormon Times section of

Deseret News as well as the New Era magazine. Sarah received a bachelors more

..

Connect:

Advertise with us

Report this ad

Advertise with us

Report this ad

Home News Sports Moneywise Opinion Faith Family Obituaries Sign up for Mormon Times updates

Home » Sports » Opinion » Family » Special Sections »

Blogs

Utah Jazz

Editorials

Marriage & Parenting Education Week

Topics

Sports Picks

Op-Eds

Family Media

LDS General Conference

Lists

BYU Cougars

Letters

Movie Guide

Mormons in America

Movies

Utah Utes

Political Cartoons

Calendar

Olympics

Columnists

Utah State Aggies Faith »

TV Listings

Outdoor Retailer

Watch It

Real Salt Lake

Family Life Wire Rugby

Featured Faiths

Salt Lake Bees

Sports Picks

News »

Mormon Times

High school sports LDS Church News

Sundance Film Festival

Utah news

Rock

Utah Blaze

World & Nation

Mission Reunions

Harmon

Utah Grizzlies

Politics

Faith Wire

Watch It

Business

Scores and Stats

Education

Salt Lake County On TV

NFL

Utah County

Davis County MLB

Weber State Wildcats

Police/Courts

Grizzlies

Legislature

Utah Valley Wolverines

Weather

Southern Utah University

Immigration

Sports Wire

News Wire

Print Subscription About us Contact us FAQ Feedback Jobs RSS E-Edition Privacy policy Terms of Use Legal notices Advertise with us

Advertise with us

Report this ad
