Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Giants' War

Nor were the Gods themselves more safe above; Against beleaguer'd Heav'n the giants move. Hills pil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie, To make their mad approaches to the skie. 'Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time T' avenge with thunder their audacious crime: Red light'ning plaid along the firmament, And their demolish'd works to pieces rent. Sing'd with the flames, and with the bolts transfixt, With native Earth, their blood the monsters mixt; The blood, indu'd with animating heat, Did in th' impregnant Earth new sons beget: They, like the seed from which they sprung, accurst, Against the Gods immortal hatred nurst, An impious, arrogant, and cruel brood; Expressing their original from blood. Which when the king of Gods beheld from high (Withal revolving in his memory, What he himself had found on Earth of late, Lycaon's guilt, and his inhumane treat), He sigh'd; nor longer with his pity strove; But kindled to a wrath becoming Jove: Then call'd a general council of the Gods; Who summon'd, issue from their blest abodes, And fill th' assembly with a shining train. A way there is, in Heav'n's expanded plain, Which, when the skies are clear, is seen below, And mortals, by the name of Milky, know. The ground-work is of stars; through which the road Lyes open to the Thunderer's abode: The Gods of greater nations dwell around, And, on the right and left, the palace bound; The commons where they can: the nobler sort With winding-doors wide open, front the court. This place, as far as Earth with Heav'n may vie, I dare to call the Louvre of the skie. When all were plac'd, in seats distinctly known, And he, their father, had assum'd the throne, Upon his iv'ry sceptre first he leant, Then shook his head, that shook the firmament: Air, Earth, and seas, obey'd th' almighty nod; And, with a gen'ral fear, confess'd the God. At length, with indignation, thus he broke His awful silence, and the Pow'rs bespoke. I was not more concern'd in that debate Of empire, when our universal state Was put to hazard, and the giant race Our captive skies were ready to imbrace: For tho' the foe was fierce, the seeds of all Rebellion, sprung from one original; Now, wheresoever ambient waters glide, All are corrupt, and all must be destroy'd. Let me this holy protestation make, By Hell, and Hell's inviolable lake, I try'd whatever in the godhead lay: But gangren'd members must be lopt away, Before the nobler parts are tainted to decay. There dwells below, a race of demi-gods, Of nymphs in waters, and of fawns in woods: Who, tho' not worthy yet, in Heav'n to live, Let 'em, at least, enjoy that Earth we give. Can these be thought securely lodg'd below, When I my self, who no superior know, I, who have Heav'n and Earth at my command, Have been attempted by Lycaon's hand? At this a murmur through the synod went, And with one voice they vote his punishment. Thus, when conspiring traytors dar'd to doom The fall of Caesar, and in him of Rome, The nations trembled with a pious fear; All anxious for their earthly Thunderer: Nor was their care, o Caesar, less esteem'd By thee, than that of Heav'n for Jove was deem'd: Who with his hand, and voice, did first restrain Their murmurs, then resum'd his speech again. The Gods to silence were compos'd, and sate With reverence, due to his superior state. Cancel your pious cares; already he Has paid his debt to justice, and to me. Yet what his crimes, and what my judgments were, Remains for me thus briefly to declare. The clamours of this vile degenerate age, The cries of orphans, and th' oppressor's rage, Had reach'd the stars: I will descend, said I, In hope to prove this loud complaint a lye. Disguis'd in humane shape, I travell'd round The world, and more than what I heard, I found. O'er Maenalus I took my steepy way, By caverns infamous for beasts of prey: Then cross'd Cyllene, and the piny shade More infamous, by curst Lycaon made: Dark night had cover'd Heaven, and Earth, before I enter'd his unhospitable door. Just at my entrance, I display'd the sign That somewhat was approaching of divine. The prostrate people pray; the tyrant grins; And, adding prophanation to his sins, I'll try, said he, and if a God appear, To prove his deity shall cost him dear. 'Twas late; the graceless wretch my death prepares, When I shou'd soundly sleep, opprest with cares: This dire experiment he chose, to prove If I were mortal, or undoubted Jove: But first he had resolv'd to taste my pow'r; Not long before, but in a luckless hour, Some legates, sent from the Molossian state, Were on a peaceful errand come to treat: Of these he murders one, he boils the flesh; And lays the mangled morsels in a dish: Some part he roasts; then serves it up, so drest, And bids me welcome to this humane feast. Mov'd with disdain, the table I o'er-turn'd; And with avenging flames, the palace burn'd. The tyrant in a fright, for shelter gains The neighb'ring fields, and scours along the plains. Howling he fled, and fain he wou'd have spoke; But humane voice his brutal tongue forsook. About his lips the gather'd foam he churns, And, breathing slaughters, still with rage he burns, But on the bleating flock his fury turns. His mantle, now his hide, with rugged hairs Cleaves to his back; a famish'd face he bears; His arms descend, his shoulders sink away To multiply his legs for chase of prey. He grows a wolf, his hoariness remains, And the same rage in other members reigns. His eyes still sparkle in a narr'wer space: His jaws retain the grin, and violence of his face This was a single ruin, but not one Deserves so just a punishment alone. Mankind's a monster, and th' ungodly times Confed'rate into guilt, are sworn to crimes. All are alike involv'd in ill, and all Must by the same relentless fury fall. Thus ended he; the greater Gods assent; By clamours urging his severe intent; The less fill up the cry for punishment. Yet still with pity they remember Man; And mourn as much as heav'nly spirits can. They ask, when those were lost of humane birth, What he wou'd do with all this waste of Earth: If his dispeopl'd world he would resign To beasts, a mute, and more ignoble line; Neglected altars must no longer smoke, If none were left to worship, and invoke. To whom the Father of the Gods reply'd, Lay that unnecessary fear aside: Mine be the care, new people to provide. I will from wondrous principles ordain A race unlike the first, and try my skill again. Already had he toss'd the flaming brand; And roll'd the thunder in his spacious hand; Preparing to discharge on seas and land: But stopt, for fear, thus violently driv'n, The sparks should catch his axle-tree of Heav'n. Remembring in the fates, a time when fire Shou'd to the battlements of Heaven aspire, And all his blazing worlds above shou'd burn; And all th' inferior globe to cinders turn. His dire artill'ry thus dismist, he bent His thoughts to some securer punishment: Concludes to pour a watry deluge down; And what he durst not burn, resolves to drown. The northern breath, that freezes floods, he binds; With all the race of cloud-dispelling winds: The south he loos'd, who night and horror brings; And foggs are shaken from his flaggy wings. From his divided beard two streams he pours, His head, and rheumy eyes distill in show'rs, With rain his robe, and heavy mantle flow: And lazy mists are lowring on his brow; Still as he swept along, with his clench'd fist He squeez'd the clouds, th' imprison'd clouds resist: The skies, from pole to pole, with peals resound; And show'rs inlarg'd, come pouring on the ground. Then, clad in colours of a various dye, Junonian Iris breeds a new supply To feed the clouds: impetuous rain descends; The bearded corn beneath the burden bends: Defrauded clowns deplore their perish'd grain; And the long labours of the year are vain. Nor from his patrimonial Heaven alone Is Jove content to pour his vengeance down; Aid from his brother of the seas he craves, To help him with auxiliary waves. The watry tyrant calls his brooks and floods, Who rowl from mossie caves (their moist abodes); And with perpetual urns his palace fill: To whom in brief, he thus imparts his will. Small exhortation needs; your pow'rs employ: And this bad world, so Jove requires, destroy. Let loose the reins to all your watry store: Bear down the damms, and open ev'ry door. The floods, by Nature enemies to land, And proudly swelling with their new command, Remove the living stones, that stopt their way, And gushing from their source, augment the sea. Then, with his mace, their monarch struck the ground; With inward trembling Earth receiv'd the wound; And rising streams a ready passage found. Th' expanded waters gather on the plain: They float the fields, and over-top the grain; Then rushing onwards, with a sweepy sway, Bear flocks, and folds, and lab'ring hinds away. Nor safe their dwellings were, for, sap'd by floods, Their houses fell upon their houshold Gods. The solid piles, too strongly built to fall, High o'er their heads, behold a watry wall: Now seas and Earth were in confusion lost; A world of waters, and without a coast. One climbs a cliff; one in his boat is born: And ploughs above, where late he sow'd his corn. Others o'er chimney-tops and turrets row, And drop their anchors on the meads below: Or downward driv'n, they bruise the tender vine, Or tost aloft, are knock'd against a pine. And where of late the kids had cropt the grass, The monsters of the deep now take their place. Insulting Nereids on the cities ride, And wond'ring dolphins o'er the palace glide. On leaves, and masts of mighty oaks they brouze; And their broad fins entangle in the boughs. The frighted wolf now swims amongst the sheep; The yellow lion wanders in the deep: His rapid force no longer helps the boar: The stag swims faster, than he ran before. The fowls, long beating on their wings in vain, Despair of land, and drop into the main. Now hills, and vales no more distinction know; And levell'd Nature lies oppress'd below. The most of mortals perish in the flood: The small remainder dies for want of food. A mountain of stupendous height there stands Betwixt th' Athenian and Boeotian lands, The bound of fruitful fields, while fields they were, But then a field of waters did appear: Parnassus is its name; whose forky rise Mounts thro' the clouds, and mates the lofty skies. High on the summit of this dubious cliff, Deucalion wafting, moor'd his little skiff. He with his wife were only left behind Of perish'd Man; they two were human kind. The mountain nymphs, and Themis they adore, And from her oracles relief implore. The most upright of mortal men was he; The most sincere, and holy woman, she. When Jupiter, surveying Earth from high, Beheld it in a lake of water lie, That where so many millions lately liv'd, But two, the best of either sex, surviv'd; He loos'd the northern wind; fierce Boreas flies To puff away the clouds, and purge the skies: Serenely, while he blows, the vapours driv'n, Discover Heav'n to Earth, and Earth to Heav'n. The billows fall, while Neptune lays his mace On the rough sea, and smooths its furrow'd face. Already Triton, at his call, appears Above the waves; a Tyrian robe he wears; And in his hand a crooked trumpet bears. The soveraign bids him peaceful sounds inspire, And give the waves the signal to retire. His writhen shell he takes; whose narrow vent Grows by degrees into a large extent, Then gives it breath; the blast with doubling sound, Runs the wide circuit of the world around: The sun first heard it, in his early east, And met the rattling ecchos in the west. The waters, listning to the trumpet's roar, Obey the summons, and forsake the shore. A thin circumference of land appears; And Earth, but not at once, her visage rears, And peeps upon the seas from upper grounds; The streams, but just contain'd within their bounds, By slow degrees into their channels crawl; And Earth increases, as the waters fall. In longer time the tops of trees appear, Which mud on their dishonour'd branches bear. At length the world was all restor'd to view; But desolate, and of a sickly hue: Nature beheld her self, and stood aghast, A dismal desart, and a silent waste. Which when Deucalion, with a piteous look Beheld, he wept, and thus to Pyrrha spoke: Oh wife, oh sister, oh of all thy kind The best, and only creature left behind, By kindred, love, and now by dangers joyn'd; Of multitudes, who breath'd the common air, We two remain; a species in a pair: The rest the seas have swallow'd; nor have we Ev'n of this wretched life a certainty. The clouds are still above; and, while I speak, A second deluge o'er our heads may break. Shou'd I be snatcht from hence, and thou remain, Without relief, or partner of thy pain, How cou'dst thou such a wretched life sustain? Shou'd I be left, and thou be lost, the sea That bury'd her I lov'd, shou'd bury me. Oh cou'd our father his old arts inspire, And make me heir of his informing fire, That so I might abolisht Man retrieve, And perisht people in new souls might live. But Heav'n is pleas'd, nor ought we to complain, That we, th' examples of mankind, remain. He said; the careful couple joyn their tears: And then invoke the Gods, with pious prayers. Thus, in devotion having eas'd their grief, From sacred oracles they seek relief; And to Cephysus' brook their way pursue: The stream was troubled, but the ford they knew; With living waters, in the fountain bred, They sprinkle first their garments, and their head, Then took the way, which to the temple led. The roofs were all defil'd with moss, and mire, The desart altars void of solemn fire. Before the gradual, prostrate they ador'd; The pavement kiss'd; and thus the saint implor'd. O righteous Themis, if the Pow'rs above By pray'rs are bent to pity, and to love; If humane miseries can move their mind; If yet they can forgive, and yet be kind; Tell how we may restore, by second birth, Mankind, and people desolated Earth. Then thus the gracious Goddess, nodding, said; Depart, and with your vestments veil your head: And stooping lowly down, with losen'd zones, Throw each behind your backs, your mighty mother's bones. Amaz'd the pair, and mute with wonder stand, 'Till Pyrrha first refus'd the dire command. Forbid it Heav'n, said she, that I shou'd tear Those holy reliques from the sepulcher. They ponder'd the mysterious words again, For some new sense; and long they sought in vain: At length Deucalion clear'd his cloudy brow, And said, the dark Aenigma will allow A meaning, which, if well I understand, From sacrilege will free the God's command: This Earth our mighty mother is, the stones In her capacious body, are her bones: These we must cast behind. With hope, and fear, The woman did the new solution hear: The man diffides in his own augury, And doubts the Gods; yet both resolve to try. Descending from the mount, they first unbind Their vests, and veil'd, they cast the stones behind: The stones (a miracle to mortal view, But long tradition makes it pass for true) Did first the rigour of their kind expel, And suppled into softness, as they fell; Then swell'd, and swelling, by degrees grew warm; And took the rudiments of human form. Imperfect shapes: in marble such are seen, When the rude chizzel does the man begin; While yet the roughness of the stone remains, Without the rising muscles, and the veins. The sappy parts, and next resembling juice, Were turn'd to moisture, for the body's use: Supplying humours, blood, and nourishment; The rest, too solid to receive a bent, Converts to bones; and what was once a vein, Its former name and Nature did retain. By help of pow'r divine, in little space, What the man threw, assum'd a manly face; And what the wife, renew'd the female race. Hence we derive our nature; born to bear Laborious life; and harden'd into care. The rest of animals, from teeming Earth Produc'd, in various forms receiv'd their birth. The native moisture, in its close retreat, Digested by the sun's aetherial heat, As in a kindly womb, began to breed: Then swell'd, and quicken'd by the vital seed. And some in less, and some in longer space, Were ripen'd into form, and took a sev'ral face. Thus when the Nile from Pharian fields is fled, And seeks, with ebbing tides, his ancient bed, The fat manure with heav'nly fire is warm'd; And crusted creatures, as in wombs, are form'd; These, when they turn the glebe, the peasants find; Some rude, and yet unfinish'd in their kind: Short of their limbs, a lame imperfect birth: One half alive; and one of lifeless earth. For heat, and moisture, when in bodies join'd, The temper that results from either kind Conception makes; and fighting 'till they mix, Their mingled atoms in each other fix. Thus Nature's hand the genial bed prepares With friendly discord, and with fruitful wars. From hence the surface of the ground, with mud And slime besmear'd (the faeces of the flood), Receiv'd the rays of Heav'n: and sucking in The seeds of heat, new creatures did begin: Some were of sev'ral sorts produc'd before, But of new monsters, Earth created more. Unwillingly, but yet she brought to light Thee, Python too, the wondring world to fright, And the new nations, with so dire a sight: So monstrous was his bulk, so large a space Did his vast body, and long train embrace. Whom Phoebus basking on a bank espy'd; E're now the God his arrows had not try'd But on the trembling deer, or mountain goat; At this new quarry he prepares to shoot. Though ev'ry shaft took place, he spent the store Of his full quiver; and 'twas long before Th' expiring serpent wallow'd in his gore. Then, to preserve the fame of such a deed, For Python slain, he Pythian games decred. Where noble youths for mastership shou'd strive, To quoit, to run, and steeds, and chariots drive. The prize was fame: in witness of renown An oaken garland did the victor crown. The laurel was not yet for triumphs born; But every green alike by Phoebus worn, Did, with promiscuous grace, his flowing locks adorn.

7
