Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Story of Cygnus

From these first onsets, the Sigaean shore Was strew'd with carcasses, and stain'd with gore: Neptunian Cygnus troops of Greeks had slain; Achilles in his carr had scour'd the plain, And clear'd the Trojan ranks: where-e'er he fought, Cygnus, or Hector, through the fields he sought: Cygnus he found; on him his force essay'd: For Hector was to the tenth year delay'd. His white-main'd steeds, that bow'd beneath the yoke, He chear'd to courage, with a gentle stroke; Then urg'd his fiery chariot on the foe; And rising shook his lance; in act to throw. But first he cry'd, O youth, be proud to bear Thy death, ennobled by Pelides' spear. The lance pursu'd the voice without delay, Nor did the whizzing weapon miss the way; But pierc'd his cuirass, with such fury sent, And sign'd his bosom with a purple dint. At this the seed of Neptune: Goddess-born, For ornament, not use, these arms are worn; This helm, and heavy buckler, I can spare; As only decorations of the war: So Mars is arm'd for glory, not for need. 'Tis somewhat more from Neptune to proceed, Than from a daughter of the sea to spring: Thy sire is mortal; mine is ocean's king. Secure of death, I shou'd contemn thy dart, Tho' naked; and impassible depart: He said, and threw: the trembling weapon pass'd Through nine bull-hides, each under other plac'd, On his broad shield; and stuck within the last. Achilles wrench'd it out; and sent again The hostile gift: the hostile gift was vain. He try'd a third, a tough well-chosen spear; Th' inviolable body stood sincere, Though Cygnus then did no defence provide, But scornful offer'd his unshielded side. Not otherwise th' impatient hero far'd, Than as a bull incompass'd with a guard, Amid the Circus roars, provok'd from far By sight of scarlet, and a sanguine war: They quit their ground, his bended horns elude; In vain pursuing, and in vain pursu'd: Before to farther fight he wou'd advance, He stood considering, and survey'd his lance. Doubts if he wielded not a wooden spear Without a point: he look'd, the point was there. This is my hand, and this my lance, he said; By which so many thousand foes are dead, O whither is their usual virtue fled! I had it once; and the Lyrnessian wall, And Tenedos, confess'd it in their fall. Thy streams, Caicus, rowl'd a crimson-flood; And Thebes ran red with her own natives' blood. Twice Telephus employ'd their piercing steel, To wound him first, and afterward to heal. The vigour of this arm was never vain: And that my wonted prowess I retain, Witness these heaps of slaughter on the plain. He said; and, doubtful of his former deeds, To some new tryal of his force proceeds. He chose Menoetes from among the rest; At him he launch'd his spear, and pierc'd his breast: On the hard earth the Lycian knock'd his head, And lay supine; and forth the spirit fled. Then thus the hero: Neither can I blame The hand, or jav'lin; both are still the same. The same I will employ against this foe, And wish but with the same success to throw. So spoke the chief; and while he spoke he threw; The weapon with unerring fury flew, At his left shoulder aim'd: nor entrance found; But back, as from a rock, with swift rebound Harmless return'd: a bloody mark appear'd, Which with false joy the flatter'd hero chear'd. Wound there was none; the blood that was in view, The lance before from slain Menoetes drew. Headlong he leaps from off his lofty car, And in close fight on foot renews the war. Raging with high disdain, repeats his blows; Nor shield, nor armour can their force oppose; Huge cantlets of his buckler strew the ground, And no defence in his bor'd arms is found, But on his flesh, no wound or blood is seen; The sword it self is blunted on the skin. This vain attempt the chief no longer bears; But round his hollow temples and his ears His buckler beats: the son of Neptune, stunn'd With these repeated buffets, quits his ground; A sickly sweat succeeds, and shades of night; Inverted Nature swims before his sight: Th' insulting victor presses on the more, And treads the steps the vanquish'd trod before, Nor rest, nor respite gives. A stone there lay Behind his trembling foe, and stopp'd his way: Achilles took th' advantage which he found, O'er-turn'd, and push'd him backward on the ground, His buckler held him under, while he press'd, With both his knees, above his panting breast. Unlac'd his helm: about his chin the twist He ty'd; and soon the strangled soul dismiss'd. With eager haste he went to strip the dead: The vanish'd body from his arms was fled. His sea-God sire, t' immortalize his frame, Had turn'd it to a bird that bears his name. A truce succeeds the labours of this day, And arms suspended with a long delay. While Trojan walls are kept with watch and ward; The Greeks before their trenches mount the guard; The feast approach'd; when to the blue-ey'd maid His vows for Cygnus slain the victor paid, And a white heyfer on her altar laid. The reeking entrails on the fire they threw, And to the Gods the grateful odour flew. Heav'n had its part in sacrifice: the rest Was broil'd, and roasted for the future feast. The chief-invited guests were set around! And hunger first asswag'd, the bowls were crown'd, Which in deep draughts their cares, and labours drown'd. The mellow harp did not their ears employ: And mute was all the warlike symphony: Discourse, the food of souls, was their delight, And pleasing chat prolong'd the summer's night. The subject, deeds of arms; and valour shown, Or on the Trojan side, or on their own. Of dangers undertaken, fame atchiev'd, They talk'd by turns; the talk by turns reliev'd. What things but these could fierce Achilles tell, Or what cou'd fierce Achilles hear so well? The last great act perform'd, of Cygnus slain, Did most the martial audience entertain: Wondring to find a body free by Fate From steel; and which cou'd ev'n that steel rebate: Amaz'd, their admiration they renew; And scarce Pelides cou'd believe it true.

7
