Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Story of Caeneus

Then Nestor thus: what once this age has known, In fated Cygnus, and in him alone, These eyes have seen in Caeneus long before; Whose body not a thousand swords cou'd bore. Caeneus, in courage, and in strength, excell'd; And still his Othrys with his fame is fill'd: But what did most his martial deeds adorn (Though since he chang'd his sex) a woman born. A novelty so strange, and full of Fate, His list'ning audience ask'd him to relate. Achilles thus commends their common sute: O father, first for prudence in repute, Tell, with that eloquence, so much thy own, What thou hast heard, or what of Caeneus known: What was he, whence his change of sex begun, What trophies, join'd in wars with thee, he won? Who conquer'd him, and in what fatal strife The youth, without a wound, cou'd lose his life? Neleides then: Though tardy age, and time, Have shrunk my sinews, and decay'd my prime; Though much I have forgotten of my store, Yet not exhausted, I remember more. Of all that arms atchiev'd, or peace design'd, That action still is fresher in my mind, Than ought beside. If reverend age can give To faith a sanction, in my third I live. 'Twas in my second cent'ry, I survey'd Young Caenis, then a fair Thessalian maid: Caenis the bright, was born to high command; A princess, and a native of thy land, Divine Achilles; every tongue proclaim'd Her beauty, and her eyes all hearts inflam'd. Peleus, thy sire, perhaps had sought her bed, Among the rest; but he had either led Thy mother then; or was by promise ty'd; But she to him, and all, alike her love deny'd. It was her fortune once to take her way Along the sandy margin of the sea: The Pow'r of ocean view'd her as she pass'd, And, lov'd as soon as seen, by force embrac'd. So Fame reports. Her virgin-treasure seiz'd, And his new joys, the ravisher so pleas'd, That thus, transported, to the nymph he cry'd; Ask what thou wilt, no pray'r shall be deny'd. This also Fame relates: the haughty fair, Who not the rape ev'n of a God cou'd bear, This answer, proud, return'd: To mighty wrongs A mighty recompence, of right, belongs. Give me no more to suffer such a shame; But change the woman, for a better name; One gift for all: she said; and while she spoke, A stern, majestick, manly tone she took. A man she was: and as the Godhead swore, To Caeneus turn'd, who Caenis was before. To this the lover adds, without request, No force of steel shou'd violate his breast. Glad of the gift, the new-made warrior goes; And arms among the Greeks, and longs for equal foes.

7
