Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Fate of Periclymenos

This tale, by Nestor told, did much displease Tlepolemus, the seed of Hercules: For, often he had heard his father say, That he himself was present at the fray; And more than shar'd the glories of the day. Old Chronicle, he said, among the rest, You might have nam'd Alcides at the least: Is he not worth your praise? The Pylian prince Sigh'd ere he spoke; then made this proud defence. My former woes in long oblivion drown'd, I wou'd have lost; but you renew the wound: Better to pass him o'er, than to relate The cause I have your mighty sire to hate. His fame has fill'd the world, and reach'd the sky (Which, oh, I wish, with truth, I cou'd deny!); We praise not Hector; though his name, we know, Is great in arms; 'tis hard to praise a foe. He, your great father, levell'd to the ground Messenia's tow'rs: nor better fortune found Elis, and Pylos; that a neighb'ring state, And this my own: both guiltless of their fate. To pass the rest, twelve, wanting one, he slew; My brethren, who their birth from Neleus drew, All youths of early promise, had they liv'd; By him they perish'd: I alone surviv'd. The rest were easie conquest: but the fate Of Periclymenos, is wondrous to relate. To him, our common grandsire of the main Had giv'n to change his form, and chang'd, resume again. Vary'd at pleasure, every shape he try'd; And in all beasts, Alcides still defy'd: Vanquish'd on Earth, at length he soar'd above; Chang'd to the bird, that bears the bolt of Jove: The new-dissembled eagle, now endu'd With beak, and pounces, Hercules pursu'd, And cuff'd his manly cheeks, and tore his face; Then, safe retir'd, and tour'd in empty space. Alcides bore not long his flying foe; But bending his inevitable bow, Reach'd him in air, suspended as he stood; And in his pinion fix'd the feather'd wood. Light was the wound; but in the sinew hung The point, and his disabled wing unstrung. He wheel'd in air, and stretch'd his vans in vain; His vans no longer cou'd his flight sustain: For while one gather'd wind, one unsupply'd Hung drooping down, nor pois'd his other side. He fell: the shaft that slightly was impress'd, Now from his heavy fall with weight increas'd, Drove through his neck, aslant, he spurns the ground, And the soul issues through the weazon's wound. Now, brave commander of the Rhodian seas, What praise is due from me, to Hercules? Silence is all the vengeance I decree For my slain brothers; but 'tis peace with thee. Thus with a flowing tongue old Nestor spoke: Then, to full bowls each other they provoke: At length, with weariness, and wine oppress'd, They rise from table; and withdraw to rest.

7
