Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Song of the Muses

First Ceres taught the lab'ring hind to plow The pregnant Earth, and quickning seed to sow. She first for Man did wholsome food provide, And with just laws the wicked world supply'd: All good from her deriv'd, to her belong The grateful tributes of the Muse's song. Her more than worthy of our verse we deem, Oh! were our verse more worthy of the theme. Jove on the giant fair Trinacria hurl'd, And with one bolt reveng'd his starry world. Beneath her burning hills Tiphaeus lies, And, strugling always, strives in vain to rise. Down does Pelorus his right hand suppress Tow'rd Latium, on the left Pachyne weighs. His legs are under Lilybaeum spread, And Aetna presses hard his horrid head. On his broad back he there extended lies, And vomits clouds of ashes to the skies. Oft lab'ring with his load, at last he tires, And spews out in revenge a flood of fires. Mountains he struggles to o'erwhelm, and towns; Earth's inmost bowels quake, and Nature groans. His terrors reach the direful king of Hell; He fears his throws will to the day reveal The realms of night, and fright his trembling ghosts. This to prevent, he quits the Stygian coasts, In his black carr, by sooty horses drawn, Fair Sicily he seeks, and dreads the dawn. Around her plains he casts his eager eyes, And ev'ry mountain to the bottom tries. But when, in all the careful search, he saw No cause of fear, no ill-suspected flaw; Secure from harm, and wand'ring on at will, Venus beheld him from her flow'ry hill: When strait the dame her little Cupid prest With secret rapture to her snowy breast, And in these words the flutt'ring boy addrest. O thou, my arms, my glory, and my pow'r, My son, whom men, and deathless Gods adore; Bend thy sure bow, whose arrows never miss'd, No longer let Hell's king thy sway resist; Take him, while stragling from his dark abodes He coasts the kingdoms of superior Gods. If sovereign Jove, if Gods who rule the waves, And Neptune, who rules them, have been thy slaves; Shall Hell be free? The tyrant strike, my son, Enlarge thy mother's empire, and thy own. Let not our Heav'n be made the mock of Hell, But Pluto to confess thy pow'r compel. Our rule is slighted in our native skies, See Pallas, see Diana too defies Thy darts, which Ceres' daughter wou'd despise. She too our empire treats with aukward scorn; Such insolence no longer's to be born. Revenge our slighted reign, and with thy dart Transfix the virgin's to the uncle's heart. She said; and from his quiver strait he drew A dart that surely wou'd the business do. She guides his hand, she makes her touch the test, And of a thousand arrows chose the best: No feather better pois'd, a sharper head None had, and sooner none, and surer sped. He bends his bow, he draws it to his ear, Thro' Pluto's heart it drives, and fixes there.

7
