Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

A Boy transform'd to an Eft

Thus, while thro' all the Earth, and all the main, Her daughter mournful Ceres sought in vain; Aurora, when with dewy looks she rose, Nor burnish'd Vesper found her in repose, At Aetna's flaming mouth two pitchy pines To light her in her search at length she tines. Restless, with these, thro' frosty night she goes, Nor fears the cutting winds, nor heeds the snows; And, when the morning-star the day renews, From east to west her absent child pursues. Thirsty at last by long fatigue she grows, But meets no spring, no riv'let near her flows. Then looking round, a lowly cottage spies, Smoaking among the trees, and thither hies. The Goddess knocking at the little door, 'Twas open'd by a woman old and poor, Who, when she begg'd for water, gave her ale Brew'd long, but well preserv'd from being stale. The Goddess drank; a chuffy lad was by, Who saw the liquor with a grutching eye, And grinning cries, She's greedy more than dry. Ceres, offended at his foul grimace, Flung what she had not drunk into his face, The sprinklings speckle where they hit the skin, And a long tail does from his body spin; His arms are turn'd to legs, and lest his size Shou'd make him mischievous, and he might rise Against mankind, diminutives his frame, Less than a lizzard, but in shape the same. Amaz'd the dame the wondrous sight beheld, And weeps, and fain wou'd touch her quondam child. Yet her approach th' affrighted vermin shuns, And fast into the greatest crevice runs. A name they gave him, which the spots exprest, That rose like stars, and varied all his breast. What lands, what seas the Goddess wander'd o'er, Were long to tell; for there remain'd no more. Searching all round, her fruitless toil she mourns, And with regret to Sicily returns. At length, where Cyane now flows, she came, Who cou'd have told her, were she still the same As when she saw her daughter sink to Hell; But what she knows she wants a tongue to tell. Yet this plain signal manifestly gave, The virgin's girdle floating on a wave, As late she dropt it from her slender waste, When with her uncle thro' the deep she past. Ceres the token by her grief confest, And tore her golden hair, and beat her breast. She knows not on what land her curse shou'd fall, But, as ingrate, alike upbraids them all, Unworthy of her gifts; Trinacria most, Where the last steps she found of what she lost. The plough for this the vengeful Goddess broke, And with one death the ox, and owner struck, In vain the fallow fields the peasant tills, The seed, corrupted ere 'tis sown, she kills. The fruitful soil, that once such harvests bore, Now mocks the farmer's care, and teems no more. And the rich grain which fills the furrow'd glade, Rots in the seed, or shrivels in the blade; Or too much sun burns up, or too much rain Drowns, or black blights destroy the blasted plain; Or greedy birds the new-sown seed devour, Or darnel, thistles, and a crop impure Of knotted grass along the acres stand, And spread their thriving roots thro' all the land. Then from the waves soft Arethusa rears Her head, and back she flings her dropping hairs. O mother of the maid, whom thou so far Hast sought, of whom thou canst no tidings hear; O thou, she cry'd, who art to life a friend, Cease here thy search, and let thy labour end. Thy faithful Sicily's a guiltless clime, And shou'd not suffer for another's crime; She neither knew, nor cou'd prevent the deed; Nor think that for my country thus I plead; My country's Pisa, I'm an alien here, Yet these abodes to Elis I prefer, No clime to me so sweet, no place so dear. These springs I Arethusa now possess, And this my seat, o gracious Goddess, bless: This island why I love, and why I crost Such spacious seas to reach Ortygia's coast, To you I shall impart, when, void of care, Your heart's at ease, and you're more fit to hear; When on your brow no pressing sorrow sits, For gay content alone such tales admits. When thro' Earth's caverns I a-while have roul'd My waves, I rise, and here again behold The long-lost stars; and, as I late did glide Near Styx, Proserpina there I espy'd. Fear still with grief might in her face be seen; She still her rape laments; yet, made a queen, Beneath those gloomy shades her sceptre sways, And ev'n th' infernal king her will obeys. This heard, the Goddess like a statue stood, Stupid with grief; and in that musing mood Continu'd long; new cares a-while supprest The reigning of her immortal breast. At last to Jove her daughter's sire she flies, And with her chariot cuts the chrystal skies; She comes in clouds, and with dishevel'd hair, Standing before his throne, prefers her pray'r. King of the Gods, defend my blood and thine, And use it not the worse for being mine. If I no more am gracious in thy sight, Be just, o Jove, and do thy daughter right. In vain I sought her the wide world around, And, when I most despair'd to find her, found. But how can I the fatal finding boast, By which I know she is for ever lost? Without her father's aid, what other Pow'r Can to my arms the ravish'd maid restore? Let him restore her, I'll the crime forgive; My child, tho' ravish'd, I'd with joy receive. Pity, your daughter with a thief shou'd wed, Tho' mine, you think, deserves no better bed. Jove thus replies: It equally belongs To both, to guard our common pledge from wrongs. But if to things we proper names apply, This hardly can be call'd an injury. The theft is love; nor need we blush to own The thief, if I can judge, to be our son. Had you of his desert no other proof, To be Jove's brother is methinks enough. Nor was my throne by worth superior got, Heav'n fell to me, as Hell to him, by lot: If you are still resolv'd her loss to mourn, And nothing less will serve than her return; Upon these terms she may again be yours (Th' irrevocable terms of fate, not ours), Of Stygian food if she did never taste, Hell's bounds may then, and only then, be past.

7
