Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Dragon's Teeth transform'd to Men

Impatient for the wonders of the day, Aurora drives the loyt'ring stars away. Now Mars's mount the pressing people fill, The crowd below, the nobles crown the hill; The king himself high-thron'd above the rest, With iv'ry scepter, and in purple drest. Forthwith the brass-hoof'd bulls are set at large, Whose furious nostrils sulph'rous flame discharge: The blasted herbage by their breath expires; As forges rumble with excessive fires, And furnaces with fiercer fury glow, When water on the panting mass ye throw; With such a noise, from their convulsive breast, Thro' bellowing throats, the struggling vapour prest. Yet Jason marches up without concern, While on th' advent'rous youth the monsters turn Their glaring eyes, and, eager to engage, Brandish their steel-tipt horns in threatning rage: With brazen hoofs they beat the ground, and choak The ambient air with clouds of dust and smoak: Each gazing Graecian for his champion shakes, While bold advances he securely makes Thro' sindging blasts; such wonders magick art Can work, when love conspires, and plays his part. The passive savages like statues stand, While he their dew-laps stroaks with soothing hand; To unknown yokes their brawny necks they yield, And, like tame oxen, plow the wond'ring field. The Colchians stare; the Graecians shout, and raise Their champion's courage with inspiring praise. Embolden'd now, on fresh attempts he goes, With serpent's teeth the fertile furrows sows; The glebe, fermenting with inchanted juice, Makes the snake's teeth a human crop produce. For as an infant, pris'ner to the womb, Contented sleeps, 'till to perfection come, Then does the cell's obscure confinement scorn, He tosses, throbs, and presses to be born; So from the lab'ring Earth no single birth, But a whole troop of lusty youths rush forth; And, what's more strange, with martial fury warm'd, And for encounter all compleatly arm'd; In rank and file, as they were sow'd, they stand, Impatient for the signal of command. No foe but the Aemonian youth appears; At him they level their steel-pointed spears; His frighted friends, who triumph'd, just before, With peals of sighs his desp'rate case deplore: And where such hardy warriors are afraid, What must the tender, and enamour'd maid? Her spirits sink, the blood her cheek forsook; She fears, who for his safety undertook: She knew the vertue of the spells she gave, She knew the force, and knew her lover brave; But what's a single champion to an host? Yet scorning thus to see him tamely lost, Her strong reserve of secret arts she brings, And last, her never-failing song she sings. Wonders ensue; among his gazing foes The massy fragment of a rock he throws; This charm in civil war engag'd 'em all; By mutual wounds those Earth-born brothers fall. The Greeks, transported with the strange success, Leap from their seats the conqu'ror to caress; Commend, and kiss, and clasp him in their arms: So would the kind contriver of the charms; But her, who felt the tenderest concern, Honour condemns in secret flames to burn; Committed to a double guard of fame, Aw'd by a virgin's, and a princess' name. But thoughts are free, and fancy unconfin'd, She kisses, courts, and hugs him in her mind; To fav'ring Pow'rs her silent thanks she gives, By whose indulgence her lov'd hero lives. One labour more remains, and, tho' the last, In danger far surmounting all the past; That enterprize by Fates in store was kept, To make the dragon sleep that never slept, Whose crest shoots dreadful lustre; from his jaws A tripple tire of forked stings he draws, With fangs, and wings of a prodigious size: Such was the guardian of the golden prize. Yet him, besprinkled with Lethaean dew, The fair inchantress into slumber threw; And then, to fix him, thrice she did repeat The rhyme, that makes the raging winds retreat, In stormy seas can halcyon seasons make, Turn rapid streams into a standing lake; While the soft guest his drowzy eye-lids seals, Th' ungarded golden fleece the stranger steals; Proud to possess the purchase of his toil, Proud of his royal bride, the richer spoil; To sea both prize, and patroness he bore, And lands triumphant on his native shore.

7
