Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Story of Aegeus

From hence to Athens she directs her flight, Where Phineus, so renown'd for doing right; Where Periphas, and Polyphemon's neece, Soaring with sudden plumes amaz'd the towns of Greece. Here Aegeus so engaging she addrest, That first he treats her like a royal guest; Then takes the sorc'ress for his wedded wife; The only blemish of his prudent life. Mean-while his son, from actions of renown, Arrives at court, but to his sire unknown. Medea, to dispatch a dang'rous heir (She knew him), did a pois'nous draught prepare; Drawn from a drug, was long reserv'd in store For desp'rate uses, from the Scythian shore; That from the Echydnaean monster's jaws Deriv'd its origin, and this the cause. Thro' a dark cave a craggy passage lies, To ours, ascending from the nether skies; Thro' which, by strength of hand, Alcides drew Chain'd Cerberus, who lagg'd, and restive grew, With his blear'd eyes our brighter day to view. Thrice he repeated his enormous yell, With which he scares the ghosts, and startles Hell; At last outragious (tho' compell'd to yield) He sheds his foam in fury on the field,- Which, with its own, and rankness of the ground, Produc'd a weed, by sorcerers renown'd, The strongest constitution to confound; Call'd Aconite, because it can unlock All bars, and force its passage thro' a rock. The pious father, by her wheedles won, Presents this deadly potion to his son; Who, with the same assurance takes the cup, And to the monarch's health had drank it up, But in the very instant he apply'd The goblet to his lips, old Aegeus spy'd The iv'ry hilted sword that grac'd his side. That certain signal of his son he knew, And snatcht the bowl away; the sword he drew, Resolv'd, for such a son's endanger'd life, To sacrifice the most perfidious wife. Revenge is swift, but her more active charms A whirlwind rais'd, that snatch'd her from his arms. While conjur'd clouds their baffled sense surprize, She vanishes from their deluded eyes, And thro' the hurricane triumphant flies. The gen'rous king, altho' o'er-joy'd to find His son was safe, yet bearing still in mind The mischief by his treach'rous queen design'd; The horrour of the deed, and then how near The danger drew, he stands congeal'd with fear. But soon that fear into devotion turns, With grateful incense ev'ry altar burns; Proud victims, and unconscious of their fate, Stalk to the temple, there to die in state. In Athens never had a day been found For mirth, like that grand festival, renown'd. Promiscuously the peers, and people dine, Promiscuously their thankful voices join, In songs of wit, sublim'd by spritely wine. To list'ning spheres their joint applause they raise, And thus resound their matchless Theseus' praise. Great Theseus! Thee the Marathonian plain Admires, and wears with pride the noble stain Of the dire monster's blood, by valiant Theseus slain. That now Cromyon's swains in safety sow, And reap their fertile field, to thee they owe. By thee th' infested Epidaurian coast Was clear'd, and now can a free commerce boast. The traveller his journey can pursue, With pleasure the late dreadful valley view, And cry, Here Theseus the grand robber slew. Cephysus' cries to his rescu'd shore, The merciless Procrustes is no more. In peace, Eleusis, Ceres' rites renew, Since Theseus' sword the fierce Cercyon slew. By him the tort'rer Sinis was destroy'd, Of strength (but strength to barb'rous use employ'd) That tops of tallest pines to Earth could bend, And thus in pieces wretched captives rend. Inhuman Scyron now has breath'd his last, And now Alcatho's roads securely past; By Theseus slain, and thrown into the deep: But Earth nor Sea his scatter'd bones wou'd keep, Which, after floating long, a rock became, Still infamous with Scyron's hated name. When Fame to count thy acts and years proceeds, Thy years appear but cyphers to thy deeds. For thee, brave youth, as for our common-wealth, We pray; and drink, in yours, the publick health. Your praise the senate, and plebeians sing, With your lov'd name the court, and cottage ring. You make our shepherds and our sailors glad, And not a house in this vast city's sad. But mortal bliss will never come sincere, Pleasure may lead, but grief brings up the rear; While for his sons' arrival, rev'ling joy Aegeus, and all his subjects does employ; While they for only costly feasts prepare, His neighb'ring monarch, Minos, threatens war: Weak in land-forces, nor by sea more strong, But pow'rful in a deep resented wrong For a son's murder, arm'd with pious rage; Yet prudently before he would engage, To raise auxiliaries resolv'd to sail, And with the pow'rful princes to prevail. First Anaphe, then proud Astypalaea gains, By presents that, and this by threats obtains: Low Mycone, Cymolus, chalky soil, Tall Cythnos, Scyros, flat Seriphos' isle; Paros, with marble cliffs afar display'd; Impregnable Sithonia; yet betray'd To a weak foe by a gold-admiring maid, Who, chang'd into a daw of sable hue, Still hoards up gold, and hides it from the view. But as these islands chearfully combine, Others refuse t' embark in his design. Now leftward with an easy sail he bore, And prosp'rous passage to Oenopia's shore; Oenopia once, but now Aegina call'd, And with his royal mother's name install'd By Aeacus, under whose reign did spring The Myrmidons, and now their reigning king. Down to the port, amidst the rabble, run The princes of the blood; with Telamon, Peleus the next, and Phocus the third son: Then Aeacus, altho' opprest with years, To ask the cause of their approach appears. That question does the Gnossian's grief renew, And sighs from his afflicted bosom drew; Yet after a short solemn respite made, The ruler of the hundred cities said: Assist our arms, rais'd for a murder'd son, In this religious war no risque you'll run: Revenge the dead—for who refuse to give Rest to their urns, unworthy are to live. What you request, thus Aeacus replies, Not I, but truth and common faith denies; Athens and we have long been sworn allies: Our leagues are fix'd, confed'rate are our pow'rs, And who declare themselves their foes, are ours. Minos rejoins, Your league shall dearly cost (Yet, mindful how much safer 'twas to boast, Than there to waste his forces, and his fame, Before in field with his grand foe he came), Parts without blows—nor long had left the shore, E're into port another navy bore, With Cephalus, and all his jolly crew; Th' Aeacides their old acquaintance knew: The princes bid him welcome, and in state Conduct the heroe to their palace gate; Who entr'ring, seem'd the charming mein to wear, As when in youth he paid his visit there. In his right hand an olive-branch he holds, And, salutation past, the chief unfolds His embassy from the Athenian state, Their mutual friendship, leagues of ancient date; Their common danger, ev'ry thing cou'd wake Concern, and his address successful make: Strength'ning his plea with all the charms of sense, And those, with all the charms of eloquence. Then thus the king: Like suitors do you stand For that assistance which you may command? Athenians, all our listed forces use (They're such as no bold service will refuse); And when y' ave drawn them off, the Gods be prais'd, Fresh legions can within our isle be rais'd: So stock'd with people, that we can prepare Both for domestick, and for distant war, Ours, or our friends' insulters to chastize. Long may ye flourish thus, the prince replies. Strange transport seiz'd me as I pass'd along, To meet so many troops, and all so young, As if your army did of twins consist; Yet amongst them my late acquaintance miss'd: Ev'n all that to your palace did resort, When first you entertain'd me at your court; And cannot guess the cause from whence cou'd spring So vast a change—Then thus the sighing king: Illustrious guest, to my strange tale attend, Of sad beginning, but a joyful end: The whole to a vast history wou'd swell, I shall but half, and that confus'dly, tell. That race whom so deserv'dly you admir'd, Are all into their silent tombs retir'd: They fell; and falling, how they shook my state, Thought may conceive, but words can ne'er relate.

7
