Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Story of Ants chang'd to Men

A dreadful plague from angry Juno came, To scourge the land, that bore her rival's name; Before her fatal anger was reveal'd, And teeming malice lay as yet conceal'd, All remedies we try, all med'cines use, Which Nature cou'd supply, or art produce; Th' unconquer'd foe derides the vain design, And art, and Nature foil'd, declare the cause divine. At first we only felt th' oppressive weight Of gloomy clouds, then teeming with our fate, And lab'ring to discarge unactive heat: But ere four moons alternate changes knew, With deadly blasts the fatal South-wind blew, Infected all the air, and poison'd as it flew. Our fountains too a dire infection yield, For crowds of vipers creep along the field, And with polluted gore, and baneful steams, Taint all the lakes, and venom all the streams. The young disease with milder force began, And rag'd on birds, and beasts, excusing Man. The lab'ring oxen fall before the plow, Th' unhappy plow-men stare, and wonder how: The tabid sheep, with sickly bleatings, pines; Its wool decreasing, as its strength declines: The warlike steed, by inward foes compell'd, Neglects his honours, and deserts the field; Unnerv'd, and languid, seeks a base retreat, And at the manger groans, but wish'd a nobler fate: The stags forget their speed, the boars their rage, Nor can the bears the stronger herds engage: A gen'ral faintness does invade 'em all, And in the woods, and fields, promiscuously they fall. The air receives the stench, and (strange to say) The rav'nous birds and beasts avoid the prey: Th' offensive bodies rot upon the ground, And spread the dire contagion all around. But now the plague, grown to a larger size, Riots on Man, and scorns a meaner prize. Intestine heats begin the civil war, And flushings first the latent flame declare, And breath inspir'd, which seem'd like fiery air. Their black dry tongues are swell'd, and scarce can move, And short thick sighs from panting lung are drove. They gape for air, with flatt'ring hopes t' abate Their raging flames, but that augments their heat. No bed, no cov'ring can the wretches bear, But on the ground, expos'd to open air, They lye, and hope to find a pleasing coolness there. The suff'ring Earth with that oppression curst, Returns the heat which they imparted first. In vain physicians would bestow their aid, Vain all their art, and useless all their trade; And they, ev'n they, who fleeting life recall, Feel the same Pow'rs, and undistinguish'd fall. If any proves so daring to attend His sick companion, or his darling friend, Th' officious wretch sucks in contagious breath, And with his friend does sympathize in death. And now the care and hopes of life are past, They please their fancies, and indulge their taste; At brooks and streams, regardless of their shame, Each sex, promiscuous, strives to quench their flame; Nor do they strive in vain to quench it there, For thirst, and life at once extinguish'd are. Thus in the brooks the dying bodies sink, But heedless still the rash survivors drink. So much uneasy down the wretches hate, They fly their beds, to struggle with their fate; But if decaying strength forbids to rise, The victim crawls and rouls, 'till on the ground he lies. Each shuns his bed, as each wou'd shun his tomb, And thinks th' infection only lodg'd at home. Here one, with fainting steps, does slowly creep O'er heaps of dead, and strait augments the heap; Another, while his strength and tongue prevail'd, Bewails his friend, and falls himself bewail'd: This with imploring looks surveys the skies, The last dear office of his closing eyes, But finds the Heav'ns implacable, and dies. What now, ah! what employ'd my troubled mind? But only hopes my subjects' fate to find. What place soe'er my weeping eyes survey, There in lamented heaps the vulgar lay; As acorns scatter when the winds prevail, Or mellow fruit from shaken branches fall. You see that dome which rears its front so high: 'Tis sacred to the monarch of the sky: How many there, with unregarded tears, And fruitless vows, sent up successless pray'rs? There fathers for expiring sons implor'd, And there the wife bewail'd her gasping lord; With pious off'rings they'd appease the skies, But they, ere yet th' attoning vapours rise, Before the altars fall, themselves a sacrifice: They fall, while yet their hands the gums contain, The gums surviving, but their off'rers slain. The destin'd ox, with holy garlands crown'd, Prevents the blow, and feels th' expected wound: When I my self invok'd the Pow'rs divine, To drive the fatal pest from me and mine; When now the priest with hands uplifted stood, Prepar'd to strike, and shed the sacred blood, The Gods themselves the mortal stroke bestow, The victim falls, but they impart the blow: Scarce was the knife with the pale purple stain'd, And no presages cou'd be then obtain'd, From putrid entrails, where th' infection reign'd. Death stalk'd around with such resistless sway, The temples of the Gods his force obey, And suppliants feel his stroke, while yet they pray. Go now, said he, your deities implore For fruitless aid, for I defie their pow'r. Then with a curst malicious joy survey'd The very altars, stain'd with trophies of the dead. The rest grown mad, and frantick with despair, Urge their own fate, and so prevent the fear. Strange madness that, when Death pursu'd so fast, T' anticipate the blow with impious haste. No decent honours to their urns are paid, Nor cou'd the graves receive the num'rous dead; For, or they lay unbury'd on the ground, Or unadorn'd a needy fun'ral found: All rev'rence past, the fainting wretches fight For fun'ral piles which were another's right. Unmourn'd they fall: for, who surviv'd to mourn? And sires, and mothers unlamented burn: Parents, and sons sustain an equal fate, And wand'ring ghosts their kindred shadows meet. The dead a larger space of ground require, Nor are the trees sufficient for the fire. Despairing under grief's oppressive weight, And sunk by these tempestuous blasts of Fate, O Jove, said I, if common fame says true, If e'er Aegina gave those joys to you, If e'er you lay enclos'd in her embrace, Fond of her charms, and eager to possess; O father, if you do not yet disclaim Paternal care, nor yet disown the name; Grant my petitions, and with speed restore My subjects num'rous as they were before, Or make me partner of the fate they bore. I spoke, and glorious lightning shone around, And ratling thunder gave a prosp'rous sound; So let it be, and may these omens prove A pledge, said I, of your returning love. By chance a rev'rend oak was near the place, Sacred to Jove, and of Dodona's race, Where frugal ants laid up their winter meat, Whose little bodies bear a mighty weight: We saw them march along, and hide their store, And much admir'd their number, and their pow'r; Admir'd at first, but after envy'd more. Full of amazement, thus to Jove I pray'd, O grant, since thus my subjects are decay'd, As many subjects to supply the dead. I pray'd, and strange convulsions mov'd the oak, Which murmur'd, tho' by ambient winds unshook: My trembling hands, and stiff-erected hair, Exprest all tokens of uncommon fear; Yet both the earth and sacred oak I kist, And scarce cou'd hope, yet still I hop'd the best; For wretches, whatsoe'er the Fates divine, Expound all omens to their own design. But now 'twas night, when ev'n distraction wears A pleasing look, and dreams beguile our cares, Lo! the same oak appears before my eyes, Nor alter'd in his shape, nor former size; As many ants the num'rous branches bear, The same their labour, and their frugal care; The branches too a like commotion sound, And shook th' industrious creatures on the ground, Who, by degrees (what's scarce to be believ'd) A nobler form, and larger bulk receiv'd, And on the earth walk'd an unusual pace, With manly strides, and an erected face- Their num'rous legs, and former colour lost, The insects cou'd a human figure boast. I wake, and waking find my cares again, And to the unperforming Gods complain, And call their promise, and pretences, vain. Yet in my court I heard the murm'ring voice Of strangers, and a mixt uncommon noise: But I suspected all was still a dream, 'Till Telamon to my apartment came, Op'ning the door with an impetuous haste, O come, said he, and see your faith and hopes surpast: I follow, and, confus'd with wonder, view Those shapes which my presaging slumbers drew: I saw, and own'd, and call'd them subjects; they Confest my pow'r, submissive to my sway. To Jove, restorer of my race decay'd, My vows were first with due oblations paid, I then divide with an impartial hand My empty city, and my ruin'd land, To give the new-born youth an equal share, And call them Myrmidons, from what they were. You saw their persons, and they still retain The thrift of ants, tho' now transform'd to men. A frugal people, and inur'd to sweat, Lab'ring to gain, and keeping what they get. These, equal both in strength and years, shall join Their willing aid, and follow your design, With the first southern gale that shall present To fill your sails, and favour your intent. With such discourse they entertain the day; The ev'ning past in banquets, sport, and play: Then, having crown'd the night with sweet repose, Aurora (with the wind at east) arose. Now Pallas' sons to Cephalus resort, And Cephalus with Pallas' sons to court, To the king's levee; him sleep's silken chain, And pleasing dreams, beyond his hour detain; But then the princes of the blood, in state, Expect, and meet 'em at the palace gate.

7
