Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Story of Erisichthon

In various shapes thus to deceive the eyes, Without a settled stint of her disguise, Rash Erisichthon's daughter had the pow'r, And brought it to Autolicus in dow'r. Her atheist sire the slighted Gods defy'd, And ritual honours to their shrines deny'd. As fame reports, his hand an ax sustain'd, Which Ceres' consecrated grove prophan'd; Which durst the venerable gloom invade, And violate with light the awful shade. An ancient oak in the dark center stood, The covert's glory, and itself a wood: Garlands embrac'd its shaft, and from the boughs Hung tablets, monuments of prosp'rous vows. In the cool dusk its unpierc'd verdure spread, The Dryads oft their hallow'd dances led; And oft, when round their gaging arms they cast, Full fifteen ells it measu'rd in the waste: Its height all under standards did surpass, As they aspir'd above the humbler grass. These motives, which would gentler minds restrain, Could not make Triope's bold son abstain; He sternly charg'd his slaves with strict decree, To fell with gashing steel the sacred tree. But whilst they, lingring, his commands delay'd, He snatch'd an Ax, and thus blaspheming said: Was this no oak, nor Ceres' favourite care, But Ceres' self, this arm, unaw'd, shou'd dare Its leafy honours in the dust to spread, And level with the earth its airy head. He spoke, and as he poiz'd a slanting stroak, Sighs heav'd, and tremblings shook the frighted oak; Its leaves look'd sickly, pale its acorns grew, And its long branches sweat a chilly dew. But when his impious hand a wound bestow'd, Blood from the mangled bark in currents flow'd. When a devoted bull of mighty size, A sinning nation's grand atonement, dies; With such a plenty from the spouting veins, A crimson stream the turfy altars stains. The wonder all amaz'd; yet one more bold, The fact dissuading, strove his ax to hold. But the Thessalian, obstinately bent, Too proud to change, too harden'd to repent, On his kind monitor, his eyes, which burn'd With rage, and with his eyes his weapon turn'd; Take the reward, says he, of pious dread: Then with a blow lopp'd off his parted head. No longer check'd, the wretch his crime pursu'd, Doubled his strokes, and sacrilege renew'd; When from the groaning trunk a voice was heard, A Dryad I, by Ceres' love preferr'd, Within the circle of this clasping rind Coeval grew, and now in ruin join'd; But instant vengeance shall thy sin pursue, And death is chear'd with this prophetick view. At last the oak with cords enforc'd to bow, Strain'd from the top, and sap'd with wounds below, The humbler wood, partaker of its fate, Crush'd with its fall, and shiver'd with its weight. The grove destroy'd, the sister Dryads moan, Griev'd at its loss, and frighted at their own. Strait, suppliants for revenge to Ceres go, In sable weeds, expressive of their woe. The beauteous Goddess with a graceful air Bow'd in consent, and nodded to their pray'r. The awful motion shook the fruitful ground, And wav'd the fields with golden harvests crown'd. Soon she contriv'd in her projecting mind A plague severe, and piteous in its kind (If plagues for crimes of such presumptuous height Could pity in the softest breast create). With pinching want, and hunger's keenest smart, To tear his vitals, and corrode his heart. But since her near approach by Fate's deny'd To famine, and broad climes their pow'rs divide, A nymph, the mountain's ranger, she address'd, And thus resolv'd, her high commands express'd.

7
