Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Transformations of Erisichthon's Daughter

Now riches hoarded by paternal care Were sunk, the glutton swallowing up the heir. Yet the devouring flame no stores abate, Nor less his hunger grew with his estate. One daughter left, as left his keen desire, A daughter worthy of a better sire: Her too he sold, spent Nature to sustain; She scorn'd a lord with generous disdain, And flying, spread her hand upon the main. Then pray'd: Grant, thou, I bondage may escape, And with my liberty reward thy rape; Repay my virgin treasure with thy aid ('Twas Neptune who deflower'd the beauteous maid). The God was mov'd, at what the fair had su'd, When she so lately by her master view'd In her known figure, on a sudden took A fisher's habit, and a manly look. To whom her owner hasted to enquire; O thou, said he, whose baits hide treach'rous wire; Whose art can manage, and experienc'd skill The taper angle, and the bobbing quill, So may the sea be ruffled with no storm, But smooth with calms, as you the truth inform; So your deceit may no shy fishes feel, 'Till struck, and fasten'd on the bearded steel. Did not you standing view upon the strand, A wand'ring maid? I'm sure I saw her stand; Her hair disorder'd, and her homely dress Betray'd her want, and witness'd her distress. Me heedless, she reply'd, whoe'er you are, Excuse, attentive to another care. I settled on the deep my steady eye; Fix'd on my float, and bent on my employ. And that you may not doubt what I impart, So may the ocean's God assist my art, If on the beach since I my sport pursu'd, Or man, or woman but my self I view'd. Back o'er the sands, deluded, he withdrew, Whilst she for her old form put off her new. Her sire her shifting pow'r to change perceiv'd; And various chapmen by her sale deceiv'd. A fowl with spangled plumes, a brinded steer, Sometimes a crested mare, or antler'd deer: Sold for a price, she parted, to maintain Her starving parent with dishonest gain. At last all means, as all provisions, fail'd; For the disease by remedies prevail'd; His muscles with a furious bite he tore, Gorg'd his own tatter'd flesh, and gulph'd his gore. Wounds were his feast, his life to life a prey, Supporting Nature by its own decay. But foreign stories why shou'd I relate? I too my self can to new forms translate, Tho' the variety's not unconfin'd, But fix'd, in number, and restrain'd in kind: For often I this present shape retain, Oft curl a snake the volumes of my train. Sometimes my strength into my horns transfer'd, A bull I march, the captain of the herd. But whilst I once those goring weapons wore, Vast wresting force one from my forehead tore. Lo, my maim'd brows the injury still own; He ceas'd; his words concluding with a groan.

7
