As I began my shift and started waiting tables, one of my favorite residents, Stan (not his real name), entered the dining room. I work in an assisted-living center and had spent many hours visiting with this wonderful man. He is an accomplished author and former professor who had served as a mission president, stake patriarch, and temple sealer.

I hoped that as I spent time with him, some of his spirituality and pleasant personality would rub off on me. I was consistently impressed by his humility and faithful desire to serve others. His wife of 63 years had recently passed away, and though he was surely grieving, he was able to find joy as he sought ways to make others feel loved and comfortable.

With the COVID-19 epidemic raging, 2020 had been especially tough for our assisted-living community. But the advent of the Christmas season brought renewed hope for the future.

That evening, Stan sat with another man at the table I was serving. As that man finished his meal, he asked me for some snacks to take back to his room. I went for the snacks, but unfortunately, we were out of what he wanted. When I returned to his table and told him, he was disappointed. I offered substitute snacks, but he politely declined.

Stan, having heard our conversation, rose from his seat. With his walker, he slowly made his way down the hall. He returned a few minutes later with some of his own favorite snacks—chocolate-covered cashews. He offered them to the man, thanked him for his company, and returned to his room.

As I thought about my friend facing the loss of his wife and our community dealing with a COVID-19 quarantine, the Savior’s words hit me. He said, “Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel’s, the same shall save it” (Mark 8:35).

Stan found joy as he continued to serve. I remember thinking, “Truly, this is a man of God.”

I will always remember the impact this experience had on me. It helped me set a lifelong goal to become a committed disciple of Jesus Christ, like Stan. He showed me that true joy is found in the continuous giving of small things, like Christmas cashews.
