My siblings and I, as kids, grew up not knowing and feeling what it means to enjoy the real spirit of Christmas centred on the life and mission of the Saviour, Jesus Christ. We celebrated Christmas as just one special day. In many ways my Christmas experience was mixed with childish wishful thinking. To me, Christmas day meant one thing: a Christmas gift. No gift, no Christmas.

Despite our childhood hearts focusing only on our Christmas gift, we knew this period between when school let out and Christmas day wasn’t going to be an easy ride. It would be a tough time which I will call “time to behave”. Our loving parents didn’t accept any excuse and made sure everyone had something to do. Each evening after dinner, the work plan for the next day was briefly discussed and individual or group assignments appropriate to our age were given. It was during this time to behave that we were taught the value of work, family unity, bearing one another’s burdens, teamwork and other valuable life skills. Just before Christmas, our parents would judge how well we conducted ourselves on all these household chores and farming activities, and they would decide whether we were to receive or miss out the Christmas gift. I am profoundly humbled and thankful for such a self-disciplining time to behave childhood experience which molded my life with everlasting character.

Many years have gone by. We have grown from childish to adult pursuits, being caught up in the business of busy life. I vividly remember some of these wonderful, happy moments when I got my Christmas gift. On the other hand, it is hard to forget a few unpleasant Christmas days when I missed out on my Christmas gift after failing to live up to my loving parents’ expectations during the time to behave period. It was through these childhood experiences that I came to love and treasure the Saviour’s birth and the Christmas season.

Knowing that Christmas is a season, not just one special day, is a delight.

I am thrilled find to find peace in divine understanding—as the Apostle Paul taught, “And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your heart and minds through Christ Jesus” (Philippians 4:7).

Christmas season is indeed a special time for those who believe Him and who seek to know Him. In these unprecedented times we are living in, we can use this time to reflect on our priorities and turn our focus to the Saviour Jesus Christ. The Saviour warmly calls to us, “Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not” (Doctrine and Covenants 6:36).

He gives us an assurance of His everlasting peace. “Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let be afraid” (John 14:27).

I am grateful to know the Saviour‘s birth is a most priceless and timeless gift from our loving Heavenly Father to His children. “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

“For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved” (John 3:16–17).

I am profoundly humbled and thankful to our Heavenly Father for the gift of His beloved Son. As we seek peace from Him, feelings of comfort, borne of the Spirit, that come from God to His faithful children, are indeed a true Christmas gift. We should strive each day to live in such a way that will enable us to experience real and enduring peace at all times. These feelings will come from the Prince of Peace. As the Prophet Isaiah declared: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace” (Isaiah 9:6).

This peace comes with the understanding of the simple yet divine truth that through Him, we can overcome physical and spiritual death. Because of Him, we will live again. He made it possible for us to be forgiven if we repent. He loves us unconditionally. He knows us more than our human capability can comprehend. He understands us even when are going through the most difficult times. He consistently and warmly invites us to seek His everlasting peace, as He did during His earthly ministry. “These things I have spoken to you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world” (John 16:33).

In more recent times, the Lord said, “Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit and you shall have peace in me” (D&C 19:23).

During this Christmas season and throughout the year, may we seek in our hearts to experience that everlasting inner peace that comes from the Prince of Peace. We will then be able to light the world with the peace and happiness the gospel brings. As the Lord has said, “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven” (Matthew 5:16).

I am grateful for the Savior’s birth, I know that His life, His example, and His Atonement constitute a precious gift of never-ending love from our Heavenly Father to all of His children. He is truly The Gift which I will always cherish deeply in my heart.

Laurian P. Balilemwa was called as an Area Seventy in October 2020. He is married to Happiness Kagemulo; they are the parents of two children. He resides in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
