nelson’s Complete Book of

BIBLE MAPS AND CHARTS

A major theme of 1 John is fellowship with God (2:28). John wants his readers

to have assurance of the indwelling God through their abiding relationship with Him. Phrases emphasizing Christian certainty occur five times in this brief epistle.

Against false teachers who denied the reality of the incarnation by saying that

Jesus only appeared to have a human body, John strongly affirms that the Son of God

took to Himself a complete and genuine human nature (4:2, 3). The heresy John confronts here was a forerunner of second-century Gnosticism, which taught that

matter is essentially evil and spirit is essentially good. This dualistic error caused the false teachers to deny the incarnation of Christ. The true God, they taught, could

never indwell a material body of flesh and blood, and therefore the human body that Jesus supposedly possessed was not real.

Another prominent theme in this epistle is love—the word appears more than

thirty-five times in the epistle. The apostle uses the example of Cain to illustrate

what love is not: hatred is murdering in spirit, and it arises from the worldly sphere of death. John then uses the example of Christ to illustrate what love is: love is prac-

ticed in self-sacrifice, not mere profession. This practical expression of love results in assurance before God and answered prayers because the believer is walking in

obedience to God’s commands to believe in Christ and love one another.

The qualiTy Of lOve

The source of love

The effect of love

God personifies love (4:8, 16)

We reflect God’s love in the world (4:7)

We love God; our fear is gone; we keep His commands

God loved us (4:19)

(4:18, 19; 5:3)

God gave His Son for us (4:9, 10) We give our substance for others (3:17; 4:11)

Christ laid down His life for us (3:16) We lay down our lives for others (3:16)

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

1 JOhn aT a GlanCe

focus Basis Of fellowship Behavior Of fellowship

Reference 1:1 –––––––––––––2:15––––––––––––––2:28––––––––––––––––– 5:4 –––––––––––––5:21

Division Conditions For Cautions To Characteristics Of Consequences Of Fellowship

Fellowship Fellowship Fellowship

Topic Meaning Of Fellowship Manifestations Of Fellowship

Abiding In God’s Light

Abiding In God’s Love

Location

Written In Ephesus

Time

c. a.d. 90

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

438

Maps and Charts.indd 438

1/18/10 4:25:51 AM
