Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

The Labors of the Nephite Servants of God in This Land

Amid the trials and the disappointments of life, the doubts and uncertainties that seem, at times, almost to overwhelm us, it is, indeed pleasant to lay aside, for a moment, the tasks of the day and turn to Him who said: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." It is a gentle voice bidding us, "Come, refresh ourselves with the waters of life that abound in the wells of Salvation." "As the dew from heaven" it revives our drooping spirits, and as the "fresh'ning breeze and the clear blue skies" it imparts courage and strength to our tired frames, weary and worn with the toils of everyday life.

As we recall these gracious words of the Lord's, we remember other glorious promises that are to be fulfilled in our behalf. We remember the voice heard by the righteous Lamanites, "Yea, a pleasant voice, as if it were a whisper, saying, Peace, peace be with you, because of your faith in my well beloved, who was from the foundation of the world." (Hel. 5:47) We also remember God's promise to ancient Israel, "Peace, peace be to those that are far and to those that are near." It is good to pause in our struggle for the things of the world and search for that "which maketh us truly rich."

Many of the Saints residing in the Land of Lehi-Nephi had grown exceeding prosperous in prospecting for gold and for silver, which in the land wherein they lived, "did abound most plentifully." Lehi's son, Jacob, upon the death of his elder brother, Nephi, became their spiritual leader and admonished them, saying, "But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God." (Jacob 2:18) In this generation the Lord said through the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D&C 6:7) We can now understand, more fully, the words of those great throngs of good men and women who have already gone our way, "The rewards of righteousness are more to be desired than all the riches of the earth."

It is good to depart from all selfish pursuits and seek Eternal Life. It is good to forsake all sinful pleasures and learn to listen to that still small voice which cometh from the Father, to lead, and to direct, and to warn of things to come. It restores the soul and makes more bright and beautiful, the sunshine that is around us. Too often we neglect "That which is good and what the Lord doth require of us." (Micah 6:8) We become so engrossed in the world and the things thereof that we have little or no time or thought for anything but: "What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?" (3 Ne. 13:31)

When these questions present themselves, it is then we should remember, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4) When we see and recognize this great truth, the words of His servants become as meat and drink to our souls. By them our thirst is slaked, and we hunger no more. They feed us with knowledge and understanding from above, "And where the dark clouds hide the shining, let in the bright sunlight of love."

All the bounties of God express His gracious words: the fair and fragrant flowers that blossom along our way, the ripened grains that overflow our bins, the fruit that gladdens the heart of the husbandman-all are like the comforting words of His holy prophets. They hedge our paths and guide our feet; they raise us when we are fallen; and, whether it be the voice of Abraham, of Isaac, of Jacob, or the prophet teachings of the Jews, the labors of the Nephite servants of God in this land, the Apostolic Message of the Twelve, "Jesus is the Son of God," or the fullness of the Gospel, proclaimed by Joseph, the Seer, their words reveal our Father's Plan of Salvation. Too, they have an eternal authority that is quickly recognized by everyone who desires to know the mind and will of God.

This volume, with its many imperfections, is concerned principally with the labors of the Nephite servants of God in this land. From them we learn more of God's great love and His mercy. We shall see that, "The word of the Lord was verified, which he spake unto" their "fathers, saying that, Inasmuch as ye will keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land." We will hear them proclaim the great truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and we shall know that,

"I am he who speaketh." (Ether 4:8)

As we heed their words and walk in the path to which they point, we will grow in grace and in the knowledge of the glory of Him who created all things. What is more, in the nurture and admonition of God we will increase in the fear of Him and the time will not be far distant until, with joy, we will begin to say, as did the prophet of old,

From now on, henceforth end forever, I will serve God and keep his commandments.

One cannot read the story of Alma, the Younger, his conversion and his missionary experiences, nor of Nephi, the son of Helaman, "one of the greatest prophets who ever trod the earth, or to whom the God of our salvation revealed His holy mind and will" without being more and more constrained to,

"Shout praises to the Holy One of Israel." (1 Ne. 31:13)

We feel that we can do no better than to add here, the last three verses of our Preface to Volume I,

"In the ages that came and went between their times, many holy prophets of the Nephites added and recorded their prophecies and their wisdom upon the plates from which the BOOK OF MORMON was translated. We offer the following comments which is our understanding of, and our testimony to, the great truths they unfold.

"To Elders George Reynolds and Janne M. Sjodahl, who spent much of their time and ability in ferreting out the accumulated evidence herewith presented, we owe the credit for the comments and the biographical notes.

"In humility we offer them, praying our Heavenly Father, by His Spirit, to render them most for our good and greatest for His glory. With full purpose of heart, we dedicate them to all who desire to know the 'Mind and Will of God.'"-Philip C. Reynolds.
