Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

In Righteous Behavior, There is No Such Thing As Time

In the Book of Mormon, frequent mention is made of specific years and of exact times. These dates are given so that the reader may better comprehend the great truths that are being related. They aid the reader to measure the progress of this branch of the House of Israel, and to observe that whenever Israel's children were faithful and called upon the Lord in truth, He was always near them. The beautiful assurance, "Thou wilt not hide Thy face from any generation of Thy children that seek after Thee," is always present.

From the time that Lehi and his family left the land of their inheritance in search of a land which God had prepared for them, the Sacred Record shows that Lehi's posterity were prospered according to their faithfulness. When they were disobedient and unfaithful they were destroyed.

A short time after the death of the valiant servant, Lehi, a serious division took place amongst his children. Some were immovable in keeping the commandments of God while others grew negligent in observing the Law of Moses. To avoid further, and probably more serious misunderstandings between them, the two groups separated.

Those who were firm in serving the Lord, followed Nephi, the fourth son of the Patriarch. Those who were jealous, and envied Nephi's calling as the head of the little company, followed Laman, Lehi's eldest son. Ever after the two peoples were known as Nephites and as Lamanites. The history of both peoples is intertwined with the exhortations of the righteous, and the rejection of these appeals by the wicked. The record shows there were righteous among both peoples. At times, the Lamanites grew to be more righteous than were the Nephites, and then again, the Nephites would listen more attentively to the voices of God's servants, when again, they would begin to prosper in every way.

In the many years covered by the Sacred Record, or from the time he left Jerusalem, the journey of Lehi's colony in the wilderness of Judea, their crossing of the "many waters," their landing in their new home, their growth as a nation, their development under the wise rule of the three great prophet-kings, Mosiah I, his son, Benjamin, and his grandson, Mosiah II, the reign of the Judges, the ministry of Christ, the period when peace filled the hearts of every Nephite and there were no Lamanites, to the great and last civil war in which the Nephites were destroyed, we can feel the presence and the power, and understand the purposes of God.

Anthropologists and historians, place all the peoples of antiquity in a column and give each of them a number. In this way their chronology is made to appear more important than their accomplishments. When they lived thus becomes weightier than how they lived.

Historians have divided time into past and present. Soothsayers attempt to divine that which is to come. But today, after ages have passed and most of what occurred in them forgotten, we feel closer to some who are long since gone, than to many who are now great and powerful. Death, of course, is not the end; "man's immortal spirit never dies but lives on to inspire us, and move us to noble deeds and righteous endeavors, and blessing us evermore." This benediction, though general, is pronounced particularly upon our heads by all the Lord's faithful who have ever lived on this land.

Many regard the facts of history as originating in fortuitous circumstances. Even the Creation, itself, they say, occurred by chance. They forget that, "He commanded and they were created." Lord Chesterfield once said, "I am now as old as Solomon, though not so wise as he; yet I can sympathize with him when he says, 'All is vanity,' for I've been behind the scenes and know that it is so." Chesterfield was a philosopher and a skeptic. Much of his time was spent in company with Voltaire, the great French infidel; it may be that many of his conclusions were influenced thereby. However, all is not vanity. In this Chesterfield was mistaken. The wise old Hebrew king showed that all the labors of man are vain, that they are unenduring, and that the world goes on, not because of what man does, but in spite of it.

The simple truth is, some men's works live longer than do others. The arts and architecture of ancient peoples, their writings, and their ideas of God-many of which have lasted down through the centuries and have moulded our thoughts-bind us closer to "those who are far," than the ages can undo. The pyramids of Egypt, the writings of Moses, the interpretations of the Law by Ezra, the Hebrew scholar and historian who led the Jews back to Jerusalem after the Babylonian captivity, the records of the Nephites, the architecture of Greece, the paintings and sculptures of both Greece and Rome, and the beauty and originality that mark the "Golden Age of the Maya"here in America are the remains of nations and peoples who appeared, upon the horizon of civilization and who became great and dominant before they passed away, leaving behind that which they cherished most highly. From them mankind has learned many lessons. He is the heir of vast stores of knowledge and information that have accumulated from the beginning. He is the possessor of the lessons mankind has learned. These are ties that bind the present and the past and cannot be measured in the terms of an almanac.

There are things more important than time. As an illustration, consider the Jews. The belief in the "Only True and Living God that characterized their religion, gathered together and has cemented the relations of vast hosts of men and women in every land that even the years cannot separate, nor the trials of life, overwhelm. They are an entity that testifies, in a rapidly changing world, that the bonds of thought and the association of ideas are ties that bind stronger than time or place. Today they stand as a monument, "full of iron," to their faith in "the God of their fathers" and, what is still more wonderful, after centuries of sorrow and tribulation, they, in their unshaken zeal fulfill every word that has been spoken by their holy prophets, and their souls will, again, "be as a watered garden" and they will suffer no more. (See Jer. 31:12)

When we recall that two thousand years ago, the Savior, here in America, stooped to bless the little children, and at almost the same time repeated what is, perhaps, the most beautiful portion of sacred literature, "The Sermon on the Mount," we see no gap in the lives of men we do not bridge, and no time in which we may be separate. The past ages "live, and move, and have a being" in the countless things they have bequeathed to us.

Nations do not just come and go. In no annals is there such a thing as chance; history does not even recognize the word. The dictionary says, "By chance means, by accident." But, it is also said, "The accidents of man are the inspirations of God, and the incidents of this life, are the leadings and the guidings of Him who made it." All about us are proofs that this thing is so, and they bear witness that even the sparrow, on the housetop, does not fall except our Father in heaven knows and, "provides for small as well as great."

This thought should imbue each of us in leading our footsteps in our search for truth; then we will walk in paths of beauty and holiness. In the Book of Mormon, we find much to guide our feet when our steps seem uncertain. Therefore, "Let us walk in the light of the Lord," remembering, always, the words of the "elders of the Jews who lived in Jerusalem at the time of Lehi, "In thy light shall we see light."

Though "time marches on," the lessons we learn are lessons that are far more important; it is not when we lived nor where we lived but how we lived that counts.

It is good to know that six hundred years before the birth of our Lord, Lehi and his little company landed somewhere on the Pacific side of South America, but it is far more important to know that they prospered when they kept the commandments of God. It is good to know that four thousand years ago, Moses led the Children of Israel in search of the Promised Land, but it is far more significant for us to know the laws and ordinances that guided them safely there. It is good to know that two thousand years ago, the first Noel resounded amongst the hills and plains of Judea, but it is far more important to know what was taught by Jesus, who was born that night in Bethlehem.

For ages wise men and prophets had told the Jews that they were a chosen people, and that the Messiah would be born of them and in their midst. But, far more important than the age of prophecy, are the words of those who were there when they crucified our Lord, and still more important is the joy recorded of them who beheld the Risen Redeemer, and who heard Him say, "All power is given me in heaven and in earth, Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:18-19)
