Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Reference to Volume I

Volume I, of this COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON is devoted to a discussion of that which is written upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi. Its contents relate to the incidents attending the departure of Lehi and his family from Jerusalem, near the close of the Sixth Century, B.C., to about 400 years later when they had become a numerous people. Lehi left Jerusalem with his wife, Sariah, his sons, and, we may presume, his daughters. They were, before long, joined by Ishmael and members of his family, and a few others. All of them formed the little company that reached the Pacific shores of America, the Land of Zion, about ten years later.

It has been estimated that not more than sixty persons comprised the group, yet in the following generations, whose history is recorded upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi, they, through the laws of natural increase, became a proud nation, skilled in government and religion, the arts and architecture, farming and stockraising, and in all manner of useful occupations. Many of Lehi's descendants were deeply religious. They were strict in keeping the Law of Moses and committed few crimes; they were also industrious.

During this period, and particularly in its beginning, some of the most sublime truths ever vouchsafed to man were providentially made known to them through their divinely-inspired leaders. They had revelations from heaven to guide them; angels ministered unto them; they prospered in material things, and those who were zealous in keeping the Lord's commandments were benefited and blessed.

A short time after Lehi and his people disembarked from the ship they had made, to establish new homes in the Promised Land, and not a very long time after Lehi's death, they separated into two contending factions. Some stayed with Laman, while the others followed Nephi. From them arose great nations called Lamanite and Nephite.

We discussed the progress they made as distinct peoples, yet, we always kept in mind that they were both of the same Hebrew origin. We considered the revelations they received, and which they recorded upon the plates Nephi had made. We gave our understanding of them, and added our testimony to the truthfulness of the principles they make known. We ended the consideration of these people, as their history is outlined upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi, with Amaleki's statement that as he was childless, he would give the plates to King Benjamin.
