Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

The Words of Mormon

Mormon's abridgement of the Larger Plates of Nephi and the Smaller Plates of Nephi

Before we continue our consideration of this grand and glorious revelation, the Book of Mormon, let us pause, here, and acqaint ourselves with the literary construction of the second part of the sacred record. At this point the history of Lehi's descendants, as it is written on the Smaller Plates of Nephi, ends, and Mormon's abridgment of the larger plates of Nephi begins. In both volumes of plates the great saving truths for Salvation are enunciated. One reads these pages of Nephite Scripture with astonishment. They speak boldly and plainly, and speak of Eternal Life in the Kingdom of God. They tell man how he may become eligible to inherit a place in that eternal home. The power and authority of God, the road man must take to enter that Celestial Abode are clearly pointed out.

In pondering the everlasting principles of Salvation, and analyzing each one of them carefully, the doctrines stated in the Smaller Plates of Nephi, become an overwhelming portion in the lives of the Book of Mormon prophets. The inspired historians who wrote upon those plates also recorded their joys and their sorrows, and the vicissitudes through which they passed. They wrote of the mold in which their days had been cast, using the personal pronoun, "I." In translating their words, the Prophet Joseph Smith adopted the same designation.

As we pursue our studies of the Nephite annals we now give ear to a "third party," the abridger, Mormon.

Mormon, after whom the Book of Mormon is named, tells in his own words the wonderful story of the ancient inhabitants of America, the Nephites and the Lamanites. He often enlarges upon the data he transmits with annotations compiled by himself, both historical and exegetical.

Nephi, on separate occasions, was commanded by the Lord to make a set of metal plates from the precious ore that his brother, Jacob, says, "did abound most plentifully" in the land wherein they lived. The purpose for which Nephi was commanded to prepare these plates being, he declared, "That I might engraven upon them the record of my people." (1 Ne. 19:1 ) These plates were identified by him as the Larger Plates of Nephi, and the Smaller Plates of Nephi. They became known to Nephi's followers, and are today, known to us by these same terms. The first plates which Nephi made, the larger plates, were afterwards kept by the kings, or the other rulers, all of whom were placed in that high and holy office by their righteous predecessors. After making the Larger Plates as he was instructed, and before he relinquished them to another, Nephi engraved upon them, "... the record of my father; also our journeyings in the wilderness," and then he adds, "the prophecies of my father; and many of mine own "(Ibid. See also pp. 194 ff. Vol.. I, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON) During the thousand years that the records of the Nephites were kept on the Larger Plates of Nephi, many plates were added to those originally made by Nephi. In fact, when Mormon obtained custody of all the plates that had been used for this purpose, and which had been kept together by Divine Providence,* there were far too many to attempt, wisely, the presentation of them to whom they had been written.

Chapter 1

W of M 1 1 Verse 1

W of M 1 1 I, Mormon. Who was Mormon? Mormon was the last great prophet-general of the Nephite nation, but he is better known to us as the custodian and the compiler of the records of his people. He was the editor of the greater portion of the work named after him and known to us as the Book of Mormon. Mormon's father was a descendant of Nephi. He had the same name as his illustrious son, who was born on the northern continent in 311 A.D.

W of M 1 1 When the younger Mormon was eleven years of age, he went with his father to Zarahemla. A year before their departure south, he became acquainted with Ammaron, the keeper of the sacred records. Because of the iniquity of the people, Ammaron hid these records in a hill in the Land Antum. He informed young Mormon of what he had done, and placed Mormon, who was then only ten years old, in charge of the buried treasure. Ammaron instructed Mormon to go, when he was about twenty-four years of age, to the hill where he had hid them and take the Plates of Nephi, and record thereon, the things he had observed concerning the people. The remainder of the records, and other holy things which he had buried with the plates, Ammaron told Mormon to leave where they were. Mormon did as he was bid, but soon events occurred that altered his instructions.

W of M 1 1 Mormon was, as was Nephi in the beginning, commanded by the Lord to make a set of plates. Upon these plates, he was to condense into an abbreviated account what he found written upon the "Larger Plates of Nephi." Mormon, through the spirit of prophecy and of revelation, discovered many instructions which would be valuable and important to future generations to whom they might come. These teachings Mormon included in his abridgment.

W of M 1 1 In his inspired preface, and written after he had finished his abridgment, Mormon wrote:

W of M 1 1 Wherefore, it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites-Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel;...Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation-

W of M 1 1 ... also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations....

W of M 1 1 Nephi wrote concerning the second set of plates (the Smaller Plates) he made:

W of M 1 1 And I knew not at the time when I made them that I should be commanded of the Lord to make these plates; wherefore, the record of my father, and the genealogy of his fathers, and the more part of all our proceedings in the wilderness are engraven upon those plates of which I have spoken; wherefore, the things that transpired before I made these plates are, of a truth, more particularly made mention upon the first plates.

W of M 1 1 And after I had made these plates by way of commandment, I, Nephi, received a commandment that the ministry and the prophecies, the more plain and precious parts of them, should be written upon these plates; and that the things which were written should be kept for the instruction of my people, who should possess the land, and also for other wise purposes, which purposes are known to the Lord." (1 Ne. 19:2-3)

W of M 1 1 The Smaller Plates relate the story of the departure of Lehi and his family from Jerusalem, 600 B.C., to about 200 years before the birth of the Messiah in Judea.

W of M 1 1 When Nephi grew old, and was about to die, he gave the Smaller Plates to his younger brother, Jacob, who succeeded him as leader of the Saints whose chief city was in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. Of the Smaller Plates, Jacob says,

W of M 1 1 And he gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I should write upon these plates a few of the things which I considered to be most precious; that I should not touch, save it were lightly, concerning the history of this people which are called the people of Nephi.

W of M 1 1 For he said that the history of his people should be engraven upon his other plates, and that I should preserve these plates and hand them down unto my seed from generation to generation.

W of M 1 1 And if there were preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying, that I should engraven the heads of them upon these plates, and touch upon them as much as it were possible, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of our people. (Jacob 1:2-4)

W of M 1 1 It should be noted, here, that, in addition to Nephi, who wrote the greater part of the Smaller Plates, Jacob, and seven of Jacob's descendants also engraved upon them.

W of M 1 1 That the Smaller Plates should be preserved for the benefit and blessing of future generations, is, we may be sure, the purpose for which Nephi was commanded to make them. We shall see in the pages that follow, the fulfillment of the prophetic words of Mormon; we shall see in them, the presence, and the power, and the purposes of God.

W of M 1 2 Verse 2

W of M 1 2 Many hundred years. "And it is many hundred years after the coming of Christ that I deliver these records into the hands of my son." That we may get a better understanding of Mormon's words, let us follow the Nephite people through the events of their last one hundred years. They were a people who had apostatized from the Church of Christ, and who had fallen from the blessed heights of peace, to the bitter depths of unfathomable depravity. Only a short time previously these same people had attained a pinnacle of righteous living that had never before, or since, been reached. For 200 years after the Risen Redeemer ministered to their forefathers in the Land Bountiful, they were bound together by the loftiest ideals of their relationship one to another. They believed that all men were brothers, and that God was the Father of all men. Each sought to do the Savior's bidding, and all walked in the "strait and narrow path" which leads to Eternal Life. It is written in their sacred record that not one of them was lost. They were a happy, holy people; angels descended to minister to their wants, and revelations from heaven were their constant guide. Now, all was changed. The conditions under which they lived were completely reversed. The things they once hated, they now loved. What once they loved, they now despised. Instead of peace, there was war. Instead of brotherly love, there was hatred. Wickedness and abandonment to the meanest purposes of diseased and depraved hearts usurped the place of goodness and purity. Crime, degradation, and filth speeded the course of them who rushed headlong into destruction. Truly, we can see that the Lord, because of their wickedness, had forsaken them. They were left almost alone.

W of M 1 2 In the year A.D. 335, or in the 935th year of the Nephite annals, Mormon obtained the plates as Ammaron had directed. Forty years later he removed them all from the Hill Shim to prevent their destruction by marauding bands of Lamanites. Ten years later Mormon recorded:

W of M 1 2 "... having been commanded of the Lord that I should not suffer the records which had been handed down by our fathers, which were sacred, to fall into the hands of the Lamanites, (for the Lamanites would destroy them) therefore I made this record out of the plates of Nephi, and hid up in the Hill Cumorah all the records which have been entrusted to me by the hand of the Lord, save it were these few plates which I give to my son Moroni. (Morm. 6:6)

W of M 1 2 The year A.D. 322, saw actual warfare break out between the Nephites and the Lamanites for the first time since the Risen Redeemer's appearing among them. A number of battles were fought in which the armies of the Nephites were victorious. These Nephite successes ended, for a while, the awful bloodshed that is incident to open warfare, but in four years the savage contest was renewed. In the interim, iniquity had greatly increased.

W of M 1 2 When the warring began again, the youthful Mormon, only fifteen years of age, was appointed to lead the Nephite armies. In the following two years, disaster after disaster followed the cause for which he led them, and by A.D. 329, rapine, revolution, and carnage, prevailed throughout all the land. For many years warfare continued; first the Nephites overwhelmed their enemy, and then the Lamanites were successful in routing the Nephites, until, at length, both armies were near exhaustion.

W of M 1 2 This resulted in a treaty of peace with the Nephites as one party, and the Lamanites and Gadianton Robbers as the other. The provisions of this treaty, which proved to be only a temporary cessation of hostilities, were that the Nephites possessed the country north of the Isthmus, and the Lamanites, the regions south. A peace of ten years followed this treaty. In A.D. 360, the Lamanites, through their king, again declared war. Again the land was the scene of widespread conflict. For more than twenty years, combat, contention, rapine, pillage, and all the horrors of corrupt and brutal passions filled the entire countryside, which seemed to be centered in the Land Desolation, until the Lamanites drove the Nephites far to the North.

W of M 1 2 This state of things grew increasingly worse, until, at last, when every nerve had been strained for conquest, and every man who could be found was enlisted, the two vast hosts, with unquenchable hatred and unrelenting obstinacy, met at the Hill Cumorah to decide the destiny of half the world. It was the final struggle which was to end in the extermination of one, or both of the races that for nearly a thousand years had conjointly inhabited America. When the days of that final struggle were ended all but twenty-four of the Nephite army had been swept into untimely graves. A few Nephites fled to the land southward. Two of the twenty-four were Mormon, and his son, Moroni, who later tells us, (A.D. 400) that his father had been killed by the Lamanites who hunted and slew every member of the House of Nephi they could find.

W of M 1 2 Mormon was equally as great a religious teacher as he was a soldier. His annotations throughout his compilation of the Sacred Record show this, as do also his instructions and epistles to his son. Shortly before the great and final struggle near the Hill Cumorah, Mormon hid all the plates, or records, entrusted to his care there, save the abridged account of the Larger Plates of Nephi, which he gave to his son, Moroni. Mormon ends his statement regarding the horrors of the then continuing war with a prayer that his son may survive the ferocity of its carnage, and live to write the last chapter of his people's history, and, also to testify, therein, to them of Christ. We may understand, somewhat, Mormon's great character, and his stellar faith and integrity, by the power of his writings. Forgiveness of his apostate people's backsliding, and a desire to aid in their future welfare, was the prayer that filled his heart. He saw their fallen condition in the future, but his faith, upheld and sustained by his own righteousness, is expressed in the hope that what Moroni will write "some day it may profit them." Today, centuries later, we see, with ever-increasing clarity, the answer to Mormon's praying. The descendants of these same people are, today, beginning to obey the voice of Israel's Shepherd, and are coming into His fold. And we ask, "Why not?" when we remember that they, too, are of Israel.

SC W of M 1 3 W of M 1 4 W of M 1 5 W of M 1 6Verses 3-6

SC W of M 1 3 W of M 1 4 W of M 1 5 W of M 1 6I speak somewhat concerning that which I have written. When Mormon had finished or had nearly completed his Abridgment, he found upon examining the great number of plates in his possession, the Smaller Plates of Nephi. On searching them, he found that they contained a part of the history which was included on the Larger Plates of Nephi.11 It is a duplicate account of Nephite history up to the reign of King Benjamin, or up to about 200 B.C. However, there was this difference, the Smaller Plates had engraven on them "many of the words of Nephi," many of the revelations he had received for the guidance of his people, and certain prophecies concerning the "Coming of Christ." These choice portions of their Scriptures were not written upon the Larger Plates. Mormon read them, and re-read them. He was amazed. He hadn't seen the Smaller Plates before. They were so important to him, and, knowing that many of the events they prophesied had already come to pass, and that the remainder must surely do so, he put them with his own abridgment, for, he said, 'They are choice to me; and I know they will be choice unto my brethren."

W of M 1 7Verse 7

W of M 1 7And I do this for a wise purpose. The meaning of this verse is so obvious that it needs no comment. (By way of interpolation, let us note, that many passages of the Book of Mormon are so plain and easy to understand that if we do comment on them, we may be forced to comment on our own comments!) A statement of certain facts may be enlightening to the thoughtful student, when we consider, in conjunction with Mormon's declaration, a few experiences endured by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the translation of the Sacred Record. On April 12 or there about, 1828, Martin Harris, who had aided the Prophet on different occasions, began to write as the Prophet dictated the words of translation.

W of M 1 7In a relatively short time, by June 14, or two months later, the Prophet had translated, and Harris had written, 116 pages of what is commonly known as foolscap paper. It appears that Martin Harris had considerable trouble at home with his wife. Spending so much of his time and money assisting in what she believed to be a hoax, only worsened conditions that were already difficult. In his desire to change her mind, and to prove to her and to others of his relatives and numerous of his friends that Joseph Smith had the "golden plates" which he claimed to possess, he, using undue pressure, persuaded the Prophet to let him show the manuscript they had finished to them. Martin Harris was so insistent that he even asked Joseph to seek the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, for permission so to do. The Prophet did. After several refusals the request was at last granted. The result was that these pages were lost or were stolen from Harris who broke his solemn promise to the Prophet. The gift of translation was, because of this, temporarily taken from Joseph; the sacred records, too, were taken back by the heavenly keeper of them. We may imagine the torment of soul and the suffering that the Prophet experienced. In deep remorse for his sin, he repented his mistake, and the sacred plates and other implements were returned to him by the angel to whom Joseph had been required to surrender them.

W of M 1 7Before the plates were forfeited by Joseph Smith to the Angel Moroni, the Prophet, through the use of the Urim and Thummim, received the following revelation,

W of M 1 7The works, and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught, for God doth not walk in crooked paths; neither doth He turn to the right hand nor to the left; neither doth He vary from that which He hath said; therefore His paths are straight and His course is one eternal round.

W of M 1 7Remember, remember, that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men; for although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet, if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him.

W of M 1 7Behold, you have been entrusted with these things, but how strict were your commandments; and remember also, the promises which were made to you, if you did not transgress them; and behold, how oft you have transgressed the commandments and the laws of God, and have gone on in the persuasion of men; for behold, you should not have feared man more than God, although men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise His words, yet you should have been faithful, and He would have extended His arm, and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary, and He would have been with you in every time of trouble.

W of M 1 7Behold thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou are not aware thou wilt fall; but remember, God is merciful, therefore, repent of that which thou hast done, which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work; except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift.

W of M 1 7And when thou deliverest up that which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man, who has set at naught the counsels of God, and has broken the most sacred promises which were made before God, and has depended upon his own judgment, and boasted in his own wisdom; and this is the reason that thou hast lost thy privileges for a season; for thou hast suffered the counsel of thy director to be trampled upon from the beginning. Nevertheless My work shall go forth; for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come into the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto My people, and to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers; and this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers, whom the Lord has suffered to destroy their brethren, the Nephites, because of their iniquities and their abominations; for this very purpose are these plates preserved which contain these records, that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which He made to His people; and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they might believe the Gospel, and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in His name; and that through their repentance they might be saved. Amen. (History of the Church, Vol.. I, pp. 21-22

W of M 1 7Following Joseph's ordeal, and after the plates had been returned to him, he inquired of the Lord as to the work of the translation. He was granted the following revelation, which then alters the course of future translation.

W of M 1 7Now, behold I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them;

W of M 1 7And you also lost your gift at the same time, and you became darkened;

W of M 1 7Nevertheless, it is now restored unto you again; therefore see that you are faithful and continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation as you have begun.

W of M 1 7Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided to enable you to translate, but be diligent unto the end:

W of M 1 7Pray always that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work.

W of M 1 7Behold, they have sought to destroy you; yea, even the man in whom you have trusted has sought to destroy you.

W of M 1 7And for this cause I said he is a wicked man, for he has sought to take away the things wherewith you have been entrusted, and he has also sought to destroy your gift;

W of M 1 7And because you have delivered the writings into his hands, behold, wicked men have taken them from you;

W of M 1 7Therefore you have delivered them up, yea, that which was sacred, unto wickedness.

W of M 1 7And, behold Satan hath put it into their hearts to alter the words which you have caused to be written, or which you have translated, which have gone out of your hands;

W of M 1 7And, behold, I say unto you, that because they have altered the words, they read contrary from that which you translated and caused to be written,

W of M 1 7And on this wise the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan that he may destroy this work; for he hath put it into their hearts to do this, that by lying they may say they have caught you in the words when you have pretended to translate.

W of M 1 7Verily, I say unto you, that I will not suffer that Satan accomplishes his evil design in this thing;

W of M 1 7Verily, verily, I say unto you, that Satan has a great hold upon their hearts; ...

W of M 1 7Verily, verily, I say unto you, wo be unto him that lieth to deceive, because he supposeth that another lieth to deceive, for such are not exempt from the justice of God.

W of M 1 7Now, behold, they have altered these words, because Satan saith unto them, He hath deceived you-and thus he flattereth them away to do iniquity, to get thee to tempt the Lord thy God.

W of M 1 7Behold, I say unto you that you shall not translate again those words which have gone forth out of your hands; for, behold, they shall not accomplish their evil designs in lying against those words. For, behold, if you should bring forth the same words they will say that you have lied, that you nave pretended to translate, but that you have contradicted yourself;

W of M 1 7And, behold, they will publish this, and Satan will harden the hearts of the people to stir them up to anger against you, that they will not believe my words.

W of M 1 7Thus Satan thinketh to overpower your testimony in this generation:

W of M 1 7But, behold, here is wisdom, and because I show unto you wisdom and give you commandments concerning these things, what you should do, show it not unto the world until you have accomplished the work of translation.

W of M 1 7Marvel not that I said unto you, here is wisdom, show it not unto the world; ..." (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 10)

W of M 1 7Instead of citing only the first paragraph on page xiv, Volume I, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, we publish it in full. It is summed up in a few words.

W of M 1 7The wisdom and foreknowledge of the Lord was manifest in the early part of his latter-day work. Martin Harris, than whom, perhaps, there was none other more ready and willing to help the cause than he, in his anxiety to prove to his friends and his relatives that Joseph Smith had the plates, the possession of which he claimed and the work was of God, prevailed upon the Prophet to let him show the first 116 pages of the manuscript to them. These pages were lost. Were it not for the wisdom of him, "Who knoweth all things," an insurmountable difficulty may have arisen. The pages lost covered the same period of time as was covered by the Smaller Plates. In other words, a double record was had of these times. Can we imagine of anything more wise or more "foreknowing than this?"

W of M 1 8Verse 8

W of M 1 8See Comments verse 2.

W of M 1 9Verse 9

W of M 1 9And now I, Mormon, proceed to finish out my record. After Mormon's soliloquy, or speech to himself, in which he included a prayer to God, "concerning my brethren," that they may once again "be a delightsome people," he affirmed his intention of carrying on the work he had already started. Of his abridgment, he says, "I make it according to the knowledge and the understanding which God has given me." He thus testifies that the record he makes, and the knowledge he transmits, is the truth, and only the truth. How like the sacred oath, attesting our veracity, we affirm, today. The words of our oath, "So help me God," is another way of saying exactly what Mormon said in this verse. This is strong evidence that what he says is, in fact, true. It challenges man to recall if in his experience there ever was a failure when anyone said, "With the help of the Lord," I will do a certain thing. If the resolve comes from a contrite heart, and with full purpose of mind, "There never was a vain attempt, never a wasted effort." We may rely on the record of Mormon.

W of M 1 10Verse 10

W of M 1 10King Benjamin puts both the Larger and the Smaller Plates together. Amaleki was the last to write upon the Smaller Plates. Finding that they were filled with the writings of others who had preceeded him, as well as his own short account, and being childless he gave them to King Benjamin.

W of M 1 10King Benjamin was the second of the great and wise prophet-kings who reigned over the Nephites from Zarahemla, their capital city. His father was Mosiah I, who, being warned by the Lord to flee out of the Land of Lehi-Nephi, took those who would go with him, and led them northward where they found the people of Mulek. The two peoples joined, and chose Mosiah to be their king. In course of time, Mosiah died, and Benjamin, Amaleki recorded, "reigneth in his stead." Benjamin was a "just man before the Lord," says Amaleki, "I shall deliver up these plates unto him." (Omni 25)

W of M 1 10In one of the many explanatory notes which Mormon inserts in the record he makes, he informs us that after Amaleki had placed the Smaller Plates of Nephi in the possession of King Benjamin, he, that is King Benjamin, put them with the other, or the Larger Plates. The Larger Plates contained what we have called, the secular history of the Nephite people. Thus, the two sets of plates, coming into the hands of one man, did what had not been done since Nephi had made them hundreds of years before. King Benjamin thus became the first to compile the full history of the people upon one set of plates. In this, we see the purposes of God, for together, in them, we will observe that the profane and the religious history combined into one complete account, the development of the Nephite people as one great nation.

W of M 1 11Verse 11

W of M 1 11And they were handed down from King Benjamin, from generation to generation until they have fallen into my hands. The Smaller Plates of Nephi containing the sacred annals of Nephi's people were not entirely filled with engravings until about 200 years before Christ. They were started by Nephi between 570-550 B.C. But the history they contain goes back to the time when Lehi left Jerusalem, or 600 B.C. So in reality they contain the history of God's dealings with that branch of the House of Israel for about four hundred years.

W of M 1 11When Nephi died, he transferred these sacred records to the care of his brother, Jacob. From then until Moroni finally hid them in the Hill Cumorah, they continued in the hands of four families, who had charge of them as near as can be told from the abridgment. We may summarize as follows: Jacob and his descendants held them from 546 B.C. to about 200 B.C., when they were transferred to King Benjamin. He, with his son, Mosiah, held them until 91 B.C., at which time they were given into the care of Alma, the Chief Judge. Alma and his posterity retained them until 320 years after the advent of the Messiah. After these, Mormon and Moroni were the custodians until the close of the record in the year A.D. 420.

W of M 1 11Here are the facts concerning the custodianship of the sacred plates from the foregoing statement of the Prophet Mormon. Beginning with Amaleki, he gave the plates to King Benjamin about 200 B.C. Of King Benjamin, we read "... that when King Benjamin had made an end of all these things, and had consecrated his son Mosiah to be a ruler and a king over his people, and he had given him all the charges concerning the kingdom ..." (Mosiah 6:3) Which "charges" we may declare, was to be the keeper of the sacred things, including the plates. We read further in the account of Mosiah's reign, "He took the plates of brass, and all the things which he had kept, and conferred them upon Alma, who was the son of Alma; yea, all the records ...." (Mosiah 28:20) This was in 91 B.C.

W of M 1 11Alma, about seventeen years later, entrusted the plates to his son, Helaman. It is recorded in the Book of Alma, 37:1-2, "And now, my son Helaman, I command you that ye take the records which have been entrusted with me; And I also command you that you keep a record of this people, according as I have done, upon the Plates of Nephi, and keep all these things sacred which I have kept, even as I have kept them; for it is for a wise purpose that they are kept."

W of M 1 11In the year 544 of the Nephite Annals, or fifty-seven years before the birth of Christ, Helaman died, and Shiblon, his brother, we are told, "...took possession of these sacred things which had been delivered unto Helaman by Alma." (Alma 63:1)

W of M 1 11Four years later, or 53 B.C., Shiblon died, and, "It became expedient for Shiblon to confer those sacred things, before his death, upon the son of Helaman, being called after the name of his father." (Alma 63:11)

W of M 1 11In 39 B.C., "Helaman died, and his eldest son Nephi began to reign in his stead." (Hel. 3:37) Of him it is written:

W of M 1 11And Nephi, the son of Helaman, had departed out of the land of Zarahemla, giving charge to his son Nephi, who was his eldest son, concerning the plates of brass, and all the records which had been kept, and all those things which had been kept sacred from the departure of Lehi out of Jerusalem. Then he departed out of the land, and whither he went, no man knoweth; and his son Nephi did keep the records in his stead, yea, the record of this people. (3 Ne. 1:2-3)

W of M 1 11Nephi, the son of Nephi and the grandson of Helaman, thus, shortly before the birth of the Savior in Bethlehem of Judea, received the Sacred Records with instructions as to their care. This second Nephi was chosen by the Risen Redeemer to be a member of the Twelve whom He named. Nephi, the second, kept the plates in his possession until after the glorious appearing of the Savior, when he gave them into the care of his son, who was also named Nephi. He, presumably, was a young man at that time, for he kept them seventy-six years, or until A.D. 110, when a son, named Amos received them. "And he kept it eighty and four years,"..."and he kept it upon the plates of Nephi also." (4 Ne. 20, 19)

W of M 1 11And it came to pass that Amos died also (and it was an hundred and ninety and four years from the coming of Christ) and his son Amos kept the record in his stead; and he also kept the record upon the plates of Nephi;...(4 1 Ne. 21)

W of M 1 11And it came to pass that after three hundred and five years had passed away, (and the people did still remain in wickedness) Amos died; and his brother, Ammaron, did keep the records in his stead. (4 Ne. 47)

W of M 1 11Ammaron hid up all the plates in the Hill Shim. (4 Ne. 48-49) Ammaron gave them to Mormon. (Morm. 1:2-3)

W of M 1 11 Mormon obtained the plates as Ammaron had directed. (Morm. 4:23)

W of M 1 11 Mormon hid all the records in the Hill Cumorah, save the abridged ones, which he gave to his son, Moroni. (Morm. 6:6)

W of M 1 11 Moroni said, "I am the son of Mormon.... And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord; ..." (Morm. 8:14) And I seal up these records, ..." (Moro. 10:2)

W of M 1 11The following are the names of the Nephite historians, with the times during which they held the plates. Where a blank space is noted, the information is not given in the Book of Mormon, and therefore can only be guessed at, which we choose not to do.

W of M 1 11Nephi, from ___ to 546 B.C.

W of M 1 11Jacob, from 546 to ___.

W of M 1 11Enos, from ___ to 422.

W of M 1 11Jarom, from 422 to 362.

W of M 1 11Omni, from 362 to 318.

W of M 1 11Amaron, from 318 to 280.

W of M 1 11Chemish, from 280 to ___.

W of M 1 11Abinadom, from ___ to ___.

W of M 1 11Amaleki, from ___ to 200 (circa).

W of M 1 11King Benjamin, from 200 to 125.

W of M 1 11King Mosiah, from 125 to 91.

W of M 1 11Alma, the Younger, from 91 to 73.

W of M 1 11Helaman, the Elder, from 73 to 57.

W of M 1 11Shiblon, from 57 to 53.

W of M 1 11Helaman, the Younger, from 53 to 39.

W of M 1 11Nephi, from 39 to 1.

W of M 1 11Nephi, the Disciple, from 1 to A.D. 34.

W of M 1 11Nephi, the son of the Disciple, 34 to 110.

W of M 1 11Amos, from 110 to 194.

W of M 1 11Amos, the Younger, from 194 to 306.

W of M 1 11Ammaron, from 306 to 320.

W of M 1 11Mormon, from 320 to 385.

W of M 1 11Moroni, from 385 to 420. Record closes.

W of M 1 12Verse 12

W of M 1 12Now, concerning this King Benjamin. A mighty man in the midst of Israel, was Benjamin. Blessed were the people over whom he reigned, for he governed them in righteousness, and for their welfare; he indeed labored with all the might of his body and all the faculty of his soul. Holy and pure in his individual life, he was ministered to by angels, and was often the recipient of revelations from on high.

SC W of M 1 13 W of M 1 14Verses 13-14

SC W of M 1 13 W of M 1 14And in the strength of the Lord they did contend against the enemy. The reign of King Benjamin was a long one when he died in Zarahemla at a very advanced age. Some time during his tenure upon the throne, the aggressive Lamanites, not content with occupying the Land of Nephi, actually followed the Nephites into the Land of Zarahemla, and invaded that also. The war that followed was a bloody one. King Benjamin led his forces, and with his own strong arm slew many of the enemy. He was armed with the historic Sword of Laban, which appears to have been handed down from monarch to monarch from the day that Nephi first wielded it. King Benjamin was ultimately successful in driving the invading Lamanites out of all the regions belonging to his people. Many thousands of the Lamanites were slain.

SC W of M 1 15 W of M 1 16 W of M 1 17 W of M 1 18Verses 15-18

SC W of M 1 15 W of M 1 16 W of M 1 17 W of M 1 18False Christs, and false teachers, quieted. The reign of King Benjamin was also troubled with various religious impostors, false Christs, and pretended prophets, who, with an effervescent zeal, caused much dissension among the people, and, by their preachments, induced some to apostatize. This was a source of great sorrow to King Benjamin, who, himself, was like a father to them, and who also labored with his own hands to set a good example to those over whom he ruled.

SC W of M 1 15 W of M 1 16 W of M 1 17 W of M 1 18However, with the aid of many of the righteous men who dwelt in Zarahemla, King Benjamin exposed to the understanding of his people, the false claims of the self-styled Messiahs, the untrue assertions of the pseudo-prophets, and the hollow teachings of them who attempted to belie the truth. In doing this, unity was restored throughout all the land, peace of mind was re-established, and the worship of the God of Israel, in its correct form, was practised by those who bowed only to the True and Living God. In the event that any of the impostors broke the Nephite law, they were tried, and if found guilty, were punished according to its demands. It must be remembered that freedom of conscience was absolutely protected among the Nephites, and even the civil law was administered with a showing of great mercy in the days of Benjamin, and of his father, Mosiah I, and of his son, Mosiah II.

SC W of M 1 15 W of M 1 16 W of M 1 17 W of M 1 18It is not so stated, but we may presume, that, what we call a "revival in religion" entered the spiritual thinking of many of those lately-consolidated people. To many of them, only recently were the glories of God's Plan of Salvation made known. The coming of the Messiah to dwell among the children of man was, for them, an event that they anxiously looked forward to. Their hearts were filled with joyous hope. They looked beyond the horizon for that day to come. We may imagine that they, being in such a mental and spiritual condition, were readily susceptible to the deceptions of those who cried, "Lo, the Christ is come!" or, "Behold, a great prophet hath arisen." We may trace this peculiar form of spiritual activity to an increased desire on their part to learn, and it shows a keen interest in religion among them. To it, we may attribute the frequency with which false prophets troubled the reign of King Benjamin. But, says Mormon, "For behold, King Benjamin was a holy man," and, as we have said, that with the help of many righteous men who did support him, he shut their mouths, and did again "establish peace in the land."

Notes

A Great Number of Plates. That which follows answers the question frequently asked, "What became of the Book of Mormon Plates?" President Brigham Young, at a special conference held at Farmington, Utah, June 17, 1877, on which occasion the Davis Stake of Zion was organized, said,

When Joseph got the Plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the Hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver Cowdery says that when Joseph and he went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says that he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun or artificial light, but it was as light as day. They laid the Plates on a table. It was a large table that stood in the middle of the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than many wagon loads. They were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there, the Sword of Laban hung upon the wall, but when they went again, it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the Gold Plates. It was unsheathed, and on it was written these words, "This Sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the Kingdom of our God and His Christ." (Journal of Discourses, Vol.. 19, p. 38)

President Young, in the same discourse, said that he had this from Oliver Cowdery, himself, and from others familiar with the incident related. "Don Carlos Smith, he says, was a witness to these things.

The Book of Mosiah
