Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 1

Mosiah 1 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 1 1 And now there was no more contention in all the Land of Zarahemla. During the long reign of King Benjamin, there was considerable strife and contention between the Nephites and the Lamanites, (W of M 14) and also among his own people. (Ibid 16) At length, however, peace was established throughout the Land of Zarahemla. The most notable event of King Benjamin's extended and benevolent reign was a great spiritual revival when his entire people solemnly entered into a covenant to serve the Lord and keep His commandments.

Mosiah 1 2 Verse 2

Mosiah 1 2 Benjamin's three sons taught that thereby they might become men of understanding. The names of the three were, Mosiah, who became king, Helorum, and Helaman. They were instructed, at the bidding of their father, in all the learning of their people, both sacred and secular, and in the history of the Nephites, with especial reference to God's dealings with, and His preserving care over them. This is the only mention in the Book of Mormon of Helorum and Helaman.

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5Verse 3-5

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5The records which were engraven on the Plates of Brass. Here, between the lines, we read a remarkable testimony to the truth we find expressed in the history of the Mulekites. In their great hurry to escape from Jerusalem and the ravages of a conquering enemy who showed no pity, the forefathers of these people failed to take with them a copy of the Hebrew Scriptures as Lehi had done a short while before.

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5At the time Mosiah I found the descendants of the Jewish prince, Mulek, dwelling in their city, Zarahemla, which was situated on the west banks of the River Sidon, they were a very numerous, but an unenlightened people. Their principal business seems to have been warfare, and consequently many had fallen by the sword. Without the light of God's Holy Word to guide them, and bereft of the exhortations of His holy prophets, the Mulekites had continued to sink deeper and deeper into abysmal ignorance of the glories and the mysteries of God. Their language was corrupted because they had no records to preserve their mother tongue. Many even denied the existence of their Creator. However, Mormon tells us in his abridgment that they did exceedingly rejoice, and, that their King, Zarahemla, did also rejoice because the Lord had sent the people of Mosiah with the Plates of Brass "which contained the record of the Jews." We may imagine the joy of the Mulekites at this fresh expression of Divine love. Benjamin told his sons that it was because their Nephite forefathers brought these plates out of Jerusalem with them that they always had the commandments of God before their eyes. These plates, which are sometimes called the Plates of Laban, had engraved upon them, in Egyptian characters, the history of God's dealings with those from whom the Lehites had descended. Lehi, it must be remembered, was a scholar. In some way he had come into contact with the Egyptians; he could read their writings; he understood their language, and he was versed in the learning of their wise men.

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5It must also be remembered that Egypt was then the greatest and the first in nearly all the pursuits of life. In architecture, in astronomy, in commerce, and in government, its people excelled. Lehi could read what was engraven upon the Plates of Brass. He was not forced to leave to a sometimes faulty memory those things that had been written concerning the handiwork of God; nor, was he compelled to rely on hearsay. He conveyed to all his children, and thus to all the generations which followed him, the knowledge he had obtained, and those things he had learned through actual communion with the people of Egypt. His knowledge and understanding of the ways of the Lord was a mighty bastion in the defense of his faith, and proved to be a firm foundation in the instruction of his children. He read to them from these plates how God had always preserved His righteous children from the attacks of the adversary, and that, not by learning and not by might, but by wisdom in keeping the commandments of God, did man know Him.

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5Without the knowledge these plates contained, King Benjamin emphatically told his sons, they, too, would have become like the Lamanites who knew nothing of the glories of God, and who did not believe them even when they are taught them. This deplorable condition was because of the traditions of the Lamanite fathers who had neglected these sacred things.

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5In addition to the Book of Moses,12 which these plates contained, they had engraved on them, the prophecies of Isaiah and a history of the Jews by Samuel and other Hebrew prophets down to the reign of Zedekiah. This included, presumably, the "Psalms of David" and the "Wisdom of Solomon." These represented the "Golden Age of Hebrew Literature."

SC Mosiah 1 3 Mosiah 1 4 Mosiah 1 5We may understand, somewhat, of the beauty and the force of the teachings they found written thereon, when we read the wonderful words of the Prophet Samuel. It appears that Saul, the king of the Jews, offered many sacrifices in the hope he would mitigate the severity of any punishment for the disobedience of which he was guilty. Samuel said, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." (1 Sam. 15:22) The wise King Solomon said, "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man." (Eccl. 12:13)

SC Mosiah 1 6 Mosiah 1 7 Mosiah 1 8Verses 6-8

SC Mosiah 1 6 Mosiah 1 7 Mosiah 1 8Behold, also the Plates of Nephi. King Benjamin, besides exhorting his sons to keep the Lord's commandments, testified to them of the truthfulness of the things written on them, (the Plates of Brass) and he further confirmed the truth of that which is contained upon the Plates of Nephi. "They are true," he said, "and we may know of their surety because we have them before our eyes." In other words, "We can see them; we can handle them, and now I will see to it that you receive all the learning and understanding necessary to know that they tell the truth." "Search them diligently, that ye may profit thereby"; "Keep the commandments of God, that ye may prosper in the land according to the promises which the Lord made unto our fathers." (2 Ne. 1:20)

Mosiah 1 9Verse 9

Mosiah 1 9King Benjamin waxed old. The education of King Benjamin's sons may have been, and probably was, over a period of several years, for we are told that when they had been taught "in all the language of his fathers, that thereby they might become men of understanding," King Benjamin saw that he must shortly die. The Sacred Record says, "He waxed old." Waxed old, means grew old, and although the word wax is seldom in modern-day favor, it is good English so to use it. Feeling the infirmities of great age, and realizing that each passing year added burdens to the weight he already carried, King Benjamin deemed it wise to appoint one of his sons to be ruler in his stead.

Mosiah 1 10Verse 10

Mosiah 1 10King Benjamin had Mosiah brought before him. King Benjamin knew that his son Mosiah was a just and an upright person. Through him, the king called a conference of all the Saints living in Zarahemla, and also the people over whom Mosiah presided under him. One purpose in having them gather together was, "On the morrow I shall proclaim unto this my people out of mine own mouth that thou art a king and a ruler over this people "On the morrow, does not necessarily mean tomorrow, but may mean presently, or at an early date.

Mosiah 1 10"On the Morrow." The observation has been made that Zarahemla must have been a small country, if all the people in it could have been notified one day to come to conference at the capital the next day. But that is a too hasty conclusion. For, while on the morrow certainly can mean the following twenty-four hours, it also, and very often or frequently, stands for soon or shortly. For instance, the Lord commanded Lehi to "take his journey" from the Valley of Lemuel "on the morrow." (1 Ne. 16:9) He obeyed by beginning his preparations, but these were not made in a day. (1 Ne. 16:9-12) The same observation is true of the departure of the travelers from the Land Bountiful in Arabia. (l 1 Ne. 18:5-6) A ship is not loaded and provisioned in one day. In 3 Ne. 1:13 we read that the Lord promised the Prophet Nephi, "On the morrow come I into the world." The people understood that. "They began to know that the Son of God must shortly appear." (Verse 17) Then again, when Jesus told His disciples: "Take therefore no thought for the morrow (3 Ne. 13:24) he did not mean for the next twenty-four hours, but for the future in general. The story in Mosiah shows that this is the meaning of the phrase there. The people heard the proclamation, and prepared to keep its obligations.

SC Mosiah 1 11 Mosiah 1 12Verses 11-12

SC Mosiah 1 11 Mosiah 1 12I shall give this people a name. Another purpose of King Benjamin in calling this conference of all the people over whom he reigned, was, that upon them he promised to confer a name, which because of their integrity and diligence in serving the Lord, they had merited. This name would distinguish them from all other people; it would be a sign to the Lamanites, and the Zoramites, and every other "ite" that, here, the people of King Benjamin served the Lord, that here, they kept the commandments of God. It is of great interest to us to know that as long as they did not transgress the laws of God, that name would always remain with them. That name was yet to be given them.

SC Mosiah 1 13 Mosiah 1 14Verses 13-14

SC Mosiah 1 13 Mosiah 1 14If this...favored people...should fall into transgression...the Lord will deliver them up. The prophet-king foretells the fate of any people, who, having known the Lord, His marvelous ways, and His might, apostatize therefrom, and, who, thus knowingly transgress His laws. "He will deliver them up." Without the strength of His sustaining arm to uphold them, they will become weak, like the Lamanites, who at that time were an idle and a degenerate people. The Lord will not preserve the followers of Laman in their condition of slothfulness, as He had protected the Nephites when they obeyed His laws. Otherwise, King Benjamin says, "They must have fallen into the hands of the Lamanites, and become the victims to their hatred."

SC Mosiah 1 13 Mosiah 1 14King Benjamin recognized the fact that if their forefathers had not repented of evil ways and had not coupled with it a determination to do the Lord's will, they would have been left to their own devices, which at strongest were not very strong. He does not say, but, we know that when left alone, man's utmost strength is absolute weakness, and his wisdom but a mixture of foolishness and folly, when compared to the wisdom and the understanding of the Lord. Frequently the Nephite historians point to this truth expressed here in the words of King Benjamin!

SC Mosiah 1 15 Mosiah 1 16 Mosiah 1 17Verses 15-17

SC Mosiah 1 15 Mosiah 1 16 Mosiah 1 17He gave Mosiah charge of all the affairs of the kingdom. The abdication of King Benjamin was made less unpleasant, and the assumption of the kingly prerogatives by Mosiah made more impressive by the outgoing ruler's handing over to his son and successor, the Plates of Brass, the Plates of Nephi, the Sword of Laban, and the Liahona. Benjamin, here, relates to Mosiah the story of the Liahona; how it worked only by the faith of those of their fathers who gave heed to Him, and were diligent in serving the Lord. (For a discussion of the Liahona, See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol.. I, pp. 187, 188, 274.)

Mosiah 1 18Verse 18

Mosiah 1 18 Mosiah did as his father commanded him. Without any delay, Mosiah proceeded to do the things his father desired. He sent a proclamation throughout all the land for the people to meet on the morrow in conference at the temple that had been erected in Zarahemla, where with great joy, the king, as directed by the Lord, would appoint Mosiah to be his successor on the Nephite throne.

Mosiah 1 18King Benjamin had much to declare to his subjects. A spirit of rejoicing spread throughout the land, and an anticipated spiritual feast, caused them, in vast numbers, to respond to the call of King Benjamin. What his message was, and the name he gave to his people, we, in this COMMENTARY, take great joy in relating.

Benjamin

The second of the three prophet-kings of the Nephites who reigned in the Land of Zarahemla. He was the son of Mosiah I, and the father of Mosiah II, and like them, was most probably a seer. He undoubtedly held the priesthood, as he received the ministrations of angels, was favored with revelations from the Lord, and organized the Church of Jesus Christ among his people. He was also the custodian of the Sacred Record, etc., having received them from Amaleki, who was childless. The time and place of his birth is not given in the holy writings, though it was probably in the Land of Nephi. He lived to a great age, and died full of peace and honor in Zarahemla, 122 B.C. He is illustrious for the justice and mercy with which he administered the law, for his great devotion to God, and for the love he had for his people. One of his most outstanding qualities was the frugality and simplicity of his personal life which he always maintained. Three of his sons are mentioned by name, Mosiah, Heloram, and Helaman, whom he caused to be educated in all the learning of his fathers, giving special attention to their religious training, and instruction in the history of God's dealings with their forefathers.

The reign of Benjamin was not one of uninterrupted peace. Sometimes during its continuance the aggressive Lamanites, not content with occupying the Land of Nephi, actually followed the Nephites into the Land of Zarahemla, and invaded that also. The war was a fierce one. King Benjamin led his forces, armed with the historic sword of Laban, and with it slew many of the enemy. Benjamin was ultimately successful in driving the invading hosts out of all the regions occupied by his people, with a loss to the Lamanites of many thousands of warriors slain.

The reign of King Benjamin was also troubled with various religious impostors, false Christs, pretended Messiahs and prophets, who caused apostasy and dissensions among the people, much to the sorrow of the good king. However, by the aid of some of the many righteous men who dwelt in his dominions, he exposed the heresies, made manifest the falsity of the claims of the self-styled messiahs and prophets, and restored unity, and faith, and worship, among his subjects, and in such cases where these innovators had broken the civil law, they were arraigned, tried, and punished by that law.

We may presume that the original inhabitants of Zarahemla, just awakening to a newness of religious life, were particularly subject to the influence brought by these impostors. They had but lately learned the mysteries of the Plan of Salvation, and of the coming of the Messiah to dwell among the sons of men. The glory and the beauty of this divine advent filled their new-born souls with joyous hope. Looking forward for the arrival of that happy day, with their first love undiminished and their zeal unslackened, they were especially open to the deceptions of those who cried, "Lo, the Christ is come!" or, "Behold, a great prophet hath arisen!"

There was another class, who, moved by the spirit of unrest, were a source of perplexity to the king. They were those who, having left the Land of Nephi with the righteous, still permitted their thoughts and affections to be drawn towards their former homes and old associations. The natural consequence was that they were constantly agitating the idea of organizing expeditions to visit their old homes. The first of these that actually started, of which we have an account, fought among themselves with such fury that all were slain except fifty men, who, in shame and, sorrow, returned to Zarahemla to recount the miserable end of their expedition. Yet some remained unsatisfied and under the leadership of a man named Zeniff another company started on the ill-advised journey. Nothing was heard of them while Benjamin reigned.

When King Benjamin was well stricken with years, the Lord directed him to consecrate his son, Mosiah, to be his successor on the Nephite throne. Feeling that age was impairing his energies, he directed his son to gather the people together at the temple that had been erected in Zarahemla, and he would give them his parting instructions. (125 B.C.) Agreeable to this call the people gathered at the temple, but so numerous had they grown that it was too small to hold them. They also brought with them the firstlings of their flocks that they might offer sacrifices and burn offerings according to the Mosaic law. As the assembled thousands could not get inside the temple, they pitched their tents by families, every one with its door towards the building, and the king had a tower erected near the temple from which he spoke.

The teachings of King Benjamin at these meetings were some of the most divine and glorious ever uttered by man. He preached to his hearers the pure principles of the Gospel-the duty which man owed to his God, and to his fellows. He also told them how he had been visited by an angel, and what wonderful things the angel had shown him concerning the coming of the God of Israel to dwell with men in the flesh.

When King Benjamin had made an end of speaking the words which had been delivered to him by the angel, he observed that the power of his testimony had so worked upon the Nephites that they, in the deep sense of their own unworthiness, had fallen to the ground. Then and there, they cried out confessing their faith in the coming Messiah, and pleading that through his atoning blood they might receive the forgiveness of their sins, and that their hearts might be purified. After they had lifted their deep-felt cry to heaven, the Spirit of the Lord came down upon them, and because of their exceeding faith, they received a remission of their sins. When the king had finished his discourse he gave them a new name, because of the covenant they desired to make, which thing he greatly desired. The name they were to bear forever after was the name of Christ, which should never be blotted out except through transgression. Thus, was established the first Christian Church in Zarahemla (125 B.C.), for every soul who heard these teachings (except the little children who could not understand) entered into this sacred covenant with God, which most of them kept and faithfully observed to the end of their mortal lives.

King Benjamin's truly royal work was now done. He had lived to bring his people into communion with their Creator; his spirit was full of heavenly joy, but his body trembled under the weight of many years. So before he dismissed the multitude, he consecrated his son, Mosiah, to be their king, appointed priests to instruct the people in the ways of the Lord, and with his patriarchal blessing dismissed his subjects. Then, according to their respective families they all departed for their own homes.

Mosiah now reigned in his father's stead, while Benjamin, beloved and honored, remained yet another three years on the earth before he returned to the presence of his Father in Heaven.

Mosiah II

The third king of the Nephites in the land of Zarahemla where he was born B.C. 154; he was consecrated king by his father Benjamin B.C. 124 and died in Zarahemla, B.C. 91, aged 63 years. He came to the throne under most happy circumstances: he had the full confidence of his subjects who were a righteous, God-fearing people, the Lamanites were at peace with the Nephites and internal development and prosperity characterized the condition of his kingdom. Individually he proved to be one of the greatest and best of kings; his whole energies were devoted to the good of his people, and they loved him with an intensity of affection scarcely equaled in the annals of any race. In the fourth year of his reign the expedition under Ammon started which resulted in the return to Zarahemla of nearly all the living descendants of the company that left under Zeniff to re-occupy the land of Lehi-Nephi. The leader of one of these companies was Alma, the elder, whom Mosiah called to take charge of the church in Zarahemla. Soon after the arrival of these fugitives from the land of Nephi, Mosiah gathered all the people together and had them made acquainted with the vicissitudes and sorrows through which the newcomers had passed since their fathers left Zarahemla. Also taking advantage of the presence of so many of his subjects he addressed them on such matters as he deemed necessary and desirable. At his request Alma also taught them. When assembled in large bodies Alma went from one multitude to another preaching repentance and faith in the Lord; afterwards, by Mosiah's direction, he went through the land organizing and establishing churches and ordaining priests and teachers over every church. Thus were seven churches established at this time in the land of Zarahemla.

In the course of years many of the rising generation gave no heed to the word of God. These were mostly such as were too young to enter into covenant with the Lord at the time that Benjamin anointed Mosiah to be his successor. Not only did they themselves reject the doctrines of the atonement, the resurrection and other Gospel principles but they led away many who were members of the Church and sorely persecuted those who remained faithful to God and his laws. Encouraged by the fact that four of Mosiah's sons and one of Alma's were leaders in this crusade they paid no attention to the national law which guaranteed freedom of conscience to all men alike. By divine interposition, through a holy angel, these young men were turned from the error of their way and afterwards became strong pillars in the church and messengers of salvation to both Nephites and Lamanites. The four sons of Mosiah (named Aaron, Ammon, Omner and Himni) not content with their zealous labors among their countrymen proposed to go and labor among the Lamanites. The good king, like many of his subjects, did not favorably regard this proposal. He feared for the lives of his sons but having inquired of the Lord and received assurances of heavenly protection he gladly let them go.

Mosiah now felt that it was time that the question of the succession of the throne should be settled. In his magnanimity he sent among the people to learn whom they would have for their king. The people chose his son Aaron but Aaron would not accept the royal power, his heart was set upon the conversion of his fellow-men to the knowledge of the Gospel. This refusal troubled the mind of Mosiah; he apprehended difficulties if Aaron at some future time should change his mind and demand his rights. Mosiah therefore issued another address in which he proposed to retain the kingdom during the remainder of his life after which the Nephites should be governed by judges elected by themselves. In other respects also Mosiah consented to newly arrange the affairs of the people and, if we may so express it, to codify the laws. This code became the constitution of the nation under the rule of the Judges which limited the powers of the officials and guaranteed the rights of the people. This compilation was acknowledged by the people whereupon the historian remarks "Therefore they were obliged to abide by the laws which he had made" and from that time they became supreme throughout the nation. It is stated in another place that this change was made by the direct command of Jehovah. But besides being a king Mosiah was also a seer. The gift of interpreting strange tongues and languages was his. By this gift he translated from the twenty-four plates of gold, found by the people of King Limhi, the record of the Jaredites. No wonder that a man possessed of such gifts, so just and merciful in the administration of the law, so perfect in his private life, should be esteemed more than any man by his subjects and that they waxed strong in their love towards him. As a king he was a father to them but as a prophet, seer and revelator he was the source from whence divine wisdom flowed unto them.

His sons having started on their missions to the Lamanites (B.C. 91) Mosiah gave the sacred plates and the associate holy things into the care of the younger Alma and the same year passed away to the rest of the Just.
