Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 2

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8Verses 1-8

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8Multitudes being so great, King Benjamin built a tower so all could hear his words. The people heard the proclamation; then they began to gather in Zarahemla on the day appointed. They brought with them the firstlings of their flocks and their choicest young bullocks so that they might offer sacrifices and burnt offerings according to the Law of Moses, which they had been taught to observe. They came in such numbers that they were not to be counted. The king expected no such a multitude. Under the wise rule of King Benjamin, they had prospered greatly, both in numbers and in material.

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8We may surmise the great response to the call of Mosiah. The people loved King Benjamin who had been as a father to them. He had protected them when, from within and without, their enemies assailed them with false claims to proper conduct. He guided them aright. Now he was bowed down with the weight of many years and trembled under the responsibilities he carried, and would soon go to his God who had, in wisdom, appointed him to be their king. They welcomed the time when they could meet together and, as one, hear from his own lips, the words telling of God's wonderful ways. They hoped to be where they could hear his parting instructions. They gathered in Zarahemla with songs of joy and thanksgiving. All were imbued with the holy impulse, "I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation." "Thanks be to God," their historian wrote, "who had brought them out of Jerusalem, and who had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, and had appointed just men to be their teachers, and also a just man to be their king."

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8They rejoiced that Benjamin was their king. By example and by precept he had taught them to keep the laws of God, that thereby they might take delight in serving the Lord, "and be filled with love towards God and all men." Their hearts overflowed with gratitude to the Great Giver of all these things. "O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together," (Ps. 34:3) was the righteous desire of their hearts, and in the end, the purpose of the conference they held in Zarahemla.

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8May we suggest the advice given to Moses by his father-in-law, Jethro, the priest of Midian, concerning the Children of Israel, which advice Moses accepted. Jethro said, "Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers " (Ex. 18:21) Such a man was Benjamin!

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8Agreeable to the call that was made, the people, as we have noted, gathered in Zarahemla. So many came that the temple could not hold them. The plan had been to hold the general assemblies within its walls. So that more of those attending the sessions could hear his instructions, King Benjamin had a tower, or platform, erected, from which he spoke. This proved not to be enough, although the many visitors there pitched their tents around the temple lot, each tent with its opening facing the sacred building so that the people there could remain within their tents and hear what might be said. Even this arrangement was not sufficient to accommodate everyone. To instruct them King Benjamin had his words written down and distributed among those who were not within "sound of his voice, that they might also receive his words."

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8The sermons preached by King Benjamin at these meetings were some of the most divine and glorious recorded in the sacred annals of any people. They show, in his own life, the development of the loftiest conception of man's relationship to God, that is, "The Fatherhood of God, and the brotherhood of man."

SC Mosiah 2 1 Mosiah 2 2 Mosiah 2 3 Mosiah 2 4 Mosiah 2 5 Mosiah 2 6 Mosiah 2 7 Mosiah 2 8The realization of that great truth came to him through his service to others. He testified to them that God had kept and preserved him, to "serve you with all the might, mind and strength which the Lord hath granted unto me." The most menial of his subjects, he said, was like unto him in the sight of that God, before whom there is no inequality or rank. His sermons reveal to our senses, what Prof. Henri Bergson13 says, are conditions, "consistent with the satisfaction of our highest ideals." These conditions were, everywhere, to be met, and King Benjamin even went so far as to labor with his own hands in order to be an example, that his people should not be grieved with burdensome taxes and tasks that would end in their being slaves to the taskmaster, or victims of the tyrant's oppression.

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15Verses 9-15

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15And these are the words which he spake. Saying, "My brethren," is a wonderful example of the humility and grace of King Benjamin's character. He thus approached them over whom he ruled, as "My brethren," and not like one who because of station, ascribes to himself, honor, and majesty. "Brethren" is the distinction he applied to those, who like himself, kept the Lord's commandments. There is nothing that equalizes men more than walking together in the paths of righteousness. In God's justice there is no inequality or inferiority among those who stand before Him, save as to them who do, and them who do not, obey His Laws. We remember the words of Micah: "He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." (Micah 6:8) To walk humbly with God, makes the rough places, smooth, and the journey, sweet.

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15In perusing this sermon of King Benjamin's, we are impressed with the nobility of his teachings; he says, "that ye might understand." Operating with his words, and raising them to sublime heights one can feel the warmth of brotherly love and kindness which unites all men in the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He preached to them of Christ's atoning Sacrifice. They looked forward to His coming, and they kept the Law of Moses because they saw in it the likeness of Him who would bring them Salvation. Looking forward to the Messiah was to them as effective as it is for us to look back. (Jarom 1:14) They were united in all good things.

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15For unity to be lasting and real, it must be upheld and sustained by righteousness. When men combine in evil, it is recognized as intrigue and conspiracy; when they unite with no fixed purpose, it is merely coalition. But the tie that bound together King Benjamin's people was not a plot, nor a scheme that would end with success or failure according to the strength or weakness of those involved. It was love-love of the Word of God, love of truth, and love for one another. This unity was innate in Benjamin and his followers. It recalls the words of the Psalmist, "How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity."

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15To develop this unity of purpose, Benjamin did not use harsh, disciplinary measures. He was not tyrannical or arbitrary. He had not caused any man to be confined in dungeons, nor had he suffered any of them to be made slaves.24 He labored with his own hands to provide the necessary things of life; he had sought neither gold nor silver from them by way of taxes, which to the poor among them might be grievous or oppressive. Through all this he taught them to keep the commandments of God. He did not boast these things, nor did he offer any apologies, pretexts, or excuses for his past; he entered calmly and even joyously on the prospects of answering before God for that which he had encouraged to be done.

SC Mosiah 2 9 Mosiah 2 10 Mosiah 2 11 Mosiah 2 12 Mosiah 2 13 Mosiah 2 14 Mosiah 2 15The righteous behavior of the Nephites under King Benjamin, we may conclude, was the outgrowth of common principles, the reciprocity of mutual affections, "the inspiration of the heart, not the discipline of the rod." Jesus said, "Draw near unto me, and I will draw near unto you"; we should not forget that the nearer we are to God, the nearer we are to one another. This seems to have been the case with Benjamin's people. They were united in serving the Lord, and, together they were united as one big family of brethren in obeying and honoring His prophet. When we consider King Benjamin's salutation, "My Brethren," we recall the words of Jesus, our Redeemer, "Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven the same is my...brother."

SC Mosiah 2 16 Mosiah 2 17Verses 16-17

SC Mosiah 2 16 Mosiah 2 17I have only been in the service of God. To serve God, means, among many other things, a daily sacrifice on our part of all selfish longings. To minister to the needs of His children is but a "thank-offering" to God for the blessings we receive from Him; in serving others we put to the highest use the things He has entrusted to our care. We thus become His servants; we do His will In past ages of the world, God's servants did not oppress His children, nor were any considered more mighty than were others, save those who in might sought to do His will and yearned to be in His service. It is good to remember that none were ever overcome who put their trust in the Great Father of us all by ministering to His children, our fellows. The service we render to God is measured in the same terms, and by the same rod with which we serve one another. We should always keep in our minds, that to serve Him is perfect freedom, and to worship Him is life's greatest happiness and its true satisfaction. King Benjamin said, "In my days of service to you...I have only been in the service of God." In serving His children we may become poorer in the things of the world, but, we will be richer in heavenly treasures.

SC Mosiah 2 16 Mosiah 2 17In King Benjamin's sermons, no lessons are more boldly proclaimed then is this lesson of service. The conclusion is not to be escaped that we serve God best by sharing with the needy the gifts we receive from His bounteous hands, by showing compassion for the distressed, by upholding the falling, by loosing the bound. Truly, we can ennoble our lives no more graciously than by serving God with deeds of loving-kindness to our fellow men.

Mosiah 2 17Verse 17

Mosiah 2 17I tell you...that you may learn wisdom. In King Solomon's Book of the Proverbs we read, "The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom." That means wisdom is in doing His Will; it lies in serving God. Whether it is in the home, in the schoolroom, out in the open spaces, or elsewhere, our service to God, manifest in the aid we render to our fellows, adds to the total of wisdom with which we eventually will be crowned.

Mosiah 2 17"Love one another," was the cardinal principle that permeated the entire mission of our Savior. "God so loved the world ..." is the reason for man's redemption. King Benjamin was truly conscious that God is the loving Father of all men; he taught his people, "When you are in the service of your fellow beings ye are in the service of your God!" The Lord is the strength of all who serve Him, and the praise of them that love to do His will. Herein is wisdom. "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that obtaineth understanding."

Mosiah 2 18Verse 18

Mosiah 2 18Then ought not ye to labor to serve one another? Here, King Benjamin draws an astute comparison between his life of helpful devotion to his people, and the obligation they have to aid one another. He said, in effect, "I, whom ye call your king, have spent all my days ministering to your wants, in bringing you" succor, according to the hour and the power of your needs, and, for it, "I ask of you nothing, no recompense save that you serve God," "then ought not ye to labor to serve one another?"

Mosiah 2 19Verse 19

Mosiah 2 19O how you ought to thank your heavenly King. "If I, Benjamin, your earthly king, by serving you, merit any thanks," "O how you ought to thank your heavenly King" for the blessings He constantly bestows.

SC Mosiah 2 20 Mosiah 2 21Verses 20-21

SC Mosiah 2 20 Mosiah 2 21Ye would be unprofitable servants. Benjamin, here, reminds his listeners of a great truth, we, ourselves, constantly lose sight of-that is the greatness of God, and the nothingness of man. He extols the might and power of God which is shown by Him bestowing His tender mercies upon them. Life itself, His watchful care over them, the food they eat, the clothes they wear, His sustaining arm, and above these things which He abundantly provides, He sends Peace, His most precious gift. Truly, King Benjamin's people drank deeply of the waters of peace which flowed down upon them in a river of righteousness.

SC Mosiah 2 20 Mosiah 2 21But, King Benjamin says that no strength of their own, no power inherent in themselves, could render unto the Great Giver of all these things, praise and thanksgiving equal to the end thereof. If we, he said, should attempt to pay the Lord in full for the blessings He with unending grace supplies by serving Him to the utmost of our ability, we would still be "unprofitable servants."

Mosiah 2 22Verse 22

Mosiah 2 22And behold, all that he requires of you is to keep his commandments. The words and phrases, behold, and it came to pass, now I say unto you, and some others, were commonly used by ancient Hebrew writers. This custom was carried on by the Nephites.

Mosiah 2 22Now, let us put ourselves in the position of Benjamin's people, and ponder our inability to repay the Lord for his goodness. What would be our reaction to any demand for payment? We have already quoted the words of the prophet, "He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." (Micah 6:8) But, we have noted, "to walk humbly with thy God," means to keep His commandments. This is what the Lord desires, King Benjamin, as well as many other holy men, emphasize. He expects no more, He will accept no less. Benjamin's statement to his people, "that ye may live and move and do according to your own will," (v. 21) reminds us of our Free Agency, being "free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for" ourselves "and not to be acted upon." (2 Ne. 2:26-27) But, we are also reminded, "That to serve Him is perfect freedom, and to worship Him, the soul's purest happiness."

SC Mosiah 2 23 Mosiah 2 24Verses 23-24

SC Mosiah 2 23 Mosiah 2 24He hath created you. There are two things to begin with, Benjamin told his people, all of whom were members of God's Church, which you, if you labored forever, could not pay back. First, he said, "He created you," and gave you life. Secondly, He demands obedience to His laws. (v. 22) Here is another lesson for us to learn. It does not matter to what heights we climb, or to the depths into which we descend, the riches of the earth we acquire, or the joys we entertain; in spite of what we are and the worldly goods we accumulate, we are only the custodians of them; He is the owner, and we are the keepers whether good or bad. We can boast of nothing.

SC Mosiah 2 25 Mosiah 2 26 Mosiah 2 27Verses 25-27

SC Mosiah 2 25 Mosiah 2 26 Mosiah 2 27Can ye say aught of yourselves? King Benjamin reminded his people of a fact they knew well. It is contained in the Hebrew Scriptures, copies of which they had made from the Brass Plates of Laban. In them was the story of man's Creation. The Scriptures were the constant guides and the companions of the Nephites. A knowledge of them was a large portion of their learning, as it was to the Jews in Jerusalem. They knew they were created out of the dust of the earth, and sooner or later, would return thereto. They knew they lived only as tenants in a grand and glorious Creation. All they had, and even that of which they were made was borrowed from Him who is the Creator of all, and to whom everything belongs.

SC Mosiah 2 25 Mosiah 2 26 Mosiah 2 27King Benjamin's people understood his words and realized their humble station in life. Again they reasoned among themselves-"The greatness of God, and the nothingness of men." (See, Mosiah 4:11)

SC Mosiah 2 25 Mosiah 2 26 Mosiah 2 27Though Benjamin was a righteous leader whom they called their king, yet, he told them, he was like unto them, made of dust. He was getting old, he said, and in a few years would give back to its source, the body they then beheld, the body of Benjamin, their King. Notwithstanding his regal calling, his end on earth was like that of all men-a return to dust.

SC Mosiah 2 25 Mosiah 2 26 Mosiah 2 27As one of them who was about to die, and whose spirit would then return to God who created it, Benjamin told his subjects that he had called them together to end his active service to them, which with a clear conscience before God he had diligently performed. He desired to again bear witness of God's goodness and mercy, and to testify to them once more of the Messiah who would Redeem mankind from the effects of Adam's great sin. He did not want any dereliction of his to be an excuse for one of them to urge lack of knowledge, let alone to commit sin. He would stand before God, on the Day of Judgment, knowing well that he had fulfilled every command of the Lord in instructing his people.

Mosiah 2 28Verse 28

Mosiah 2 28And my immortal spirit may join the choirs above. Benjamin, here, expresses the desire to be fully prepared to "join the choirs above." Compare Morm. 7:7, where we are told that those who are found guiltless will have the privilege of dwelling in the presence of God, and singing "ceaseless praises with the choirs above."

Mosiah 2 28Does it seem improbable that there are choirs in the realm inhabited by the redeemed? The ability to sing and to compose and play music is a divine gift. The very purpose of it is to enable man to praise the Lord and to glorify His name. There is no music so inspiring, so elevating, so refining, as sacred music, and it is a great question whether any other kind, especially martial music, is not best characterized as a poor, worthless imitation.

Mosiah 2 28We know that John the Beloved, on several occasions in his Apocalyptic visions, became aware of singing and music of heavenly origin. (Rev. 5:9; 14:3; 15:3) We also know that at the time of the birth of our Lord, a heavenly host sang praises to God, audible to mortal ear. (Luke 2:13-14)

Mosiah 2 28And here, let me,35 in all humility, place on record that to my own personal knowledge, singing and music were heard in the Manti Temple at the time of its dedication. On two separate occasions I had the privilege of hearing the super-earthly harmonies. The first was just before the beginning of the services on the day I attended. It sounded as a very distant organ music, for a brief moment, as if a door had been opened and then almost immediately closed. The second occasion was a few days later, when I was preparing to perform some ordinance work for some of my friends on the other side. It sounded as the singing of male voices, also for a brief moment, and came as from a far distance. There were other manifestations during those days, never to be forgotten. During the service I noticed that some of the Twelve, notably Elder Heber J. Grant, the late President of the Church, and also John W. Taylor, were surrounded by rays of light, resembling the colors of the rainbow, only softer.

Mosiah 2 28Yes, there are choirs on the other side, and bands, and John describes their performances as "the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder:...and the voice of harpers harping with their harps." (Rev. 14:2)

SC Mosiah 2 29 Mosiah 2 30Verses 29-30

SC Mosiah 2 29 Mosiah 2 30I can no longer be your...king. King Benjamin called this conference of all the Saints dwelling in his domain just three years before he died. The record does not say when he was born, nor where. We presume it was in the Land of Lehi-Nephi where his father, Mosiah, at the command of the Lord, gathered the righteous into one large group, and led them to Zarahemla where they found the People of Mulek. He passed away in that city 122 B.C., greatly mourned and much loved by his subjects. Benjamin lived for many years, and ruled his people in the fear of the Lord.

SC Mosiah 2 29 Mosiah 2 30No people, ever, were ruled by a king more gracious than was Benjamin. He labored constantly for their well-being, and for their spiritual happiness; he continued nearly all the days of his life to be their untiring servant.

SC Mosiah 2 29 Mosiah 2 30But, now his old and worn frame could no longer support his desire to carry on. He trembled as one having the palsy; his enfeebled body refused to stand alone. King Benjamin, dwelling in that poor, dilapidated, and decrepit, old house, the body of Benjamin the High Priest, solemnly bowed before "The Majesty on High" and before his devoted people he acknowledged the Lord's watchful care over him. At the same time Benjamin declared, "I can no longer be your teacher, or your king." He also said, in a manner appropriate to his exalted calling, "The Lord hath commanded me that I should declare unto you this day, that my son Mosiah is a king and a ruler over you."

Mosiah 2 31Verse 31

Mosiah 2 31Keep the commandments of God which shall be delivered to you by my son. Among King Benjamin's parting instructions was an appeal to his devoted people that they follow their newly appointed King's advice and counsel. Just as they had observed his very own, and also as they had hearkened to the words of Mosiah I, who was Benjamin's father, they should attend to Mosiah's commandments which would come to them from God.

Mosiah 2 31As in the past when their fathers kept the Lord's commandments they were benefited and blessed, Benjamin promised similar prosperity, and added the further assurance, "Your enemies shall have no power over you."

SC Mosiah 2 32 Mosiah 2 33Verses 32-33

SC Mosiah 2 32 Mosiah 2 33Beware...ye list to obey the evil spirit. The word, list, as used here, is archaic, or antiquated. It is not used in ordinary conversation. Its meaning has, however, been preserved in Scriptural writings, in poetry, and sometimes in legal documents. Here, it means hearken, heed, or attend to.

SC Mosiah 2 32 Mosiah 2 33In these verses King Benjamin warned his faithful people against heeding the suggestions offered by evil-doers who sought to stir up strife and angry passions among them. He made known to them the awful consequences of such folly. He decried contention, and we imagine he reminded them of their community of interests and the responsibilities they owed to one another. If any were beguiled into committing error, and persisted in sin, dying therein, and not having repented therefrom, he pronounced wo. That one cannot, Benjamin said, transgress God's Laws willfully and knowingly, without, at last, obtaining as wages for intentional disobedience "an everlasting punishment" which is sure to come.

SC Mosiah 2 32 Mosiah 2 33The designs of Satan and his wicked servants is to rend asunder the just and benevolent purposes of Almighty God. They are servants of evil. They know that "In unity there is strength"; they also know that dissension is a prolific pro-genitress; and that one of her offspring is doubt. Doubt, itself, begets sin. It excuses evil-doers by refusing to recognize proper authority; and by denying and deriding the good, the just, and the pure.

SC Mosiah 2 32 Mosiah 2 33Uncertainty in the minds of God's children, and dissension among them, no matter how little, will prolong the coming of that Day when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the earth.

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35Verses 34-35

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35There are not any among you...that have not been taught concerning these things. Continuing his discourse, Benjamin reminded his listeners that from their childhood days, when first they began to understand Gospel principles and saw them in the beauties of God's boundless glory, they had been taught to love and to fear Him. Endless proof of His goodness and mercy toward them fortified Benjamin's people in their resolve to render to God "all they have and are." In doing so, a payment was made on a debt they eternally owed to their Heavenly Father who had created them, and who, in His great love, gave them life.

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35Benjamin's people could not avoid the reasoned judgment that his words were true, because they had before them the records of the Jews which told them of God's marvelous ways and His unending purpose. Even down to the reign of Zedekiah, the last of Judah's kings, the words of their holy prophets were written "with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond," (Jer. 17:1) upon the plates Lehi had brought from Jerusalem.

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35These plates, or copies of them, were available to all the Nephites, and of course, they became familiar with the promises of the Lord given by His Hebrew servants.

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35Besides these, the Nephites had in their possession, the records of their fathers, also engraven on metal plates. In them were written the things God had commanded His Nephite servants to proclaim. Their exhortations to the righteous, their rebukes of the wicked, and their many blessings, were all included in the chronicles upon these plates which had been handed down by each generation of their ancestors, and now were in the care of King Benjamin.

SC Mosiah 2 34 Mosiah 2 35King Benjamin's people knew that what was written on these plates was true, and further, they also knew that the Lord who had directed the assemblage of them was "just and true" in all His ways.

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39Verses 36-39

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39After you have known all these things the man that doeth contrary is in open rebellion against God. King Benjamin now summed up the many points he had made in the foregoing part of his inspiring and inspiriting address. He admonished his people, that now after you have received all this written testimony, and have been taught from your youth that it is true, the burden of carrying forth the work of the Lord rests upon the shoulders of each one of you.

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39He said to them, "do not withdraw yourselves from the Spirit of the Lord," that thereby you may be led in "wisdom's paths." Learn to listen to that still small voice which comes from the Father to lead, and to direct, and to warn of things to come. Undoubtedly King Benjamin remembered the words of the Psalmist which he had read on the brass plates of Laban: Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a steadfast spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and let a willing spirit uphold me. (Ps. 51:10-12 Jewish Rendition). Then you will be preserved and prospered, and your prayers will be answered in blessings on your heads.

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39But if, he said, on the contrary, you reject the knowledge you have received, and refuse to obey God's commands, you become an enemy to Him. All thoughts of Him you reduce to excuses for your actions, and soon you will recall your words in His praise.

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39Little by little, such a man "listeth" to the evil spirit; he becomes dead to all righteousness, and hardened to the demands of justice. He, himself, forces God's Holy Spirit to leave his unworthy body, for "He dwelleth not in unholy temples." This man, unless he repents and turns to God, lives and dies His enemy. Conscience, that court of righteous and holy decisions which is folded up in the bosoms of all of us, awakens in him a "lively sense of his own guilt," thus removing from him the desire to mingle with those who serve the Lord and who seek to do His will. In other words, "He is the author of his own damnation." There is only one end to him, he receives a just reward for his sins, "which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever." That means just this: a sinner by his transgressions, loses certain privileges and blessings accruing to the righteous for their faithful performance of duty. The sinner may later repent and obtain the promised forgiveness of his trespasses, but he can never regain the place he lost when he was beguiled into by-and-forbidden paths. In the "strait and narrow way," he finds himself far behind those who have remained unwavering and true to God's commands. He cannot overtake them. Thus, forever, he lags behind them; behind those who were "firm and steadfast, and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord." (1 Ne. 2:10) In this way the opportunities he once parted with may be returned, but he, himself, is the one entirely responsible for any delay in their delivery. The sinner's punishment is that he can never escape the effects of his slothfulness, nor his willful disobedience. We, from this can understand how his pain and anguish are like a fire that cannot be quenched, "whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever."

SC Mosiah 2 36 Mosiah 2 37 Mosiah 2 38 Mosiah 2 39When the transgressor, or the offender, whichever we choose to call him, sees before him, the multitudes of the righteous and thinks that he might have been among them had he also been upright in all his days, the thought dooms him to endure "a never ending torment," which in his breast is remorse.

SC Mosiah 2 40 Mosiah 2 41Verses 40-41

SC Mosiah 2 40 Mosiah 2 41O, all ye old men. O, all ye old men upon whom has rested the burden of carrying forth, for so many years, knowledge of the matchless ways of the Lord, His marvelous works, and the Salvation He has prepared for His children; let not your years be a reason for slackening your zeal; let it be the reverse. If the light we call life is nearly extinguished, let us work harder ere it go out. To the young men and the children who can understand his "words," Benjamin alludes to the "awful situation of those that have fallen into transgression." He says in effect, "Let us not fan ourselves into that silly delusion, that someday, perhaps when our backs are bent with the weight of years, then we will serve the Lord, that then we will keep the commandments of God." To everyone he says, "Consider on the blessed and happy state of those who keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual." We know of no better expression to describe King Benjamin's words than the exhortation of Alma to his son, Shiblon, "And now, my son, I trust that I shall have great joy in you, because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto God; for as you have commenced in your youth to look to the Lord your God, even so I hope that you will continue in keeping his commandments; for blessed is he that endureth to the end," (Alma 38:2)
