Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 3

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 Verses 1-4

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 And he said unto me, Awake! After the first session of the conference was over, allowing the aged King Benjamin to seek a much needed rest, he again began to instruct his God-fearing people. The spirit of prophecy was greatly with him, and they, by that same spirit, understood his words. With exceeding great joy he declared unto them many things that would yet come to pass.

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 Firmly, but with a heart filled with gladness, he proclaimed the coming of the Messiah, Jesus Christ, at a time not far distant when, with power, He would bring Salvation to everyone who believed on His name.

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 We may imagine the magnificent effect of his words when we remember that Benjamin was their High-Priest, as, also, he was their king.

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 The scene presented here was almost inspiring, certainly inspiriting. Bowed down with the weight of years, his white hair flowing with the breeze, his voice trembling and scarcely audible even to the multitude that had gathered to hear his parting instructions, King Benjamin solemnly raised his arms toward heaven and at the same time he told them of a visit by an angel to him, and of the wonderful things the angel had said.

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 He told them how he had been roused from a peaceful slumber by a voice that said, "Awake; and hear the words which I shall tell thee." This was the voice of one sent down from On High: "For behold, I am come to declare unto thee the glad tidings of great joy."

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 The heavenly messenger then imparted to Benjamin his divine commitment, saying that, because of thy righteousness and thy prayers, which the Lord hath heard, He "hath sent me to declare unto thee that thou mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people, that they may also be filled with joy."

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 The remaining verses of Chapter 3, are a record of the things the angel said to King Benjamin. The angel ended his visit with the King and High-Priest with these words, "Thus hath the Lord commanded me. Amen."

SC Mosiah 3 1 Mosiah 3 2 Mosiah 3 3 Mosiah 3 4 King Benjamin proceeded to declare to his people, by way of prophecy, the "glad tidings" committed to him by the angel.

SC Mosiah 3 5 Mosiah 3 6 Mosiah 3 7Verses 5-7

SC Mosiah 3 5 Mosiah 3 6 Mosiah 3 7The time cometh...that the Lord Omnipotent shall come down from heaven. King Benjamin prophesied to his faithful people of the Messiah, "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was and is from all eternity to all eternity," and who, with great power, would come down from heaven to dwell among the children of mortality, and who would take upon Himself a body of flesh and blood. King Benjamin confirmed, by the spirit of prophecy which imbued both him and his people, many of the things which had been foretold by the prophets concerning the Messiah, the Redeemer of the world, Who was to come.

SC Mosiah 3 5 Mosiah 3 6 Mosiah 3 7But, however, with words that were painful to their hearts and, no doubt, were perplexing to their minds, he spoke of the sufferings of our Lord; that He should endure the wrath of men; that He should be tempted, tried, and be afflicted; that His body should be racked with pain, and that His anguish, because of the wickedness and abominations of the world, should be so great that blood would exude from every pore. Benjamin also told them that the Messiah would perform many mighty miracles when He lived among men. He would heal the sick, raise the dead, cause the blind to see, and cure all manner of diseases.

SC Mosiah 3 5 Mosiah 3 6 Mosiah 3 7It is worthy of note, that many of the miracles wrought by the Savior when he visited the Nephites were, when they are compared, found to be of the same character as the wondrous works He performed among the Jews. Frequently, too, they were more marvelous and more glorious in Bountiful on account of the greater faith of the Nephites. He healed the sick, cast out devils, raised the dead in Bountiful as He did in Judea and Galilee.

SC Mosiah 3 5 Mosiah 3 6 Mosiah 3 7But there were other manifestations that were somewhat different that, so far as the record goes, were entirely dissimilar. In the Land of Jerusalem, Jesus miraculously fed five thousand by increasing the store of loaves and fishes that had been provided; in Bountiful He administered the Emblems of His Body and Blood when neither the Disciples nor the multitude had brought either bread or wine. Angels ministered to men during His labors among the Jews; they did so more abundantly during His visits to the Nephites. Again, though we are told in the Bible of the Holy Redeemer blessing little children, we nowhere read therein of the glorious manifestations, the outpouring of the Spirit, the ministry of the angels, the baptism of fire that took place when the Risen Redeemer blessed the little ones of the Nephites.

Mosiah 3 8Verse 8

Mosiah 3 8And He shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God. One of the most noteworthy things connected with the ancient Nephite Church was the great plainness and the detail with which the incidents of the birth, life, and death of the Lord Jesus Christ were understood and prophesied by the Nephite servants of God who dwelt on the earth before He tabernacled in mortality.

Mosiah 3 8Among others things it was declared of Him, that:

Mosiah 3 8God, Himself, shall come down from heaven among the children of men and shall redeem His people. (Mosiah 15:1)

Mosiah 3 8He shall take upon Him flesh and blood. (Mosiah 7:27)

Mosiah 3 8He should be born in the Land of Jerusalem, the name given by the Nephites to the land of their forefathers, whence they came. (Alma 7:10) (See Chapter 13, 1 Nephi.)

Mosiah 3 8His mother's name should be Mary. (Mosiah 3:8, Alma 7:10)

Mosiah 3 8She should be a virgin of the City of Nazareth; very fair and beautiful, a precious and chosen vessel.16 (1 Ne. 11:13; Alma 7:10)

Mosiah 3 8She should be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Alma 7:10)

Mosiah 3 8He should be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God.27

Mosiah 3 8He should be baptized by John at Bethabara, beyond Jordan. (1 Ne. 10:9)

Mosiah 3 8 John should testify that he had baptized the Lamb of God, (1 Ne. 10:9) who should take away the sins of the world. (1 Ne. 10:10)

Mosiah 3 8After His baptism the Holy Ghost should come down upon Him out of heaven, and abide upon him in the form of a dove. (1 Ne. 11:27; 2 Ne. 31:8)

Mosiah 3 8We do not insert here the prophecies of Isaiah and other Jewish prophets that are recorded in the Bible concerning Him, and which are also included in the Book of Mormon. Neither do we include the prophecies made by His servants that appear beyond this book, (Mosiah) except those contained in Alma 7:10, which later and in their proper order we shall consider.

Mosiah 3 8His mother shall be called Mary. Mary, the mother of Christ, is twice mentioned by name in the prophecies of the ancient Nephite worthies. Here, in the prophetic sermon of King Benjamin, and by Alma, the younger, in preaching to the people of Gideon (83 B.C.). Alma declared that Jesus should be born "of Mary...she being a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed, and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a son, yea, even the Son of God." (Alma 7:10) She was also shown to Nephi in a vision (600 B.C.) though he does not mention her by name. He records, "I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white." Of this virgin an angel told him, "The virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh." Further on, he states, "I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms. And the angel said unto me, Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!" (1 Ne. 11:13-21)

Mosiah 3 8She being a virgin. For a discussion of this term, See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol.. I, pp. 81-83.

Mosiah 3 9Verse 9

Mosiah 3 9And lo, He cometh unto His own, that Salvation might come unto the children of men. King Benjamin continued his discourse by expounding the doctrines of Christ. The Atonement and the purpose of Christ's mission is herein made plain. Notwithstanding the many proofs of His Divinity, and the miracles wrought by Him among the Jews, showing forth the power and authority of God, the Jews would still consider Him only a man, and, too, a man who was possessed with an evil spirit. Without knowledge of His true being, and with malice, they would take Him and ruthlessly crucify Him. The point King Benjamin makes in this portion of his address is that Salvation comes by faith on His name, not only to those who would see and then would believe, but also, to them that through faith alone looked to Him for that life which is eternal.

Mosiah 3 10Verse 10

Mosiah 3 10And He shall rise the third day from the dead. The Bible confirms the fulfillment of this part of King Benjamin's prophecy. Each of the four writers of the Gospels ends his account with the beautiful but amazing story of the Resurrection of Christ. May we draw attention to the Gospel according to Mark?

Mosiah 3 10And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him. And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun. And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre? And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great. And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted. And he said unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him. But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for they were afraid. Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he cast seven devils. And she went and told them that she had been with him, as they mourned and wept. And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not. After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country. And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed they them. Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13Verses 11-13

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13His blood atoneth. King Benjamin's people increasingly rejoiced in his words, for they knew he declared unto them the things that were told him by the angel.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13He expounded the Atonement of Christ, and the Fall of Adam. Benjamin gloried in the Messiah who was to come, and of Him, he said, "Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning," "shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men." "And lo, he cometh unto his own, that salvation might come unto the children of men even through faith on his name." In reading his sermons, we are prompted to call Benjamin, not King, but Prophet; for he left the sphere of earthly sovereignty and entered into a realm of glory, where only the spirit of prophecy reigns.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13The thanksgiving and gladness that ruled in the hearts of Benjamin's people remind us of the words of the angel when he awakened Benjamin and introduced himself to the King, "... behold, I am come to declare unto thee the glad tidings of great joy...that thou mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people, that they may also be filled with joy." While listening to the "glad tidings"bourne by their king, the people thought of Isaiah's words which were written upon the brass Plates of Laban, "Thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the Holy One of Israel," (Isa. 41:16) and Mosiah records of them, "They also took of the firstlings of their flocks, that they might offer sacrifice and burnt offerings according to the law of Moses," (Mosiah 2:4) and they did this "with rejoicing and with singing." (1 Chr. 23:18) Their joy also reminds us of the time when the Jews dedicated the wall around their holy city; "And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgiving, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for Gad had made them rejoice with great joy " (Neh. 12:27 and 43)

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13The angel told Benjamin, and the Prophet and King made it known to his people, that the justice and mercy of God-His loving-kindness-extends, not only to His righteous children, but also to those who through no fault of their own, died "not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." His blood atoneth for their sins.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13Jacob, the son of Lehi and the brother of Nephi, exclaimed, "O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." Jacob then goes on and explains this very doctrine:

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned, for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him.

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel. (2 Ne. 9:20-26)

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13The Prophet Abinadi adds testimony to this great truth:

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord. (Mosiah 15:24)

SC Mosiah 3 11 Mosiah 3 12 Mosiah 3 13This is a complete and satisfactory reply to that question we so often hear, "What will become of those who have never heard the Gospel message?" God is just! He is also merciful. His loving-kindness extends to all His children, and the Atonement is infinite. There is a justice which is injustice; sometimes infinite mercy is perfect justice.

Mosiah 3 12Verse 12

Mosiah 3 12But wo, wo unto him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God. Again, we bring before you, the words of Abinadi, that in them, all might see the great knowledge the Nephite servants of God had of the Plan of Salvation.

Mosiah 3 12But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have willfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; there are they that have no part in the first resurrection. Therefore ought ye not to tremble? For salvation cometh to none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such; for he cannot deny himself; for he cannot deny justice when it has its claims. (Mosiah 15:26-27)

Mosiah 3 13Verse 13

Mosiah 3 13And the Lord God hath sent his holy prophets among all the children of men, to declare these things to every kindred, nation, and tongue. The Prophet Nephi, early after his father, Lehi, left Jerusalem taking all his family into the wilderness with him, said:

Mosiah 3 13And behold, it is wisdom in God that we should obtain these records, [the Plates of Laban] that we may preserve unto our children the language of our fathers;

Mosiah 3 13And also that we may preserve unto them the words which have been spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, which have been delivered unto them by the Spirit and power of God, since the world began, even down unto this present time. (1 Ne. 3:19-20)

Mosiah 3 13Over 500 years later, Alma, the High Priest of the Church of Christ, exhorted the people of Ammonihah to repent, and called the scriptures to verify his utterances:

Mosiah 3 13... Behold, the scriptures are before you; if ye will wrest them it shall be to your own destruction.

Mosiah 3 13And now it came to pass that when Alma had said these words unto them, he stretched forth his hand unto them and cried with a mighty voice, saying; Now is the time to repent, for the day of salvation draweth nigh;

Mosiah 3 13Yea, and the voice of the Lord, by the mouth of angels, doth declare it unto all nations; yea, doth declare it, that they may have glad tidings of great joy; yea, and he doth sound these glad tidings among all his people, yea, even to them that are scattered abroad upon the face of the earth; wherever they have come unto us.

Mosiah 3 13And they are made known unto us in plain terms, that we may understand, that we cannot err; and this because of our being wanderers in a strange landerefore, we are thus highly favored, for we have these glad tidings declared unto us in all parts of our vineyard.

Mosiah 3 13For behold, angels are declaring it unto many at this time in our land; and this is for the purpose of preparing the hearts of the children of man to receive his word at the time of his coming in his glory. (Alma 13:20-24)

Mosiah 3 13(The word, wrest, used in Alma's quote, means (1) to turn; twist; especially, to pull or force away by violent wringing or twisting. (2) To twist from its natural order or proper use or meaning by violence; to distort. (Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary)

Mosiah 3 13Yet another 500 years and Moroni declared:

Mosiah 3 13And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should come. (Moro. 7:23)

Mosiah 3 13Already come among them.

Mosiah 3 13Wherefore, the prophets, and the priests, and the teachers, did labor diligently, exhorting with all long-suffering the people to diligence; teaching the law of Moses, and the intent for which it was given; persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was. And after this manner did they teach them. (Jarom 1: 11 )

Mosiah 3 13Elsewhere we say, that they looked forward to Christ even as we look back. Both visions of Him are equally efficacious.

Mosiah 3 13In addition to the words of Nephi, Alma, and Moroni we have just quoted, the following passages from the Book of Mormon will enlighten us concerning the declaration and the promise made in this verse:

Mosiah 3 14Verse 14

Mosiah 3 14Yet the Lord God saw that his people were a stiffnecked people. (See, Comments Chapter 13:29-30)

Mosiah 3 15Verse 15

Mosiah 3 15And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them. (See, Comments Chapter 13:31-33)

Mosiah 3 16Verse 16

Mosiah 3 16Little Children are blessed. The promise of the Lord concerning little children, their salvation and the effect on them of His Atoning Sacrifice, is so clearly set forth in the Book of Mormon that we will only direct attention to the following passages of Book of Mormon scripture:

Mosiah 3 17Verse 17

Mosiah 3 17Christ, the only name whereby salvation can come unto the children of men. Through Christ, and Him alone, is man redeemed from the effects of Adam's transgression. To a people who were taught to observe all the requirements of the Law of Moses, and were strict to conform their lives to its rules, Benjamin proclaimed that no matter how careful they were in its observance, it "availeth nothing" for their Salvation except "it were through the atonement of his blood."

Mosiah 3 17There shall be no other name given by which salvation is brought about, and notwithstanding the many ordinances and signs which the Lord, in His loving-kindness gave to the Children of Israel, they were all a foreshadowing of Christ and pointed to His coming.

Mosiah 3 17Through Adam's Fall, sin came into the world. Sin is the enemy of all righteousness; he who commits sin is also an enemy. We reverently speak of God as the Alrighteous Father; in Him there is no sin. "Man is carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Alma 42:10) Because of iniquity man was cast out from God's presence. Sin cannot abide with Him. The Father is separated from His children.

Mosiah 3 17The way must be found, a plan prepared, whereby the Father and His children may be re-united, else His purposes will fail, and all His promises to them go unfulfilled.

Mosiah 3 17That Way has been found, a Plan for all His children to regain what once was theirs-an abode with God in the Celestial Home-has been made. Christ is the Way, and there is no other.

Mosiah 3 17The Prophet Nephi, the son of Lehi, in a discourse to his brothers delivered to them after his glorious vision, said, "And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God, without end." (2 Ne. 31:21)

Mosiah 3 19Verse 19

Mosiah 3 19Becometh as a child. (See, verse 16)

SC Mosiah 3 20 Mosiah 3 21 Mosiah 3 22Verses 20-22

SC Mosiah 3 20 Mosiah 3 21 Mosiah 3 22I say unto you...the knowledge of the Savior shall spread throughout every nation...The fulfillment of the words of the angel cannot be denied. King Benjamin repeated by way of prophecy what is now becoming an established fact-God's inspired teachers and evangelists are going among all nations declaring the Glad Tidings of Man's Redemption through the Lord, Jesus Christ. Salvation, they proclaim, cometh to all by repentance and faith on His name.

SC Mosiah 3 20 Mosiah 3 21 Mosiah 3 22King Benjamin again admonished his people to learn God's commandments, and do them. By observing all the rites and obligations demanded by the Law of Moses, and further, only by looking forward to Christ and his Atoning Sacrifice, which the Law foreshadowed, can man be "found blameless in the sight of God." This, King Benjamin said, "Is according to the words which I have spoken unto thee." He meant, no doubt, that he repeated, for emphasis, what he had already said. It is by repetition we learn.

Mosiah 3 23Verse 23

Mosiah 3 23I have spoken the words which the Lord God commanded me. In concluding his great sermon, King Benjamin affirmed his first, or introductory words-that an angel from heaven, in the name of God, commanded him to declare these things to his people that they may "be filled with joy."
