Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 4

Mosiah 4 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 4 1 When King Benjamin had made an end of speaking...he cast his eyes round about on the multitude. King Benjamin's powerful address, repeating the words which the angel had said to him, so prevailed upon his listeners that when he finished talking he observed that they had all fallen to the ground.

Mosiah 4 1 To fall to the earth is a recognition of the greatness of God, and of man's nothingness. It expresses the soul's deepest humility, or its state or quality of being humble in spirit. To prostrate oneself before "The Majesty on High," with one's face toward the ground, signifies humble adoration. With freedom from pride and arrogance, having a desire to do good, and with a great love for the coming Savior in their hearts, the people of King Benjamin fell down and worshipped the Lord.

Mosiah 4 1 Bowing the head and closing the eyes is but a simple, yet not unlike gesture in which we avow our fealty to God. Doing so, exhibits the same qualities as we have noted above.

Mosiah 4 2 Verse 2

Mosiah 4 2 For we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God. The deep sense of their own unworthiness caused the multitude that had gathered together in the conference of the Saints in Zarahemla, to pray unanimously that the Lord would, in His loving-kindness, purify their hearts, and make them worthy of the blessings the Messiah would bring to those who served Him, and who have, as Benjamin said, "Faith on his name."

Mosiah 4 2 As if they were one, being of the same mind, they entreated the Great Giver of all good to accord to them the blessings brought about by Christ's Atoning Sacrifice, for, they testified before God and each other that they believed in Him who was the Creator of all things, "who shall come down among the children of men."

Mosiah 4 3 Verse 3

Mosiah 4 3 They were filled with joy. The prayers offered by the assembled worshipers were quickly answered in blessings from above: the holy Spirit of the Lord came upon them; their sins were all forgiven; they were filled with joy even as the angel had said to Benjamin; Peace, God's most precious gift" was allotted to them, "Because," the Sacred Record says, "of their exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ."

Mosiah 4 4 Verse 4

Mosiah 4 4 My friends and my brethren. See, p. 42.

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7Verses 5-7

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7This is the man who receiveth salvation. That if, said Benjamin, the knowledge of God's goodness had aroused in them a conviction of their fallen state, and further will cause them to be diligent in keeping the commandments of the Lord, "This is the man who receiveth salvation."

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7And this is the means whereby salvation cometh. The doctrine of Adam's Fall is explicitly explained in the Book of Mormon. The orthodox view has been that although our first parents were created innocent and holy, they were deceived by the fallen angel, sinned and fell from the original state of moral perfection, and thereby brought death, sin, and endless misery upon their children and all creation.

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7Many modern theological writers have tried to eliminate the story of Adam's fall completely, explaining it away as a venerable myth. Evolutionists have seen in the story a proof of their theory of the descent of man from a brute ancestry, forgetting the apparent fact that there is not a brute animal that does not stand higher than the moral level of a great many depraved, debased human beings, thus furnishing no starting point there for a supposed upward evolution.

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7To the Book of Mormon prophets and writers, the Fall was a necessary part of the Great Plan. Adam and Eve were, in the beginning, immortal beings, and were not subject to death. But, "Subject to death they must become, however, if their posterity should inherit corruptible bodies. The Fall, then, was a deliberate use of law, by which act Adam and Eve became mortal, and could beget mortal children." (John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, p. 47) The story of the Fall is not a myth. It is a record, in poetic, highly-figurative language, of an actual occurrence, It is a record of the transition of man from a state of innocent, childlike purity, to that of a more mature age, when, the immediate divine tutelage having been completed, Adam and Eve were prepared to begin for themselves the struggle for existence and progress. And so, "Adam fell that man might be."

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7All the particulars of the story are not clear. That Adam and Eve were, literally, our ancestors, and that the "serpent" was Lucifer, the rebellious outcast from heaven, is certain. Just what facts are represented by the symbolism of the tree, the fruit, the eating thereof, is not obvious. The tree of life, which Lehi saw in his vision, the angel explains, was "a representation of the love of God," as manifested in the earthly mission of His Only Begotten Son. (1 Ne. 11:20-33; 15:33)

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7We may be sure that the tree of knowledge and the tree of life, in the narrative of the Fall, represent important realities in the experience of our first ancestors.

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7The consequences of the partaking of the forbidden tree by our first parents were that they came in possession of knowledge of good and evil, but were "cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord." This ushered in death. And in this condition they became self-willed, "carnal, sensual and devilish." (Alma 42:3-10) That was a "fall" which called for a plan of salvation. God supplied that Plan, and therefore, and thereby, the fall became a "fall upward."

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7The Atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the World. A Plan of Salvation, as just noted, had already been prepared. On this subject the Book of Mormon is exceedingly clear. Were it not for the Atonement all mankind would perish. The Atonement was effected through the sufferings and death of the Son of God. He took upon Himself the transgressions of His people, and atoned for the sins of the world. His atonement is specially for those "who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." That includes all who have died outside the light of revelation. The Atonement satisfies the demands of justice. Mercy comes because of the Atonement, and it brings about the resurrection and makes it possible for the children of Adam to return to the presence of God.

SC Mosiah 4 5 Mosiah 4 6 Mosiah 4 7The modern spirit of so-called enlightenment is entirely out of sympathy with the Christian doctrine of Atonement. It has placed man on a pedestal of independence, where he needs no divine Plan of Redemption or Salvation. But the fact remains: Outside this Plan the world is "dead." Through Christ alone can man regain "paradise lost."10

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10Verses 9-10

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10Believe in God; believe that he is. The Book of Mormon and the Bible resemble each other in that they take for granted, "He lives!" Handbooks on theology generally begin by stating the philosophical arguments supposed to prove that there is a Supreme Being, but God's books do not argue the question. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth," is the sublime opening statement of the Bible. One of the first incidents told in the Book of Mormon is that of a vision of the Prophet Lehi, in which he saw "God sitting upon his throne, surrounded by numerous concourses of angels in the attitude of singing and praising their God." (1 Ne. 1:8) There is no attempt at argument; no appeal to the reasoning faculty of man, only a plain statement of a sublime fact, in the simplest possible language: God Is.

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10And yet, when the inspired writer has occasion to rebuke atheism, he applies the cosmological argument with the greatest possible force. He says:

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10"If there be no God, we are not, for there could have been no creation." (2 Ne. 11:7)

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10That argument is unanswerable.

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10Philosophers have, indeed, asserted that God is not needed to account for the existence of worlds. Matter itself, they argue, possesses all the potency necessary to account for all established facts. In this conclusion, vast numbers of our superficial age concur and, at least pretend to, find satisfaction. Many are banded together, and with increasing numbers both among learned and unlearned, seek to spread their faith destroying opinions throughout every field of human endeavor. Their aims are freely stated: Do away with chaplains in Congress, legislatures, and in the army and navy. Recognize no religious festivals. Stop "bootlegging" Bible and religion in the schools. Use no Bibles to take an oath on. Do away with Christian morality. Take "In God We Trust" off the coins. The program they have adopted has been espoused by an ever-growing fraternity.

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10Against the ignorant, blasphemous, arrogant atheism which is fostered, the writers of the Book of Mormon stand up, as if it were from their graves, in righteous rebuke. They say, in substance: You atheists, you materialists, you monists, you do not go far enough in your negation. You deny the existence of God, but, in order to be consistent, you must also deny the existence of the land in which you live, and the mountains, the islands of the sea, the sun, the stars, and, above all, your own existence, and say that the whole Creation is only a figment of the imagination. To admit the reality of the Creation, and then deny the existence of the Creator thereof, is an inconsistency, a self-contradiction, impossible in the reasoning of any intelligent being.

SC Mosiah 4 9 Mosiah 4 10The Book of Mormon testifies to the existence of God in this and other passages (2 Ne. 2:13-14; 11:7; Mor. 9:19) against all forms of atheism, and gives as complete a picture of the Godhead as we, in our mortal state, can perceive.

Mosiah 4 11Verse 11

Mosiah 4 11And again I say unto you as I have said before. King Benjamin repeated to his people the wonderful lessons they had learned, and the number of gifts vouchsafed to them by the Lord.

Mosiah 4 11Among the blessings they had received, he counted many: They had come to a knowledge of the Lord; they had tasted of His love; their sins had been forgiven them, which, he said, "Causeth such great joy in your souls."

Mosiah 4 11But, he also said, that in the trials and disappointments of life that are sure to follow, always remember the greatness of God, His goodness and long-suffering toward you, and in the depths of humility, call "on the name of the Lord daily." At all times, was his exhortation, remain "firm and steadfast, and immovable" in the faith which you have in the coming Savior of whom the angel spoke.

Mosiah 4 12Verse 12

Mosiah 4 12If ye do this. In this verse King Benjamin reached one of the highest points in his address. The dignity of his words, the greatness of his spiritual understanding, the love he had for his people, prompted a benediction which came from his great heart. He promised them that "If ye do this" [the things outlined in verse 11] ye shall always rejoice; you will be filled with the love of God; your sins will be no longer counted against you; ye shall "grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you," which he likened to "the knowledge of that which is just and true."

Mosiah 4 12This verse is so beautiful, Benjamin's promises so sure, that we, transported in our minds to the temple lot in Zarahemla, hear his words and resolve with his people to obey his voice. May we suggest that the entire verse be memorized.

SC Mosiah 4 13 Mosiah 4 14 Mosiah 4 15 Mosiah 4 16 Mosiah 4 17 Mosiah 4 18Verses 13-18

SC Mosiah 4 13 Mosiah 4 14 Mosiah 4 15 Mosiah 4 16 Mosiah 4 17 Mosiah 4 18Other promises. In addition to the great self-inspiring promises Benjamin made to his faithful believers he pronounced other blessings which will attend the faithful performance of the angel's words. He promised them, that: Ye will live peaceably one with the other; ye will not suffer your children to go hungry or naked, nor transgress the laws of God; ye will teach them the ways of truth and to love and serve one another.

SC Mosiah 4 13 Mosiah 4 14 Mosiah 4 15 Mosiah 4 16 Mosiah 4 17 Mosiah 4 18These are all fruits that will be gathered by the faithful. Those who have an interest in God's Kingdom will divide their substance with the needy and those who have no helper but the Lord. Him, will the Lord remember in time of need. Whosoever refuses to feed the hungry and clothe the naked when he, himself, has abundance, "hath great cause to repent." "Ye," Benjamin continued, "will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish."

SC Mosiah 4 19 Mosiah 4 20 Mosiah 4 21 Mosiah 4 22 Mosiah 4 23 Mosiah 4 24 Mosiah 4 25 Mosiah 4 26Verses 19-26

SC Mosiah 4 19 Mosiah 4 20 Mosiah 4 21 Mosiah 4 22 Mosiah 4 23 Mosiah 4 24 Mosiah 4 25 Mosiah 4 26Are we not all beggars? King Benjamin pointed to a truth which was clear to his people's vision and was, by them, easily understood. He compared their own fallen condition with that of a beggar. "Do we not all," he asked, "depend upon the same Being, even God, for all the substance which we have, for food and raiment...and for all the riches we have of every kind?"

SC Mosiah 4 19 Mosiah 4 20 Mosiah 4 21 Mosiah 4 22 Mosiah 4 23 Mosiah 4 24 Mosiah 4 25 Mosiah 4 26Even during this Conference of Saints, your cries to Him increase. You never cease "begging for a remission of your sins." And now I ask you, "Have ye begged in vain?" King Benjamin answered his own question, "Nay." The Lord has abundantly blessed each one of you; He has poured out His Spirit upon you; He has filled your hearts with joy, far beyond your power to comprehend.

SC Mosiah 4 19 Mosiah 4 20 Mosiah 4 21 Mosiah 4 22 Mosiah 4 23 Mosiah 4 24 Mosiah 4 25 Mosiah 4 26Now, if God, to whom you owe your very lives, grants you blessings even before they are asked, "O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another." (See, Mosiah 2:16-19)

SC Mosiah 4 19 Mosiah 4 20 Mosiah 4 21 Mosiah 4 22 Mosiah 4 23 Mosiah 4 24 Mosiah 4 25 Mosiah 4 26Condemn not the man who asks for your help, nor keep from him a just portion of your worldly goods. In doing so you may cause him to perish, and furthermore, you will deny that very God who giveth to all men liberally, and to Whom every thing belongs. Benjamin drew the only logical conclusion from such a condition as he contemplated. He reasoned that such a man who refuses to share his substance with the needy when asked, justly deserves greater condemnation than another who gives not, but says, "I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give."

Mosiah 4 23Verse 23

Mosiah 4 23Wo be unto that man. A complete commentary on Benjamin's words recorded in this verse is found in a sermon preached by Jacob, the brother of Nephi: "But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasure; wherefore, their treasure is their God. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also." (2 Ne. 9:30)

Mosiah 4 26Verse 26

Mosiah 4 26I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor. Sharing with others the many bounties we receive from God's hand, not only adds peace and comfort to our hearts, but it awakens within us a love for His children that increases with each passing day. We show by our actions that we are truly His children and that He is the Father of all.

Mosiah 4 26It is indisputable that "feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally," renders us more obedient to God's commandments and thereby creates in us a clean heart and renews a steadfast spirit within us. (See, Ps. 51-10) Doing so is a sacrifice of righteousness when, in offering it, we put our trust in the Lord. There is no surer way to remember the Lord, His goodness and mercy, than to serve His children who want and have not.

Mosiah 4 26Blessings without number attend the giver of these things. Not only do we retain a remission of our sins, but it follows that also we may walk "guiltless before God," who is our loving parent.

Mosiah 4 27Verse 27

Mosiah 4 27See that all these things are done in wisdom. It is not required of a man to give more than he is able, nor to impart such that will overcome him and make of him another who is in want. Be diligent, Benjamin implored, and do all things in proper order. That means just this: be constant in attending to those who are in need, and with meekness minister to their wants, but remember neither do them in excess nor with ceremony.

Mosiah 4 28Verse 28

Mosiah 4 28He who borroweth of his neighbor. King Benjamin closed his sermon by giving some practical instructions. Among other things he told them were teachings in regard to those who borrow and fail to return that which they borrowed. He warned his people that in so doing they sinned, and not only did they transgress but by chance caused others to also commit sin.

SC Mosiah 4 29 Mosiah 4 30Verses 29-30

SC Mosiah 4 29 Mosiah 4 30And now, O man, remember. In conclusion, and with a great appeal to all who heard him, King Benjamin warned that there were many ways open for man to transgress God's holy laws. Even their thoughts and words, he said, as well as their deeds, were counted for or against them. Continue steadfast all your days in your faith in the words of the angel concerning the coming of our Lord. Do not falter in your determination to serve Him, that thereby you may be found blameless when you stand before Him. King Benjamin ended his mighty address with a further appeal to all: "And now, O man, remember, and perish not."

General Notes

There are two widely divergent views concerning the existence of man on earth. One of these has been called the scientific view, although it is scientific only in ascertaining a certain class of facts. Outside this preparatory work, it becomes un-scientific in the highest degree. Its conclusions are not scientific. In other words, it reminds one of a building of cardboards erected on a solid rock foundation. But such a structure would be no more lasting than one built on sand.

The other is Scriptural, and therefore, in fact, scientific both in foundation and superstructure.

In the so-called scientific view, man is the product of selection and heredity, surroundings and training. He is merely a wonderful and complicated machine. As such he delivers his products as a machine. He who knows the parts of a machine can calculate its motions and control its purposes. In the same way, the acts and even thoughts of man can be controlled by one who knows the human machinery. There can be no personal responsibility in a machine; nor in man, if he is but another machine. And even if a degree of responsibility is admitted, there can be no self-determination. The acts and thoughts are determined by the construction of the different parts. It is all mechanical.

The Scriptural view of the existence of man is different. In this view, man is the child of God. He has come, in accordance with an eternal, divine decree upon this earth, as a wonderful institute of learning, in order to get an experience necessary for eternal progress. His body, be the origin of it clearly understood or not, is the tabernacle in which the eternal and immortal spirit dwells during its existence in the material world; it is also the wonderful collection of tools by means of which that spirit is in contact with the material world, and thereby able to fulfill the purpose of its existence on the earth.

In this view, man is a personality, dwelling in flesh, with independence, volition, and responsibility. He has a peculiar place in the history of the universe as the bearer of the highest ideals, and as subject to moral responsibility. As the child of God, man has a unique place in the creation, which can be comprehended only in the light of divine revelation.

This is the Scriptural view of the existence of man on earth. It is also the only scientific view.

And because he is the child of God, his place is in the Church of God, even on this earth. Jesus in the temple should be our pattern. His question, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" means in a few words that the dwelling of God is where a child of God ought to be found; and that he ought to be occupied with the things that belong to God. It seems that it was in the Temple of God that the consciousness of the dignity of Jesus awakened to life. That is Scriptural proof enough to us that our place as human beings and the children of God is in His Church and His Temple, and that our chief concern ought to be that which belongs to Him, our Eternal Father.

With from one to three million distinct species in the animal and vegetable world, not a single species has been traced to another. Until species in the animal and vegetable world can be linked together, why should we assume without proof that man is a blood relative of any lower form of life? Those who become obsessed with the idea that they have brute blood in their veins devote their time to searching for missing links in the hope of connecting man with life below him; why do they prefer jungle ancestry to creation by God Almighty for a purpose and according to a divine plan?"

(William Jennings Bryan)
