Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 7

Mosiah 7 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 7 1 He was desirous to know concerning the people who went up to dwell in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. Continued peace for a number of years in Mosiah's realm caused many of his subjects to wonder more and more about the fate of those who had returned to their old homes in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. The Sacred Record says, "They wearied him with their teasings," for they had heard nothing of them for many years, not since they had left to re-establish their homes in that land.

Mosiah 7 2 Verse 2

Mosiah 7 2 Sixteen strong men were chosen to go to Lehi-Nephi. Under King Mosiah's direction, sixteen strong and presumably young men were provisioned and made ready to proceed to the Land of Lehi-Nephi, or to the City of Lehi-Nephi, to ascertain the fate of their brethren.

Mosiah 7 2 Meaning of the Name. We take the meaning of this name to be the Land of Nephi, or the City of Nephi in the Land of Lehi, to distinguish them from the land and city of the same name in Zarahemla, where there also was a land and a city largely occupied by Nephites. It is, as if one would say, the "Utah-Jordan," to distinguish that river from the famous "Palestine-Jordan." Helaman, the son of Helaman, later in the record informs us, "The land south was called Lehi, and the land north was called Mulek, which was after the son of Zedekiah; for the Lord did bring Mulek into the land north, and Lehi into the land south." (Hel. 6:10)11Accepting this as a.ut.h.e.ntic, the editor of this Commentary ventures the suggestion that the guardians of the child Mulek escaped to Jaffa, where they found a "Tarshish"-ship that would take them to Spain, and possibly; across the Atlantic. Jonah, it will be remembered, on his flight, went to Jaffa, where he found a ship going to Tarshish, Spain, on which he took passage. (Jonah 1:3)1

SC Mosiah 7 3 Mosiah 7 4 Mosiah 7 5 Mosiah 7 6Verses 3-6

SC Mosiah 7 3 Mosiah 7 4 Mosiah 7 5 Mosiah 7 6Not knowing the course they should travel, they took forty days in their wanderings. An expedition consisting of sixteen strong men, headed by Ammon, a descendant of King Zarahemla, needed forty days to reach a hill north in the Land of Shilom, a district contiguous to the Land of Lehi-Nephi. But they were lost in the wilderness for some days. The ruler of these expatriates from Zarahemla was Limhi, a grandson of Zeniff, who had led the malcontents to their former homes.

Mosiah 7 7Verse 7

Mosiah 7 7In verse six we are told that Ammon made what he thought were the proper arrangements to fulfill his mission. He chose three of their number to accompany him, "and they went down into the Land of Nephi." Their names were Amaleki, Helem, and Hem. When Ammon and his companions reached Lehi-Nephi, King Limhi happened to be outside the confines of the city. King Limhi's guards, fancying that Ammon and those who were with him were spies, or perhaps some of the priests of Noah, put Ammon and his party in prison. This suspected Noah, before his death, was king of the land over which Limhi ruled.

Mosiah 7 8Verse 8

Mosiah 7 8They were brought before the king. Ammon and his companions remained in prison two days. Then they were brought forth and made to stand before the king. The bands that held them tightly were released, or, at least, loosened and Ammon was commanded to answer any question the king might ask him.

SC Mosiah 7 9 Mosiah 7 10 Mosiah 7 11Verses 9-11

SC Mosiah 7 9 Mosiah 7 10 Mosiah 7 11And he said unto them: Behold, I am Limhi...Ye are permitted to speak. King Limhi disclosed his identity to Ammon and his brethren, proving himself to be king, the son of Noah, and the grandson of Zeniff, who, himself, had been made king by the voice of the people. He asked Ammon why he had been so bold, so foolhardy, and so rash, as to approach the defended city when he knew it was the custom to slay anyone who, without apparent reason, happened to do so. Ammon's life and the lives of his companions were solely in the hands of the king.

SC Mosiah 7 12 Mosiah 7 13Verse 12-13

SC Mosiah 7 12 Mosiah 7 13I am Ammon, and am a descendant of Zarahemla. With due regard for the courtesies due one of royal station, Ammon paid obeisance to his regal captor. He recounted, after praising God for the privilege of speaking, his own birth and how he had come from Zarahemla to bring succor if it were needed, and thereby learn of the circumstances surrounding the condition of their brethren whom Zeniff had "brought up out of the land." The mistake King Limhi had made, was now corrected, and an explanation of it was quickly realized by Ammon.

SC Mosiah 7 14 Mosiah 7 15 Mosiah 7 16Verses 14-16

SC Mosiah 7 14 Mosiah 7 15 Mosiah 7 16Better that we be slaves to the Nephites than to pay tribute to the king of the Lamanites. The Nephites, who under King Limhi dwelt in the land of Lehi-Nephi, like their brethren in Zarahemla, had heard nothing of the others since they parted many years before. At one time they all lived in that great city which was their capital, but restive souls among them, urged many to unite and return to Lehi-Nephi where it was hoped they could re-establish homes in the land which under the Mosaic Law they believed was the land of their inheritance. Many who departed with Zeniff and also many who remained in Zarahemla felt bereft of the association of friends and loved ones from whom they hoped to hear.

SC Mosiah 7 14 Mosiah 7 15 Mosiah 7 16The uncertainty of the fate of the others preyed heavily upon them. They wished to know what had become of one another. They grew insistent to the extent that King Mosiah, who lived in Zarahemla, ordered a party of strong men to go search them out. After forty days they found their ill-fortuned brethren existing in a most grievous manner. Ammon learned that they were abused, spied upon, and were watched continually by the Lamanites who had imposed taxes which were beyond any measure of need. In fact they were in bondage.

SC Mosiah 7 14 Mosiah 7 15 Mosiah 7 16King Limhi, though sorely burdened, rejoiced because now that their brethren in Zarahemla would soon know of their oppression, they would be delivered. In his hour of thankfulness, the king even expressed the willingness of his people to be slaves of their brethren if they so desired. But, however, this thing could not be done; the Law of Moses prohibited brethren from enslaving brethren. In any event, Limhi, the wretched overseer-for he was only nominally a king-determined that, if possible, his people would no longer pay tribute to the Lamanite king. "I will rejoice," he said, "and on the morrow I will cause that my people shall rejoice also."

SC Mosiah 7 14 Mosiah 7 15 Mosiah 7 16King Limhi then bid his soldiers to release Ammon and his friends and to take such help to the others of Ammon's companions that he had left at the camping place near Shilom, for they were, doubtless, weary and worn with the toils of a long journey in which they had "suffered hunger, thirst, and fatigue."

Mosiah 7 17Verse 17

Mosiah 7 17King Limhi sent a proclamation to all his people. It was the custom among the Nephites to meet at the call of their ruler at some sacred place where they could receive any message they had to deliver. Jacob had imparted the word of the Lord to the Nephites from the temple his brother, Nephi, had caused to be erected; King Benjamin sent heralds throughout all the land to proclaim a conference at the temple in Zarahemla; in similar manner King Limhi now ordered his people to present themselves at the temple in Lehi-Nephi where they "would hear the words he should speak to them."

Mosiah 7 18Verse 18

Mosiah 7 18O ye, my people, lift up your heads and be comforted. The people gathered as King Limhi had commanded, and he spoke words of comfort and courage to them. He told them that the time was coming and "is not far distant," when with joy they would cease to be tyrannized by their enemies, that in spite of the many vain struggles that they had made to escape their oppressive bondsmen, they now would be delivered, and that they would be set free from being the slaves of the Lamanites.

SC Mosiah 7 19 Mosiah 7 20Verse 19-20

SC Mosiah 7 19 Mosiah 7 20Therefore, lift up your heads, and rejoice, and put your trust in God. Unlike his father, King Noah, who had preceded him on the throne, Limhi was a courageous and a God-fearing man. He had seen the afflictions of his people increase with the examples his father had set, and, with them, he had suffered the burdensome tasks that were imposed by their Lamanite bondsmen.

SC Mosiah 7 19 Mosiah 7 20No doubt, Limhi was a student of the Sacred Scriptures; in them he found where God had delivered the Children of Israel from Egyptian bondage and had caused that they should escape the perils of their long journey in the wilderness. He read where the Lord had brought them through the Red Sea on dry ground, and that He had fed them with manna from above. King Limhi also read where, in the dry Arabian Desert, water, by the power of God, was brought forth from the granite rock so that the Children of Israel could slake their thirst. Of these things, Limhi reminded his people, and from hearing them again they gained courage and hope.

SC Mosiah 7 19 Mosiah 7 20Limhi then turned to their own experiences. This same God, he said, brought their fathers out of Jerusalem and thereby saved them from wicked bondage under unpitying enemies. God has preserved this people until now according to the promise He made to them when first Lehi's colony disembarked from the ship which under divine guidance they had prepared. The Lord promised them that as long as they were obedient and kept His commandments, they would be blessed and prospered in the land. King Limhi now declared that through no other faults than their own, they were in sore bondage to the Lamanites. He said it was the result of wickedness and the abominations of which they were guilty that the Lord "has brought us into bondage."

SC Mosiah 7 21 Mosiah 7 22 Mosiah 7 23Verses 21-23

SC Mosiah 7 21 Mosiah 7 22 Mosiah 7 23Zeniff was deceived by King Laman. Limhi pointed to the trials which his people had undergone because of wickedness. He began his resume by citing the exploits of his grandfather, Zeniff. He told them that Zeniff was a man of redoubtable will; he was not easily discouraged but persevered so greatly in his scheme to re-colonize their old homes that he became "overzealous to inherit the land of his fathers."

SC Mosiah 7 21 Mosiah 7 22 Mosiah 7 23Zeniff, Limhi reminded his people, made a treaty with the king of the Lamanites whereby he and his followers obtained much of the choicest land in the Lamanite kingdom. This treaty also gave them the cities of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom. Zeniff, by the voice of the people was then made king over all the Nephites who dwelt in that land.

SC Mosiah 7 21 Mosiah 7 22 Mosiah 7 23King Laman had only one object in mind when he made that favorable treaty with Zeniff, Limhi declared. The well hidden purpose of the Lamanite king was to have settled in the midst of his indolent subjects a thrifty and industrious people as were the Nephites. When they became settled in their new homes, and the land given them began to yield an abundance of the field, the intention of King Laman was to extract as tribute from the hard-working Nephites a goodly portion of their income. In fulfillment of this plot Limhi declared that even then they were paying to the Lamanite king, one half of all the grain they produced, one half of the increase of their flocks and their herds, and even, he said, "one half of all we possess." We do this as he demands or we forfeit our lives.

SC Mosiah 7 21 Mosiah 7 22 Mosiah 7 23Not to pity himself or his people, nor to offer any excuses for the past, King Limhi contrasted their awful condition with what it might have been had they served the Lord as was their portion. For them to see their almost hopeless state in their bitter remorse was sufficient cause for them to mourn.

SC Mosiah 7 24 Mosiah 7 25Verses 24-25

SC Mosiah 7 24 Mosiah 7 25Many of our brethren have been slain. In addition to the bondage in which the Nephites were held, King Limhi recounted to them the several unsuccessful efforts they had made to gain liberty. In these vain attempts "many of our brethren have been slain," "and all because of iniquity," he said.

SC Mosiah 7 24 Mosiah 7 25If we had not yielded to the blandishments of sin, and had not rejected the words of God's servants whom He sent to warn us, the Lord would not have suffered this great affliction to come upon us. King Limhi further reminded his people of the discord and the contentions among them that sometimes rose to such heights that they even shed the blood of their antagonists.

SC Mosiah 7 26 Mosiah 7 27 Mosiah 7 28Verses 26-28

SC Mosiah 7 26 Mosiah 7 27 Mosiah 7 28A prophet of the Lord have they slain. King Limhi continued the indictment of his people. So recently had they connived in the Prophet Abinadi's death that the circumstances of it were fresh in everyone's mind. Because he spoke boldly of their sins and called upon them to forsake their wicked ways, they became angry with him and caused him to be burned at the stake.

SC Mosiah 7 26 Mosiah 7 27 Mosiah 7 28To show them the enormity of their wickedness, King Limhi set forth in detail many of the things Abinadi prophesied, and for these, he said, you have taken him and "put him to death." To excuse your blameworthy conduct you betook yourselves all manner of evil doings. "Therefore," he asked them, "who wondereth that they [we] are in bondage, and that they [we] are smitten with sore afflictions?"

Mosiah 7 29Verse 29

Mosiah 7 29I will not succor my people in the day of their transgression. Succor means aid, help, or assist.

Mosiah 7 30Verse 30

Mosiah 7 30If my people shall sow filthiness. Like the passage quoted in verse twenty-nine, we do not find these words in the Hebrew Scriptures. However, a similar meaning is conveyed in Hosea 8:7:

Mosiah 7 30For they [Israel] have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk: the bud shall yield no meal.

Mosiah 7 30also,

Mosiah 7 30Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. (Job 4:8)

Mosiah 7 31Verse 31

Mosiah 7 31If my people shall sow filthiness, they shall reap the east wind. The reference to "the east wind" as an agent of destruction shows that the author of these texts was influenced by a mode of thinking that obtained in ancient Palestine. In that country the east wind then as now was harmful to vegetation. In the winter it is dry and cold, and in the summer it is dry and hot. It carries off the moisture on the leaves rapidly causing them to wither and die. On the Mediterranean this east wind is known as a levanter, and is regarded as dangerous to sailors. It was in such a storm that Paul was shipwrecked, and, with all the crew and passengers, stranded on the island of Malta. (See Acts 27:14-44) The Prophet Habakkuk (Hab. 3:17) describes in a few words what may be expected when the east wind reaps its harvest of destruction: "Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will joy in the God of my salvation." (See Mosiah 12:6)

Mosiah 7 32Verse 32

Mosiah 7 32The promise of the Lord is fulfilled. This conclusion of King Limhi's was based on the words of the Prophet Abinadi, who, when the flames of the fire the wicked priests of King Noah had kindled began to sear his aching feet, cried out against them, saying:

Mosiah 7 32Behold, even as ye have done unto me, so shall it come to pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer even the pains of death by fire; and this because they believe in the salvation of the Lord their God.

Mosiah 7 32And it will come to pass that ye shall be afflicted with all manner of diseases because of your iniquities.

Mosiah 7 32Yea, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven by wild and ferocious beasts.

Mosiah 7 32And in that day ye shall be hunted, and ye shall be taken by the hand of your enemies, and then ye shall suffer, as I suffer, the pains of death by fire.

Mosiah 7 32Thus God executeth vengeance upon those that destroy his people. O God, receive my soul.

Mosiah 7 33Verse 33

Mosiah 7 33If you will turn to the Lord. The people knew that King Limhi spoke the truth; every word of Abinadi's had been fulfilled. They had been driven and hunted by the Lamanites who resisted every effort the Nephites made to escape the ravages of their taskmaster's hatred. Disease and pestilence had taken their toll. Insurrection from within, and invasion of their capital city, made them like a "wild flock...driven by wild and ferocious beasts." King Noah, like Abinadi, was burned to death. The people had only one recourse. King Limhi pointed to it. He, no doubt, remembered the words of the Psalmist, "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth .... he shall preserve thee from all evil." (Ps. 121) Like being bourne aloft on an eagle's pinions, far above the rugged pursuits of life, the memory of these words raised King Limhi to heights of which he never before had dreamed. A prayer left his lips: "Almighty God, in all our trials we turn unto Thee, who art our ever-present help in time of trouble. Forsake us not nor abandon us. Make us feel that Thou art near unto all who call upon Thee, who call upon Thee in truth. Guide us by Thy counsel and lead us in Thy love...(Jewish Prayer) May we find favor in Thy sight."

Mosiah 7 33King Limhi rejoiced in the Lord; he bade his people also to rejoice and promised them that notwithstanding the errors of the past, if they would put their trust in the Lord and determine in their hearts to serve Him, at His own will and pleasure, He will "deliver you out of bondage." (Mosiah 17: 15-19)

Ammon

A descendant of Zarahemla, (either his son or grandson) who led a party of sixteen picked men from Zarahemla to Lehi-Nephi in the reign of Mosiah II in the endeavor to discover what had become of the people of Zeniff. They were unacquainted with the road and wandered for forty days in the wilderness before they reached their destination. Ammon then chose three companions, Amaleki, Helem and Hem to go forward and reconnoiter. They were discovered by King Limhi and his guards when near the city and cast into prison, being mistaken for the apostate priests of King Noah. After two days they were again brought before the king, when mutual explanations ensued and Ammon to his joy found that he had reached those for whom he was in search. But Limhi's people were in great distress and in bondage to the Lamanites. The next day Limhi assembled his people at the temple that they might all hear of the prosperity of their brethren in Zarahemla, at the recital of which they greatly rejoiced. Limhi and his people also wished to make covenant with God by baptism but there was no one among them authorized to administer this ordinance and Ammon would not, considering himself an unworthy servant. Their next duty was to escape from their Lamanitish task-masters which they shortly afterwards effected with the aid of Ammon and Gideon; Ammon and his brethren guiding them through the wilderness to the land of Zarahemla (B.C. 112).

Helem

A brother of Ammon, the leader of the party that went from Zarahemla to Lehi-Nephi to discover the people of Zeniff (B.C. 122). Helem accompanied his brethren on this expedition and was one of the four cast into prison by King Limhi, under the supposition that they were some of the priests of his father, Noah, who had carried off the daughters of the Lamanites. Helem is only mentioned by name in connection with this incident but it is evident that if he was a brother of Ammon, according to the flesh, he was a descendant of Zarahemla and doubtless was born in the land of that name and returned to it with the rest of the party when they led the people of Limhi out of the land of Lehi-Nephi.

Laman

A king of the Lamanites. His father's name is said to have been the same as his own. Presuming him to have been the son of the monarch who made the treaty with Zeniff, he came to the throne about B.C. 160 and immediately commenced war with the Nephites in the land of Lehi-Nephi. As long as Zeniff lived the Lamanites were unsuccessful and were driven back to their own possessions with great slaughter; but when the weak and corrupt Noah reigned in the place of his father they became more successful. Their first invasion in Noah's reign was, however, unsuccessful but after his people had slain the prophet Abinadi, the Lord used the Lamanites to scourge them for their iniquities. The hosts of this people came upon Lehi-Nephi from the borders of Shemlon. Noah ordered a precipitate retreat into the wilderness; but being incumbered with women and children, the Lamanites overtook them. The coward king commanded that the women and children should be left to the mercy of the invaders and that the men continue their flight. Some obeyed but many refused. Those who remained with their families caused their women to plead with the Lamanites for their lives. Then the latter, charmed with the beauty of the Nephite women, had compassion on them, spared their lives but held the Nephites in tribute-one-half of all they possessed was the amount of the Lamanite exaction. Laman set guards around the land of Nephi to prevent the escape of any of the Nephites; their tribute was too valuable to the indolent Lamanites to permit of its decease or stoppage. In this condition things remained for two years.

At this time there was a romantic spot in the land of Shemlon, where the Lamanitish maidens were in the habit of gathering on pleasure bent. Here they sang, danced and made merry with all the gaiety of youthful innocence and overflowing spirits. One day, when a few were thus gathered, they were suddenly surprised, and twenty-four of their number were carried off by strange men, who from their appearance, were unmistakably Nephites.

On learning of this act of treachery the Lamanites were stirred to uncontrollable anger and without seeking an explanation they made a sudden incursion into the territory held by King Limhi. This attack, however, was not successful, for their movements, though not understood, had been discovered and their intended victims poured forth to meet them.

With Limhi and his people it was a war for existence: to be defeated was to be annihilated; his warriors therefore fought with superhuman energy and desperation and eventually they succeeded in driving the Lamanites back. So speedy did the flight become, that in their confusion the Lamanites left their wounded king lying among the heaps of slain. There he was discovered by the victors. In the interview between him and Limhi that followed, mutual explanations ensued. The Lamanite king complained bitterly of the outrage committed on the daughters of his people, while Limhi protested that he and his subjects were innocent of the base act. Further investigation developed the fact that some of the iniquitous priests of King Noah, who had fled into the wilderness from the dreaded vengeance of their abused countrymen, at the time that monarch was killed, were the guilty parties. Being without wives and fearing to return home, they had adopted this plan to obtain them.

On hearing this explanation King Laman consented to make an effort to pacify his angry hosts. At the head of an unarmed body of Nephites he went forth and met his armies who were returning to the attack. He explained what he had learned and the Lamanites, possibly somewhat ashamed of their rashness, renewed the covenant of peace.

This peace, unfortunately, was of short duration. The Lamanites grew arrogant and grievously oppressive and under their exactions and cruelty the condition of Limhi's subjects grew continually worse until they were little better off than were their ancestors in Egypt before Moses, their deliverer, arose. Three times they broke out in ineffectual rebellion and just as often their task-masters grew more cruel and exacting, until their spirits were entirely broken; they cowered before their oppressors, and bowed "to the yoke of bondage, submitting themselves to be smitten and to be driven to and fro and burdened according to the desires of their enemies."

In process of time the Lord softened the hearts of the Lamanites so that they began to ease the burdens of their slaves but he did not deliver the Nephites out of bondage at once. They, however, gradually prospered and raised more grain, flocks and herds, so that they did not suffer with hunger. And in the Lord's due time they escaped from their Lamanite oppressors and in safety reached the land of Zarahemla.

Great was the excitement among the subjects of Laman when they found their Nephite vassals had disappeared. An army was immediately sent in pursuit. It followed the fugitives for some distance but did not overtake them and lost itself in the wilderness. In their wandering the Lamanite troops found the priests of Noah and their Lamanitish wives and later they came across the people of Alma in the land of Helam. The Lamanites extended their suzerainty over both these peoples and King Laman appointed Amulon, the leader of the priests of Noah, the local ruler.

Limhi

The son of Noah, and third king over the colony which left Zarahemla and returned to Lehi-Nephi. His reign was little more than a nominal one, as his people were in bondage to the Lamanites to whom they paid one-half of all they possessed and one-half of the products of their yearly toil. Out of this were paid the guards who were set to watch that none of the Nephites escaped. Limhi's reign was marked by several disastrous wars, one brought on by the fugitive priests of King Noah (see Laman, Amulon), the others were the abortive attempts of the people of Limhi to throw off the oppressor's yoke but in every case the revolt ended in its suppression and the infliction of heavier burdens and more cruel indignities upon the unfortunate Nephites. All of this was in fulfillment of the words of the prophet Abinadi. Thus the years slowly and painfully wore away. The Lord, after a time, softened the hearts of the Lamanites so that they treated their captives with less cruelty. He also prospered them in their labors that they did not suffer any more from hunger.

In this sad condition of bondage and serfdom the people of Limhi had one hope. It was to communicate with their Nephite friends in the land of Zarahemla. To this end Limhi secretly fitted out an expedition consisting of a small number of men. This company became lost in the wilderness and traveled a long distance northward until they found a land covered with the dry bones of men who appeared to have fallen in battle. Limhi's people thought this must be the land of Zarahemla and that their Nephite brethren who dwelt there had been destroyed. But in this they were wrong for they found with the dead some records engraved on plates of gold, which, when afterwards translated by the power of God, showed that these bones were those of some of the Jaredites who had been slain in war. They evidently missed the land of Zarahemla, having traveled to the west of it and passed northward through the Isthmus of Panama.

Shortly after this a small company, numbering sixteen men, reached them from Zarahemla. Their leader's name was Ammon. He had been sent by King Mosiah to the land of Nephi, to find out what had become of the people who left with Zeniff, Limhi's grandfather. At first Ammon's men were taken for spies and east into prison. The next day the mistake was discovered and Limhi and his people were overjoyed to hear from their friends. Soon plans were laid to effect the escape of the enslaved Nephites, which, under the guidance of Limhi, Ammon and Gideon were successfully accomplished. The Lamanite guards were made drowsy through a large present of wine which they freely drank. While in this condition the Nephites escaped through an unfrequented pass, crossed the wilderness and reached the land of Zarahemla in safety (B.C. 122). After the arrival of his people in Zarahemla we hear nothing more of Limhi, save that he and all who accompanied him from Lehi-Nephi were baptized by Alma, the elder, and became members of the church of God.
