Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 8

Mosiah 8 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 8 1 Limhi told his people about their brethren in Zarahemla. In the abridgment he made of the great number of plates in his possession, Mormon notes that after King Limhi had finished speaking to his distraught and greatly distressed people, he told them all the things Ammon had previously made known unto him concerning "their brethren in Zarahemla." By way of interpolation, Mormon also notes that only a few of the things King Limhi said in addressing his people were written by the abridger, himself, "in this book."

SC Mosiah 8 2 Mosiah 8 3 Mosiah 8 4 Verses 2-4

SC Mosiah 8 2 Mosiah 8 3 Mosiah 8 4 King Limhi caused that Ammon should also speak. The second-hand account which King Limhi gave to his people concerning their brethren in Zarahemla was verified by Ammon, who stood before the multitude that had gathered there and rehearsed to them the many things that had happened in Zarahemla under the reign of King Benjamin, or from the time Zeniff and his followers left their capital city until "the time that he himself came up out of the land."

SC Mosiah 8 2 Mosiah 8 3 Mosiah 8 4 Ammon told the assembled throng of the peaceful reign of King Benjamin and of the growth of the people there in both numbers and materials. He told them of the righteous desires of Benjamin for his people, and of the examples he set for them to follow. He recounted how King Benjamin had "labored with his own hands" that his people should not be burdened with taxes which might become oppressive, and, also that Benjamin desired no recompense for his service to them, save that they serve God by ministering to each others' wants.

SC Mosiah 8 2 Mosiah 8 3 Mosiah 8 4 Many other of Benjamin's teachings were explained to Limhi's people by Ammon. How great, they thought, was the difference under which they, themselves, had been forced to live by wicked King Noah and the unselfish rule of Benjamin in Zarahemla. It is worthy of note to remember that for many years Limhi's people had not been taught Gospel principles. Noah's priests had explained none of them to the people of Lehi-Nephi, but rather had led them into transgression. They were confused by Ammon's remarks concerning the angel's visit to Benjamin and the wonderful things the angel had said to him. Ammon, with great care, explained to them the coming of the Christ, His Atoning sacrifice and the Salvation prepared for the children of men. He pointed out, so that they might understand, the fulfillment of the Law of Moses in the coming of the Messiah which, he said, according to the words of Benjamin was "not far distant."

SC Mosiah 8 2 Mosiah 8 3 Mosiah 8 4 When Ammon had finished telling King Limhi's people the wonderful story about Benjamin and his people in Zarahemla, Limhi dismissed the eager throng that had listened to Ammon's recital. As they each went to their own homes, we may imagine the anguish that every memory of King Noah and his wicked priests produced in their aching hearts.

SC Mosiah 8 5 Mosiah 8 6Verses 5-6

SC Mosiah 8 5 Mosiah 8 6Limhi had the records of his people brought before Ammon to read. The Nephites in Lehi-Nephi, notwithstanding their many faults, had kept a record of their doings from the time of Zeniff to when Ammon came among them. The plates upon which this record was kept were brought before him that Ammon might read them.

SC Mosiah 8 5 Mosiah 8 6The ease with which Ammon read the record of Limhi's people astonished Limhi; his evident understanding of many obscure writings therein, and his knowledge of different races and nations of men, including the Jews and their contemporary peoples, prompted Limhi to inquire of Ammon, "if he could interpret languages." "Ammon told him that he could not." We presume that Ammon had become acquainted with Jewish history by intently reading the Hebrew Scriptures, which you remember were written upon the brass plates of Laban.

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11Verses 7-11

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11King Limhi sent an expedition to find Zarahemla. In the hope that they would get help in their efforts to escape from Lamanite bondage, King Limhi told Ammon that, in dire distress, he had chosen forty-three of "my people" to go to Zarahemla and seek assistance to that end.

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11The men Limhi selected became lost in the surrounding wilderness; they did not know the proper way to travel, nor the distance between Lehi-Nephi and Zarahemla. They only knew it was far to the north and traveled for many days in that direction. At last they reached a land "of many waters."

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11In this land, they found the remains of a great people. There, they discovered the ruins of many buildings. Scattered among the broken arches and displaced columns of a strange architecture they came across the dry bones of great numbers of men who had evidently fallen in battle. The sacred record describes them as, "a people who were as numerous as the hosts of Israel."

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11To prove to Limhi that the discovery they had made was true, and that their supposition was correct in which they supposed that their brethren in Zarahemla were all destroyed in battle, they brought back with them many relics of these dead people.

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11Among the proofs of their surmise were many artifacts used by their supposed brethren. They carried back to King Limhi in Lehi-Nephi, copper breastplates which were undamaged by age and were yet sound; they also brought swords whose hilts were decayed and gone, and the blades thereof were corroded with rust.

SC Mosiah 8 7 Mosiah 8 8 Mosiah 8 9 Mosiah 8 10 Mosiah 8 11But, by far, the most important of their finds was a set of twenty-four gold plates, which they brought with them on their return. These gold plates were filled with engravings written in a strange language which no one in King Limhi's domain could translate. Again and again, he sought their interpretation; he felt that in them was hidden a great mystery. The anxiety to learn what this mystery was, greatly induced Limhi to ask Ammon once more, "Canst thou translate?"

Mosiah 8 12Verse 12

Mosiah 8 12Knowest thou of any one that can translate? King Limhi proceeded to question Ammon further concerning the translation of the plates that had fallen into his hands. He made no mention of their probable worth, they being made of gold, but talked to Ammon only of the great store of knowledge and understanding which he felt was hidden behind the faces of numberless, and to him, incomprehensible glyphs. Ammon listened to Limhi's words as the king intently explained to him the reasons why he desired that they be translated "into our language." Perhaps, he ventured, they may tell us of those people who were destroyed, and the causes therefore. Now I ask you again, "Knowest thou of any one that can translate?"

SC Mosiah 8 13 Mosiah 8 14 Mosiah 8 15 Mosiah 8 16 Mosiah 8 17 Mosiah 8 18Verses 13-18

SC Mosiah 8 13 Mosiah 8 14 Mosiah 8 15 Mosiah 8 16 Mosiah 8 17 Mosiah 8 18I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records. Ammon answered the king and said that there is a man in Zarahemla who has a gift from God, who can translate all records of ancient peoples. He has "wherewith that he can look" and by the power of God, can translate writings belonging to ages now long past dead. The wherewith of which Ammon spoke, he said "are called interpreters," and that no man could look in them and receive the blessings they imparted unless he was commanded by the Lord so to do. Whosoever the Lord commanded "to look in them," Ammon said, "is called seer."

SC Mosiah 8 13 Mosiah 8 14 Mosiah 8 15 Mosiah 8 16 Mosiah 8 17 Mosiah 8 18The Presiding High Priest in Zarahemla, who also is the king of that land, he continued, is he who is commanded by the Lord to "do these things, and who has this high gift from God."

SC Mosiah 8 13 Mosiah 8 14 Mosiah 8 15 Mosiah 8 16 Mosiah 8 17 Mosiah 8 18King Limhi then observed that a "seer is greater than a prophet," to which Ammon explained to the king the many different gifts had by each. A seer, he said, is a revelator and a prophet, too, and no gift is greater than, by the power of God, to reveal the history of any nation in the undecipherable writings of their prophets and wise men.

SC Mosiah 8 13 Mosiah 8 14 Mosiah 8 15 Mosiah 8 16 Mosiah 8 17 Mosiah 8 18Not only, Ammon went on to explain, does a seer know the history of peoples now long forgotten, but also of things to come. By them all things are made known; hidden things are brought to light, and secret things are made manifest. Things, "that otherwise could not be known" are made known by a seer. He is both prophet and seer.

Mosiah 8 18Verse 18

Mosiah 8 18Thus God had provided a means. Ever mindful of the needs of His children, the Lord, in His watchful care over them, has provided the means whereby they can obtain great knowledge and understanding; this means, also, through faith, is a lamp unto their feet and an unending source of spiritual help in time of need.

SC Mosiah 8 19 Mosiah 8 20 Mosiah 8 21Verses 19-21

SC Mosiah 8 19 Mosiah 8 20 Mosiah 8 21Limhi rejoiced exceedingly, and gave thanks to God. Limhi was filled with joy as he heard Ammon discourse on the gift God had endowed King Mosiah with. His great hope regarding these twenty-four gold plates would now be fulfilled. For a moment, he forgot all plans to escape the bondage his people were in. With great reason he proclaimed the majesty of God, and thanked the Giver of all good for his mercy and kindness to his children. He was persuaded that a great mystery was contained in these plates, and from it, his own people would learn many lessons. It was but natural that Limhi, abounding in the new faith and hope Ammon's visit had inspired, interposed his heartfelt conclusion, "these interpreters were doubtless prepared for the purpose of unfolding all such mysteries to the children of men."

SC Mosiah 8 19 Mosiah 8 20 Mosiah 8 21O how marvelous are the works of the Lord. King Limhi remembered the wickedness of his people under the profligate rule of his father, Noah. He began to realize that the Lord, not because of their waywardness but in spite of it, prepared ways for their preservation from folly and weakness the consequences of which they had brought upon themselves.

SC Mosiah 8 19 Mosiah 8 20 Mosiah 8 21He took a retrospect of all his past life, and likened it unto the lives of his people. They had not sought for wisdom. Limhi remembered the words of Solomon, "I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy." (Prov. 30:3) Yet, in the future, we imagine he resolved that like unto Joshua he would serve God and keep His commandments.

SC Mosiah 8 19 Mosiah 8 20 Mosiah 8 21Wisdom, implies, spiritual insight. His people had refused to be guided by its holy promptings.

General Notes

Hundreds of years later than the events herein recorded, the last of the Nephite prophets, Moroni, in commenting on this particular subject which was included in the history of the Jaredites written on the twenty-four plates of gold, said,

And it came to pass that the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: Behold, thou shalt not suffer these things which ye have seen and heard to go forth unto the world, until the time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh; wherefore, ye shall treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it to no man. And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them and shall seal them up, that no one can interpret them; for ye shall write them in a language that they cannot be read.

And behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write. For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write. And when the Lord had said these words, he showed unto, the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth.

For he had said unto him in times before, that it he would believe in him that he could show unto him all things-it should be shown unto him; therefore the Lord could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things. And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I Will show them in mine own due time unto the children of men. And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him that he should seal up the two stones which he had received, and show them not, until the Lord should show them unto the children of men. (Ether 3:21-28)

And the Lord commanded the brother of Jared to go down out of the mount from the presence of the Lord, and write the things which he had seen; and they, were forbidden to come unto the children of men until after that he should be lifted up upon the cross; and for this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they should not come unto the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people.

And after Christ truly had showed himself unto his people he commanded that they should be made manifest.

And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief, and there is none save it be the Lamanites, and they have rejected the gospel of Christ; therefore I am commanded that I should hide them up again in the earth.

Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the brother of Jared.

Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written them. And he commanded me that I should seal them, up; and he also hath commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord. (Ether 4: 1-5)

For this cause did King Mosiah keep them. (Ether 4:1) This Mosiah, the son of King Benjamin, was the last of the kings of Zarahemla, preceding the judges. He was the translator of the contents of the twenty-four plates of gold, which were delivered to him by King Limhi. The translation was made by "the means of two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow." The stones, we read in the Book of Mosiah, were "prepared from the beginning, and were handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of interpreting languages." (Mosiah 28:11- 14) They were in all probability, the stones which were given to Moriancumr, and, later, to the Prophet Joseph by the resurrected prophet of the Nephites, Moroni.

How did King Mosiah get them? We turn to the Book of Omni. We read there that during the reign of the first Mosiah, the father of King Benjamin, a large stone with engravings thereon was brought to Zarahemla, to the king. He translated the text "by the gift and power of God," and found that it contained an "account of one Coriantumr and the slain of his people." The chronicler (Amaleki) adds the explanation that Coriantumr had been found by the people of Zarahemla-perhaps by hunters-and that he had lived in that country the last nine moons-months-of his life.

Coriantumr was the last king of the Jaredites of whom we have any historical record, as Ether was the last of their prophets, He fought his savage enemy, Shiz, at Ramah, until both their armies were annihilated. Then he ended the life of his antagonist. He, himself, lay on the battlefield, apparently lifeless. But he recovered, and began his pilgrimage which eventually ended in Zarahemla. As the head of the Jaredite government, or kingdom, Coriantumr may have had charge of the Interpreters, although they were useless to him, and brought them with with him to Zarahemla where they were later given into the custody of King Mosiah, the father of Benjamin.

If the conversation between Limhi and Ammon regarding the Interpreters refers to the Urim and Thummim, as it undoubtedly does, it is evident that the two stones were no part of Limhi's treasure. Limhi had the plates, there is no doubt about that, and King Mosiah had the Interpreters long before he received the plates to interpret.

All dwindled in unbelief. Moroni also informs us that the Nephites had dwindled in unbelief and the Lamanites had rejected the Gospel, therefore he had been commanded to hide the sacred relics in the earth to come forth again at some future time. These relics were the account of Moriancumer of his visions on the mount as he wrote it and sealed it up until the appearance of Christ on this continent. There were also the plates of brass, the plates of Nephi, the translation of the twenty-four plates, the plates themselves, and the Interpreters, all of which sacred objects had been used by the Church of Christ on this continent. (Compare Mosiah 28:11-13) All these the Prophet Moroni entrusted to the bosom of motherly earth, there to rest until the Gentiles would repent and exercise faith in the Lord. (Ether 4:7)

The Two Stones. These two stones, which are also known as the Interpreters (Ether 4:5; Mosiah 28:20) were, as we read here, entrusted to the care of Moriancumer before he descended from the ever memorable scene of his visions and revelations. They were delivered to him with the admonition that they be sealed up, together with the sacred records that were kept, and thus hidden from the eyes of the world until they, in the due time of the Lord, were to come forth. Their purpose is stated to be to "magnify," that is to say, to make clear, "the things which ye shall write." (Ether 4:7)

According to the Doctrine and Covenants (17:1) the sacred instrument that was deposited in the Hill Cumorah and delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith, was the Urim and Thummim112 which was received by the Brother of Jared while on the mount. When the Prophet Joseph received the stones, Sept. 22, 1827, they were framed in silver bows and fastened to a breastplate. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:35)

From the D&C 130:8-9, where God is said to dwell on a globe which is a Urim and Thummim, the name by which we know the Interpreters, we learn that the earth is to be sanctified and made immortal-"made like a crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants thereon." We conclude from that statement, that the two stones were crystals. The Prophet Joseph, further, adds to our information that the "white stone" mentioned in Rev. 2:17 "will become a Urim and Thummim to each who receives one, and that "a white stone" will be given to everyone who is privileged to come into the Celestial Kingdom. On the stone a new name will be written. By that means "things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms, even all kingdoms, will be made known."

All the inhabitants of the earth. When Moriancumr had received the Urim and Thummim, the Lord opened his vision, possibly by means of these stones, and he was shown the human race, past and future, passing as if in panorama.

Enoch had a similar view of "many generations" upon Mt. Simeon (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:2-6, 22-69). Abraham, who received the Urim and Thummim while he was in Ur, of the Chaldees, (Abr. 3:1) had marvelous visions and revelations concerning the creation of the universe and the intelligences that were organized "before the world was." (Abr. 1:28 and Chapters 4 and 5) He was thus prepared for his mission to Egypt. (Abr. 3:15) Moses, too, who may have had in his possession the same Urim and Thummim that had been given to Abraham, had similar visions. (Moses 1:1ff) He "beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold.... And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God.... And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof." (Moses 1:27-29)

Twenty-four plates. These plates, which were found by the explorers of King Limhi, and from which Mosiah compiled the Book of Ether (Ether 1:2), were of "pure gold," or, as Mosiah explains (Mosiah 21:27) of "ore." The art of the goldsmith is very ancient. It was one of the crafts of the Jews who came out of Egypt under Moses. For we read in Ex. 39:3, that those who made the sacred robes of Aaron to wear in his temple duties or services, "beat gold into thin plates, and cut" these into fine wires which were twined into the blue, purple, scarlet and fine linen yarn of which the cloth was artfully woven.

The Record of Zeniff An account of his people, from the time they left the Land of Zarahemla until they were delivered out of the hands of the Lamanites.

Compromising chapters 9 to 22 inclusive.
