Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 9

In addition to the frequency with which King Benjamin's reign was troubled with false prophets, there was another class, who, moved by the spirit of unrest, were also a source of perplexity to the king. They were those who left the Land of Lehi-Nephi with the righteous under Mosiah and still permitted their thoughts and affections to be drawn toward their former homes and old associations. Like Lot's wife they hankered for that which they had left behind. The natural consequence was that they were constantly agitating the idea of organizing expeditions to visit their old homes.

The first of these expeditions, of which there is a record, was led by an austere and bloodthirsty man totally unfit for leadership. He was slain in a battle that was fought between members of his own group. Those who were not killed returned to Zarahemla.

Leaving Zarahemla during the early years of Mosiah's reign, the next and perhaps the most successful of these migrations came to a bitter ending, when, under their king, the Nephites escaped from bondage which the Lamanites had fastened upon them.

SC Mosiah 9 1 Mosiah 9 2 Verses 1-2

SC Mosiah 9 1 Mosiah 9 2 Lamanites...I was desirous that they should not be destroyed. Zeniff, a man who evidently was somewhat learned, had a personal knowledge of the Land of Lehi-Nephi, and also was acquainted with the language spoken by the Lamanites therein, was therefore appointed a spy to learn, if possible, the size and strength of the Lamanite armies. It must always be remembered that the Nephites regarded Lehi-Nephi as the land of their father's first inheritance. The idea of the leader of this first expedition was to overwhelm the Lamanite armies and take possession of the whole land. But, Zeniff, in making his report of the conditions he found among the Lamanites, told of so many good things which he saw that, he says, "I was desirous that they should not be destroyed."

SC Mosiah 9 1 Mosiah 9 2 Instead, Zeniff advocated that a treaty be arranged with the king of the Lamanites for his people to repossess their old homes. He argued with such ardor that a great contention arose between members of the expedition who favored this peaceful settlement of their purposes and those who preferred a war-like attack, and the leader of them ordered Zeniff to be slain. But in the attempt to carry out that order a riot ensued in which all but fifty of their number perished by violence. These survivors returned to their starting place to tell of the sad ending, the failure of their attempts.

Mosiah 9 3 Verse 3

Mosiah 9 3 And yet, I being over-zealous to inherit the land. Zeniff now gathered around him everyone who was ready and willing to make a further try at regaining possession of their homes. Anyone who has sought to make a new home in a new land knows of some of the difficulties encountered.

Mosiah 9 3 These trials the Nephites remembered. In spite of many hardships that presented themselves, Zeniff, being "over-zealous to inherit the land," subdued them, and soon a rather large company started in a southerly direction through the wilderness "to go up to the land." However, the blessings of heaven were not with them to crown their efforts; they did not merit them because, "We were slow to remember the Lord our God."

Mosiah 9 4 Verse 4

Mosiah 9 4 We pitched our tents...near to the land of our fathers. After many days in which they wandered in the wilderness, being smitten and afflicted with hunger and by pestilence, they rested at the same place where the members of the first expedition had slain one another.

SC Mosiah 9 5 Mosiah 9 6 Mosiah 9 7Verses 5-7

SC Mosiah 9 5 Mosiah 9 6 Mosiah 9 7I, with four of my men went in unto the king. Zeniff, with four others of his men went into the city where he had several conversations with the king of Lehi-Nephi. Zeniff's purpose was made known to the king, and a peaceful solution of Zeniff's request was finally arrived at. A treaty between Zeniff and the king was made in which the king covenanted with Zeniff that his people could possess the Land of Lehi-Nephi and also the Land of Shilom. The king further commanded his subjects to leave the land which he had covenanted with Zeniff that he should have. Zeniff and his followers then took possession of the covenanted land.

SC Mosiah 9 8 Mosiah 9 9Verses 8-9

SC Mosiah 9 8 Mosiah 9 9We began to build buildings and repair the walls of the city. The followers of Zeniff immediately began to repair the buildings and fortifications of the cities of Lehi-Nephi and of Shimlon which had been allowed to go to disrepair under the careless rule of their Lamanite guardians. They also began to till the soil and to plant and to prepare all manner of seeds to insure a bounteous harvest which they would need. Corn and wheat and barley were planted, also, the historian says, "and with neas, and with sheum," and with all different kinds of fruit. Neas and sheum may have been kinds of grain; sheum is a name singularly like the Hebrew shum, meaning garlic. It is found in Num. 11:5. Altogether, the beginning of Zeniff's occupancy of their traditional homeland presaged a very flourishing and fortunate future. Zeniff says, "We did begin to multiply and prosper in the land."

SC Mosiah 9 10 Mosiah 9 11 Mosiah 9 12Verses 10-12

SC Mosiah 9 10 Mosiah 9 11 Mosiah 9 12It was the cunning and the craftiness of King Laman. In making the treaty we have just noted, and in permitting Zeniff and his followers to possess the choice land in and about the cities of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom, the king of the Lamanites was not as friendly as he had pretended. His objective was to get the industrious Nephites to settle in the midst of his own people, and then by his superior numbers make the Nephites his slaves, for his people were a "lazy and an idolatrous people," an unprogressive race. In the course of twelve years the abundant harvests garnered by the people of Zeniff through their thrift and industry, began to make them strong and numerous. This caused King Laman to grow uneasy. He desired to bring them into bondage that his people might reap the benefits of the Nephites' labors. They were growing so fast that he thought that if he did not put a stop to their increase they would be the stronger of the two peoples.

SC Mosiah 9 13 Mosiah 9 14Verses 13-14

SC Mosiah 9 13 Mosiah 9 14King Laman began to stir up his people. To prevent the development of the Nephites' strength, and also to stop their growth, King Laman began to stir up anger against them in the hearts of his own people. He was so successful that in the thirteenth year of Zeniff's reign as king of the Nephites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi, a numerous host of Lamanites suddenly fell upon his people while they were feeding and watering their flocks, and began to slay both the man and women. They also carried off some of their cattle, and the corn from their fields.

SC Mosiah 9 15 Mosiah 9 16 Mosiah 9 17 Mosiah 9 18 Mosiah 9 19Verses 15-19

SC Mosiah 9 15 Mosiah 9 16 Mosiah 9 17 Mosiah 9 18 Mosiah 9 19They did call on me for protection. Those of the Nephites who were not slain or overtaken by the Lamanites fled to Zeniff for protection. As quickly as he could, he armed his people with bows and arrows, swords and cimeters, clubs and slings, and with every other kind of weapon they could invent. Thus armed, they went forth in the strength of the Lord to meet the enemy, for in their hour of peril they had cried mightily to Him, and He heard their cries and answered their prayers. From one day's sunup to that of the next they fought with a determination that was born of right and righteousness, but to their sorrow 279 of their own were slain, although the number of Lamanites slain was 3043. Only when all the Lamanites were driven "out of our land" did the carnage cease.

Zeniff

The first of the three kings who reigned over the colony of Nephites who returned from Zarahemla and established themselves in the land of Lehi-Nephi, about B.C. 200.

Zeniff and his people, having left Zarahemla, traveled southward toward the land of Nephi. The blessings of the Lord were not greatly with them, for they did not seek him nor strive to do his will. In the wilderness they lost their way and suffered from famine and many afflictions; but after many days they reached the neighborhood of the city of Lehi-Nephi the former home of their race. Here Zeniff chose four of his company and accompanied by them went to the king of the Lamanites. This monarch, whose name was Laman, received them with the appearance of kindness. He made a treaty with them and gave them the lands of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom to dwell in. He also caused his own people to remove out of these cities and the surrounding country that Zeniff's people might have full possession. King Laman was in reality not so friendly as he pretended to be. His object was to get the industrious Nephites to settle in the midst of his people and then by his superior numbers to make them his slaves; for his own subjects were a lazy, unprogressive race.

As soon as Zeniff and his followers occupied their new possessions they went to work to build houses and to repair the walls of the city, for the idle Lamanites had suffered them to fall into decay. They also commenced to till the ground and to plant all manner of seeds of grain, vegetables and fruit therein. Soon, through their thrift and industry, they began to prosper and multiply. This caused King Laman to grow uneasy. He desired to bring them into bondage that his people might reap the benefits of the labors of the Nephites. But they were growing so rapidly that he feared that if he did not soon put a stop to their increase they would be the stronger of the two peoples. To prevent this he began to stir up the hearts of his people in anger against the Nephites. He succeeded so well that in the thirteenth year of Zeniff's reign in the land of Lehi-Nephi a numerous host of Lamanites suddenly fell upon his people while they were feeding and watering their flocks and began to slay them. They also carried off some of their flocks and the corn from their fields.

Those of the Nephites who were not slain or overtaken fled to Zeniff. As quickly as he could he armed his people with bows and arrows, swords and cimeters, clubs and slings and with such other weapons as they could invent. Thus armed they went forth in the strength of the Lord to meet the enemy, for in their hour of peril they had cried mightily unto him and he heard their cries and answered their prayers.

Thus strengthened they met their foes. The battle was an obstinate and a bloody one. It lasted all day and all night. At last the Lamanites were driven back with a loss of 3,043 warriors, while the people of Zeniff had to mourn the death of 279 of their brethren. After this there was peace in the land for many years.

During this time of peace Zeniff taught his people to be very industrious. He caused his men to till the ground and raise all kinds of fruit and grain. The women he had spin and make cloth for clothing, fine linen, etc. In this way, for twenty-two years, they prospered and had uninterrupted peace.

At this time the old King Laman died and his son succeeded him upon the throne. Like many young princes he desired to distinguish himself in war. So he gathered a numerous host of the Lamanites and having armed them in the same manner as the Nephites, he led them to the north of the land of Shemlon which lay near the land of Nephi-Lehi.

When Zeniff learned of the approach of young King Laman's armies he caused the women and children of his people to hide in the wilderness but every man, young or old who was unable to bear arms was placed in the ranks to go out against the foe. Zeniff himself was then an aged man but he still continued to command his forces and led them in person to battle. Strengthened by the faith Zeniff implanted in their hearts the Nephites gained a great victory and so numerous were the slain of the Lamanites that they were not counted. After this there was peace again in the land. Shortly after this Zeniff died and unfortunately for his kingdom chose for his successor an unworthy son, named Noah.
