Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 10

SC Mosiah 10 1 Mosiah 10 2 Mosiah 10 3 Mosiah 10 4 Mosiah 10 5Verses 1-5

SC Mosiah 10 1 Mosiah 10 2 Mosiah 10 3 Mosiah 10 4 Mosiah 10 5We again began to possess the land in peace. After the days of warfare were over and the Lamanites were driven out of the land occupied by the Nephites, a peace of twenty-two years enabled the people of Zeniff to learn many of the arts that accompany days of tranquillity and calm. Zeniff taught his people to be industrious. He caused his men to till the ground and to raise all kinds of fruit and gain. He had the women spin and make cloth for clothing, and for fine linen. Although this was a period of peace, preparing for war was not neglected. Zeniff caused that weapons of warfare be accumulated in the eventuality the Lamanites should again come to battle against them. He set guards over them and also over their flocks so that they, thus protected, would not fall into the hands of their enemies.

Mosiah 10 6Verse 6

Mosiah 10 6King Laman died, and his son began to reign in his stead. At this time the old king, Laman, died, and his son succeeded him upon the throne. Like many another young man, he desired to distinguish himself in war. So he gathered a numerous host of Lamanites, and, having armed them in the same manner as the Nephites, he led them to the north of the Land of Shemlon, which bordered the Land of Lehi-Nephi.

Mosiah 10 7Verse 7

Mosiah 10 7I sent spies...that I might guard against them. One of the favorite tactics of the Lamanites was to take their opponents by surprise. To obviate any chance of being taken by surprise, Zeniff sent into their camps men who were to discover what preparations the Lamanites were taking to carry out their designs. In this way he could prepare himself against the Lamanites' plans.

Mosiah 10 8Verse 8

Mosiah 10 8The soldiers of the Lamanites were almost naked. An army of the Lamanites was a strange sight to look upon. Their heads were shaven, the only covering of their bodies being a leathern girdle about their loins. Their weapons were bows and arrows, slings, swords, and rocks.

Mosiah 10 9Verse 9

Mosiah 10 9I caused that the women and children should be hid. When Zeniff learned of the approach of young King Laman's armies, he caused the women and children of his people to hide themselves in the wilderness, but every man, young or old, who was able to bear arms was placed in the ranks to go out against the foe.

Mosiah 10 10Verse 10

Mosiah 10 10We did go up to battle in the strength of the Lord. Zeniff was now an old man, but he continued to lead his forces in person and to command them in battle.

Mosiah 10 11Verse 11

Mosiah 10 11The Lamanites knew nothing concerning the Lord. From the very first, Laman and his followers conceived the idea that they were wronged, and that Nephi had usurped certain prerogatives that rightfully belonged to the elder male member of each family. They took no cognizance of the fact that obedience to the laws of God is a detaining constituent of leadership. They reviled and mocked Nephi's steadfastness in serving the Lord. They taught their children that they had been grossly sinned against, that God did not really exist, that they were the victims of oppression and not the instigators of the fiendish practices of which the Nephites accused them. After many years of such tradition the Lamanites believed nothing of the purposes of the Almighty, and they put their trust in the things of the world.

Mosiah 10 12Verse 12.

Mosiah 10 12They were a wild, and ferocious...people. The bitter passions that occupied the hearts of the Lamanites were constantly fanned into a malignant hatred for their brethren, the Nephites, in spite of every effort the Nephites made to counteract such folly. They even were taught that they had been driven out of Jerusalem because of their unrighteous parentage. They were allowed to suffer in the wilderness and on the sea, they believed, by their brethren.

Mosiah 10 13Verse 13

Mosiah 10 13The Lamanites believed they were wronged in the land of their first inheritance. A prime excuse for one's own folly is to blame someone else for it. At this the Lamanites were masters. They justified their own faults by accusation. The mirror in which they saw themselves, distorted and confused the past. They forgot that the Lord favored Nephi because he was more diligent in keeping the commandments of the Lord.

Mosiah 10 14Verse 14

Mosiah 10 14They understood not the dealings of the Lord. Man cannot put God out of his heart and then understand the ways of the Lord. Neither can he harden his heart against Him and enjoy the blessings of heaven. Nephi's brothers grew angry with him because he perceived the Lord's wishes and received an answer to his prayers.

SC Mosiah 10 15 Mosiah 10 16Verses 15-16

SC Mosiah 10 15 Mosiah 10 16They said he robbed them. Laman and Lemuel, both, told their children, and thus it was passed on to every generation of their seed, that Nephi had unrighteously taken possession of leadership in the first place, and that to be the ruler of his people was not in his province. For usurping this leadership they had sought his life.

SC Mosiah 10 15 Mosiah 10 16Again, the historian recounts that, when conditions within the little company of refugees grew unbearable, and they separated into two factions, some following Laman and others Nephi, the followers of Nephi took with them the Plates of Brass and other sacred things. Those who followed Laman cried, "Robbery," and ever after asserted, vehemently, this lie, forgetting, too, that it was Nephi who had first obtained them.

SC Mosiah 10 17 Mosiah 10 18Verses 17-18

SC Mosiah 10 17 Mosiah 10 18All these things have they taught their children. To teach their children to hate the Nephites, to rob them, and to plunder and destroy them was the aim of the misguided Lamanites. This was the reason King Laman, cunningly and craftily, agreed that Zeniff's people should occupy the land in his domain. He was quick to see an opportunity to enslave and thus destroy them as a nation. For many years they groaned under the yoke he put on them.

SC Mosiah 10 19 Mosiah 10 20 Mosiah 10 21 Mosiah 10 22Verses 19-22

SC Mosiah 10 19 Mosiah 10 20 Mosiah 10 21 Mosiah 10 22We did contend with them, face to face. Zeniff's recital of the reasons for the Lamanites' hatred of all Nephites proved to be a rallying call. His followers no longer feared battle, nor did they shrink from it. In the strength of the Lord, with prayers for their deliverance, they "did contend with them, face to face."

SC Mosiah 10 19 Mosiah 10 20 Mosiah 10 21 Mosiah 10 22Strengthened by the faith Zeniff inspired in their hearts, the Nephites won a great victory, and so many Lamanites were slain that they were not counted. After this battle there was peace again that continued throughout all the days of Zeniff. Before he died Zeniff chose, unfortunately, for his successor an unworthy son, Noah, who led the people into many sins and ruled with such folly and weakness that they fell an easy prey to the ever-watchful Lamanite foe that everywhere surrounded them.
