Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 11

SC Mosiah 11 1 Mosiah 11 2 Verses 1-2

SC Mosiah 11 1 Mosiah 11 2 Zeniff conferred the kingdom upon Noah. In the closing paragraph of Chapter 10 we noted that when Zeniff died, he conferred the kingship upon his son, Noah. Noah reigned in his father's stead, but he was a dissolute fellow who proved to be a tyrant. Unlike his father, Zeniff, he did not guide his people according to God's commandments. He walked in darkness and sin, always pursuing that which satisfied his lusts or gratified the desires of a depraved heart. The history of his reign is a composite of crime and cruelty. It is one of the most perplexing sections of Nephite annals. As a people they had, more than once, been delivered by the Lord from the vengeance of Lamanite hatred and bloodthirstiness. They prospered when they kept the Laws of God; they grew in numbers, and the fat of the land sustained them. They were happy when they ate of the labor of their hands. They were a righteous people, and the Lord delivered them in the day of evil. Their paths were in the light when they heeded the voice of God's holy servants. The Church of God was established among them, and Zeniff had appointed priests to act in the ordinances of the Law of Moses, in which form of worship the Nephites were most zealous.

SC Mosiah 11 1 Mosiah 11 2 Human nature being as it is, the example set by wicked King Noah lured many of his people to forget the goodness of the Lord to their fathers and to follow him in evil practices. The king, who was also traditionally the spiritual leader of his subjects, replaced the good priests Zeniff had consecrated by others of his own ilk. He caused those with whom he associated to surround themselves, as he had done, with wives and concubines and encouraged his people to commit all "manner of wickedness."

SC Mosiah 11 3 Mosiah 11 4 Mosiah 11 5 Mosiah 11 6 Mosiah 11 7Verses 3-7

SC Mosiah 11 3 Mosiah 11 4 Mosiah 11 5 Mosiah 11 6 Mosiah 11 7And he laid a tax of one fifth part of all they possessed. The wanton living of Noah and his favored courtiers needed much of the wealth accumulated by his industrious people to pay the expenses of a capricious court. Like most tyrants, he burdened his people with heavy taxes. Luxuries and prodigal living called for more and more of the wealth of his kingdom. It was not long before the wickedness and profligate abandonment of King Noah reached its zenith. He levied taxes upon his people that were unendurable. One-fifth of all they possessed was then confiscated by a law he enacted. The record says that one-fifth part of their gold and silver, a like part of their ziff13and in Isa. 30:22, where it means "overlaying metal."1 and their copper, iron and brass, also one-fifth part of their fatlings and of the fruit and grain of their fields, was taken from them by way of tribute which he called a tax. From the spoils of this ill-gotten levy, King Noah sustained his corrupt court in autocratic splendor. When we recall that, at about this same time, the righteous King Benjamin labored in Zarahemla with his own hands to save his people from being taxed to support his wants, we see the difference between a God-fearing ruler and one who, urged on by selfish motives, surrendered himself to the meanest purposes mankind can devise or evil power achieve. Thus, in this manner, King Noah "changed the affairs of the kingdom." And thus, he also, by flattering his people, and by speaking fine but meaningless words to them, lured many into idolatrous ways so that they labored excessively to furnish his court with excessive means for ribaldry. In doing this, the historian wrote, "Thus did the people labor exceedingly to support iniquity."

SC Mosiah 11 8 Mosiah 11 9 Mosiah 11 10 Mosiah 11 11 Mosiah 11 12 Mosiah 11 13 Mosiah 11 14 Mosiah 11 15Verses 8-15

SC Mosiah 11 8 Mosiah 11 9 Mosiah 11 10 Mosiah 11 11 Mosiah 11 12 Mosiah 11 13 Mosiah 11 14 Mosiah 11 15King Noah built many elegant and spacious buildings. Although King Noah was a vicious and debauched creature who cared nothing for that which was just and right, he built a very grand palace for himself in Lehi-Nephi. And, for his own comfort and conceit, ornamented it with gold and silver, and in the midst thereof he erected a throne made of fine wood. He also caused that the temple be embellished and that many fine buildings be erected in the Land of Shilom. He built watchtowers so high that all the surrounding country could be seen from their tops. Furthermore, he planted many vineyards and made presses. From the wine he made, he became a "wine-bibber,"14)

SC Mosiah 11 8 Mosiah 11 9 Mosiah 11 10 Mosiah 11 11 Mosiah 11 12 Mosiah 11 13 Mosiah 11 14 Mosiah 11 15According to an Associated Press dispatch, dated New Haven, Conn., March 6, 1938, it has been found by recent investigation that some of the aborigines of America were fond of intoxicants. They made, it is claimed, many kinds of wine and beer from various plants. Intoxicants were used, it seems, in religious ceremonies, dances, and socials. They were also used as medicine and as an offering when rain was desired.2 and following his example, his people, also, became drunkards. All this he did from the riches he obtained by grinding down his tax-oppressed people.

SC Mosiah 11 16 Mosiah 11 17 Mosiah 11 18 Mosiah 11 19Verses 16-19

SC Mosiah 11 16 Mosiah 11 17 Mosiah 11 18 Mosiah 11 19The Lamanites began to come in upon his people. Again the Lamanites attacked the Nephites while they were engaged in their labors and killed some of the Nephites and drove off their flocks. King Noah set guards around the land but in such small numbers that they, too, were destroyed. He finally sent his armies and drove the Lamanites away. This victory made him and his people conceited and boastful, and developed the desire to shed the blood of the Lamanites, who were their brethren. We can see the gradual decay of the moral and spiritual fibre of King Noah's people, and therein we can see, also, the polluting and defiling influences of godless leadership. We shall see, too, that, "A king is not saved by the multitude of a host."

SC Mosiah 11 20 Mosiah 11 21 Mosiah 11 22 Mosiah 11 23 Mosiah 11 24 Mosiah 11 25Verses 20-25

SC Mosiah 11 20 Mosiah 11 21 Mosiah 11 22 Mosiah 11 23 Mosiah 11 24 Mosiah 11 25Wo be unto this people, for I have seen their wickedness. At this time the Prophet Abinadi, appeared among the people of King Noah's domain. He announced that the Lord had commanded him to warn them of the dire consequences of their wickedness, and that the Lord would visit them in anger if they did not repent. Bondage to the Lamanites for them and their children was predicted by this holy man of God. He prophesied boldly, and without fear, of their coming fate; he told them that unless they abandoned the idolatry into which they had been led by Noah and his priests, and turned unto the Lord who had been merciful unto their fathers, they would be brought down and made slaves by their enemies. Bondage of the sorest kind would be their lot, and none but the Almighty God could deliver them. They would be smitten and afflicted, and, "The Lord will not hear their prayers" and "will be slow to hear their cries," he said the Lord had commanded him to say.

SC Mosiah 11 26 Mosiah 11 27 Mosiah 11 28 Mosiah 11 29Verses 26-29

SC Mosiah 11 26 Mosiah 11 27 Mosiah 11 28 Mosiah 11 29King Noah was wroth; and he said: Who is Abinadi? Bring him hither, that I may slay him. King Noah, like many despots before and after him, listened to the flattery of his craven priests, and gave no heed to the warning cries of the would-be benefactor of his people. He did not repent, nor did he admonish his subjects to. He was dead as to the counsel of God's servant. His conscience, dulled by prolonged debauchery, was insensible to the demands of justice, to right and to wrong. "Who is this Abinadi, that he should judge my people?" he cried. "Who is the Lord," that He should be so vengeful? "Bring Abinadi hither, that I may slay him," for he seeks only to stir up my people to anger one with another. These were the words of one stupefied by habitual drinking. The people, now blinded by the promises and the flattery of King Noah, were ready to follow him in whatever action he wished to take. They sought Abinadi and, with the cowardly priests of Noah, would have put him to death if they could have found him. However, Abinadi was saved by the power of the Almighty; he was to come again to warn these people of Lehi-Nephi of the punishment to be meted out to them unless they abandoned their wicked ways, and cried to the Lord their God for deliverance.

Abinadi

A Nephite prophet whom the Lord raised up in the land of Lehi-Nephi to reprove the wicked people of King Noah for their sins. As near as we can tell he delivered his prophecies about 150 B.C. At his first appearance he announced as the word of the Lord that if the people did not repent of their iniquities they should be brought into bondage and none should deliver them except the Lord and He would be slow to hear their prayers in the days of their tribulations. The people did not repent but sought the life of Abinadi and his words were fulfilled in the days of Noah's son, Limhi. Two years later he reappeared in disguise, so that the people knew him not, and pronounced yet greater woes upon the unrepentant Noah and his subjects. Slavery of the most oppressive kind, famine, pestilence and death were to be their lot and but a few years passed before Abinadi's prophecies were fulfilled. For his bold denunciations of their abominations he was taken by the priests of the king, with whom he had a long controversy on the principle of the atonement and other laws of God, which ended in his being condemned to death. In accordance with this sentence he was burned at the stake in the City of Lehi-Nephi. One man only, Alma the elder, of whom we have record, pleaded with Noah in behalf of Abinadi and this so incensed the sin-degraded king that he sought to take Alma's life. Alma, however, escaped and in his place of retreat made a record of the teachings and acts of Abinadi and to that record we are indebted for some of the most precious gospel teachings in the Book of Mormon.

Noah

The son of Zeniff and second king over the Nephite colony which returned from Zarahemla to the Land of Lehi-Nephi. Unlike his father he was not a righteous man but gave way to drunkenness and harlotry, and as is often the case with monarchs of his disposition grievously oppressed his people. He surrounded himself with creatures after his own heart, and placed the Holy Priesthood in the hands of men who were as corrupt as himself. He greatly beautified the temple in the City of Lehi-Nephi which he befouled with his debaucheries; while the cost of the rich adornment with which he lavishly ornamented it was wrung from his unwilling subjects in a tax of one-fifth of all they possessed. Not only did he greatly beautify the temple but he built himself a magnificent palace and erected many other costly buildings in the city of Lehi-Nephi and in the neighboring Valley of Shilom. He also built two very high watch towers, one of which stood near the temple and the other on the hill to the north of the Land of Shilom. Later he planted many vineyards and made an abundance of wine which resulted in him and his people becoming drunkards.

Noah had not been long on the throne before small marauding bands of Lamanites began to harass the Nephites and drive off their flocks. The king set guards around his possessions to keep the Lamanites off but he did not post them in sufficient numbers and they were slain or driven away. He finally sent his armies and drove the Lamanites back. This victory made him and his people conceited and boastful, and developed a delight in them to shed the blood of the Lamanites.

At this time (about B.C. 150) a prophet named Abinadi appeared among them and predicted that they would be brought into bondage to their enemies unless they repented of their wickedness. The king and the people were very angry with Abinadi and sought to take his life. Two years later he came among them in disguise. This time he uttered, in the name of the Lord, very terrible prophecies against Noah and his people, all of which were fulfilled in a very few years. But the people would not heed Abinadi and the more he exposed their iniquities the more furious raged their anger against him. They finally took him, bound him and hurried him with railing accusations before the king. There the priests began to cross-question him that they might confuse him and cause him to say something that would give them a pretext for slaying him. This conduct gave Abinadi the chance in turn to question his accusers, by which he exposed their deceit and iniquity; and it also enabled him to explain many of the principles of the Gospel of life and salvation. His teachings were, however, exactly what Noah's infidel priests did not want. They charged Abinadi with having reviled the king and on this charge obtained Noah's consent for his execution. And finally, Abinadi was cruelly tortured and burned to death by his fellow citizens in the sin-stained City of Lehi-Nephi.

Abinadi's cruel death was, in the providences of the Lord, made the means of establishing the Church of Christ among Noah's subjects. One of the young priests, named Alma, was converted by the prophet's teachings; he wrote them down and taught them to others. A Church was organized on the outskirts of the city but in a little while, the movement reached the ears of the king and he sent his soldiers to capture the believers. Being warned of the Lord the latter fled and escaped their pursuers.

Soon after the return of Noah's army from their unsuccessful attempt to capture Alma and his people a great division grew up among that monarch's subjects. They were heartily tired of his tyranny and his debaucheries. One of those most dissatisfied was an officer of the king's army named Gideon. In the disturbance that now arose between Noah and his people Gideon sought to slay the king. But Noah fled to the tower near the temple. From its top he beheld an advancing host of Lamanites. Pleading with Gideon for his life he ordered his people to flee. They did so but being encumbered with their families the Lamanites soon overtook them and began to slay them. The craven-hearted king then commanded his men to leave the women and children to the mercy of their savage foes and flee into the wilderness. Some obeyed while others refused. Those who followed Noah soon grew ashamed of their cowardice and desired to return to meet the Lamanites to avenge the slaughter of their wives and little ones or perish as they had done. King Noah objected and his unworthy priests sustained him. At this the soldiers grew exceedingly angry, all love for him as a man was crushed out, all respect for him as a monarch was lost; they took him and burned him to death as he had done Abinadi, and would have sacrificed the priests in the same way had they not fled from them. They turned their faces towards Lehi-Nephi and were overjoyed to meet some messengers who bore the welcome tidings that the Lamanites had spared the lives of those who had been left behind, though they held them in bondage. Noah was succeeded by his son Limhi.
