Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 12

Mosiah 12 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 12 1 After a space of two years, Abinadi again comes among them in disguise. Hunted by the iniquitous priests of King Noah, who were assisted by many of the king's subjects, Abinadi awaited in hiding for two years before he appeared again, in disguise, to warn of impending disaster. The Lord, once more, commanded Abinadi to prophesy to the people of Lehi-Nephi concerning that which was to come unless they repented of their sins and began to do His will. This time Abinadi uttered, in the name of the Lord, terrible prophecies against Noah and his people.

SC Mosiah 12 2 Mosiah 12 3 Mosiah 12 4 Mosiah 12 5 Mosiah 12 6 Mosiah 12 7 Mosiah 12 8Verses 2-8

SC Mosiah 12 2 Mosiah 12 3 Mosiah 12 4 Mosiah 12 5 Mosiah 12 6 Mosiah 12 7 Mosiah 12 8Except they repent I will utterly destroy them. Abinadi, at God's command, stretched forth his hand and, in the name of the Lord, told them that they, not some future people, should be brought into bondage, that they should be smitten like dumb beasts and slain, that vultures and dogs should devour their carcasses, that famine and pestilence should come upon them, and that hail and insects should destroy their crops. They were warned that if they did not repent, they should be utterly destroyed. He also, warned King Noah that his life would be like a garment in a hot fire. This was evidently a foreshadowing of his death by fire, which later took place when King Noah was burned at the stake by his own people. Everything that Abinadi prophesied was fulfilled in only a few years. It must not be overlooked that Abinadi told of a record, one that the Lord would preserve, which would tell how the generation of King Noah was smitten and afflicted because it refused to obey the voice of God's holy servant. The Lord, in speaking of these records, said, "I will preserve them for other nations which shall possess the land." It is this "Record of Zeniff" we are now considering. The Lord has preserved it to become an integral part of what is now The Book of Mormon.

SC Mosiah 12 9 Mosiah 12 10 Mosiah 12 11 Mosiah 12 12 Mosiah 12 13 Mosiah 12 14 Mosiah 12 15 Mosiah 12 16Verses 9-16

SC Mosiah 12 9 Mosiah 12 10 Mosiah 12 11 Mosiah 12 12 Mosiah 12 13 Mosiah 12 14 Mosiah 12 15 Mosiah 12 16They were angry with Abinadi. Abinadi was one of the greatest of prophets; he was filled with the Holy Ghost, but the people would not listen to his warnings. The more he exposed their iniquities, the more furious raged their anger against him. Neither did they believe his words. In their own opinion they were everything that was good; they were mighty in their own strength, and unapproachably wise in their own conceit. Never, if you could believe them, had a better, more valiant, more innocent people lived. Filled with this spirit of self-conceit, they took Abinadi, bound him, and hurried him with railing accusations, before King Noah. "Here is the man, we deliver him into thy hands; thou mayest do with him as seemeth thee good." As has been pointed out before, the king was the head, the ruler, and the ultimate appeal of all.

Mosiah 12 17Verse 17

Mosiah 12 17King Noah caused that Abinadi should be cast into prison. The cringing, craven King Noah, not willing to assume the responsibility of his royal prerogatives, called his false priests to advise him as to what he should do with Abinadi.

Mosiah 12 18Verse 18

Mosiah 12 18Bring him hither that we may question him. The priests of King Noah, stiffnecked and conceited, demanded that Abinadi should be brought before them, and, then and there, answer any questions or any charges they might make against him. Their purpose was not to get knowledge, or to obtain understanding, but to subject him to their gibes and taunting accusations. Their spite was keen and unlimited; their hard hearts were like granite; they were destitute of grace. Instead of seeking truth, they hoped to ensnare Abinadi by placing in his way, the fouler's net. They loved vanity and sought for falsehood.

Mosiah 12 19Verse 19

Mosiah 12 19And they began to question him. The arrogance and vanity of the priests were quickly turned into consternation as Abinadi, in defiance of the privileges given them by King Noah, reiterated to them the warnings he had previously made. He told them that the Lord was displeased with the wickedness abounding among them. Firmly he declared that the judgments of the Lord Omnipotent would be sorely visited upon them unless they repented without delay and turned to God who in times past had delivered their fathers. In their cross-examination of Abinadi they found no words of his that might condemn him. He uttered the truth, and he knew whereof he spoke. The sacred record says, "He did withstand them in all their questions, and did confound them in all their words."

Mosiah 12 20Verse 20

Mosiah 12 20What meaneth the words which are written? One of the priests of King Noah who had gathered to hear Abinadi's defense asked him to explain the meaning of that passage of scripture in which Isaiah proclaims the approach of a messenger whose feet upon the distant mountains are beautiful to behold. (Isa. 52:7-10) This prophecy was known to all the Nephites-the words of Isaiah being recorded upon the brass plates that their fathers had brought out of Jerusalem over 400 years before. Isaiah had envisioned a forerunner of good tidings, a precursor of peace and salvation.

Mosiah 12 20These words of Isaiah's are beautiful, and form one of the most meaningful of his inspired predictions. It has, however, caused many divergent interpretations by commentators of the Bible. They appear confused as to whom it refers, and the message it bears. One writer says one thing; another, something else. To many the passage portrays a messenger from the field of battle heralding the good tidings of victory. To others, it means the return of the captive Jews from their long exile. Still others see in it the coming back to Jerusalem of the king who had left his sacred city to battle the common enemy, and, who, in regal splendor returns and jubilantly proclaims peace through victory and salvation from woe. The people of Jerusalem had, many times in their history, awaited anxiously and almost impatiently for the watchmen on its ruined walls to proclaim, with almost exultant voices, the sounding of such good tidings. (See 2 Sam. 18:25-26) In spite of the great learning evinced by some of these scholars, and the piety that guides them in their research, we say, definitely, Their conclusions are wrong! The one spoken of is the Lord, the Mighty King of heaven and earth. The salvation He proclaims is the salvation of the human soul, not the cessation of tribulation for which the Jews, for many years, had hoped. The Lord publishes "Peace, good will toward men," or as some interpret it, "Peace to men of good will." The majesty of His coming, the glory of His approach, is not understood by those who see in it only the advent of an earthly potentate who sometime before departed to conquer and vanquish the foes of Jerusalem.

Mosiah 12 20At first reading, the passage may not seem important, but it is. The priests had a knowledge of the writings of Isaiah as can be noted in verses 19ff, when a question was asked Abinadi with words quoted from Isaiah. It appears that the followers of Nephi made many copies of the writings they found engraven upon the Plates of Brass, and that such a copy was in the possession of the people of King Noah. They probably retained it from the time Zeniff brought it from Zarahemla when he led his unsteady followers to the old homes of their fathers in the Land of Lehi-Nephi.

Mosiah 12 20One of the priests. The sacred record is silent as to whom the priest was that questioned Abinadi, but on reading, time and time again, the continuing account of these people, and giving much consideration to the matter of his identity, we conclude, "It was Alma." We are told that Alma followed the counsel of Abinadi and did repent. Alma wrote down all the words he had heard the Prophet speak. When Abinadi was condemned to suffer death, Alma became his defender, and, thereafter, championed his cause. He went to King Noah and plead for Abinadi's life, that it be spared. We may assume that Alma, from this time forth, kept, or caused them to be kept, the records of the Nephites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi; also that he, in like manner, kept the record of the "people of the Lord, who were driven into the wilderness by the people of King Noah."

Mosiah 12 20Dwelling in Zarahemla where the persecuted but faithful outcasts, mentioned above, fled for refuge, King Mosiah caused their records to be read in the presence of both those whose history they preserved and of his own subjects. After the reading of their records was completed by King Mosiah, he desired that Alma speak to the assembled multitude which Alma did. But their number was so great that they were divided into groups so everyone could hear. Then Alma went from one assembly to another preaching repentance and faith in the Lord. (See Chapter 25)

Mosiah 12 20The request made, we presume by Alma, gave Abinadi the opportunity to declare to the assembled throng of both priests and people, the good tidings of Salvation which was to be made, and the resurrection of Jesus, and its subsequent victory over death. In the accounts of His servants proclaiming His words, we see that the evil intents of men in seeking to destroy and bring to naught His divine purposes, are often turned to the glory of God. Were it not for the wicked designs of Noah's priests in summoning Abinadi into their presence, and there subjecting him to all manner of questioning, there, undoubtedly, would have been many who never would have heard the glorious message he bore. Again, we are reminded of the words of the poet, "Out of evil, still educing good."

Mosiah 12 20An incident with which many of us are familiar will serve to show the truth of that oft repeated saying. A few years ago some photographs of the sacred confines of the Salt Lake Temple were surreptitiously obtained by a questionable character. They were offered to several different magazines for a price. The General Authorities of the Church became aware of their proposed publication. They saw in it a wonderful way to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and thereby tell of the temple ordinances and holy ceremonies performed therein. They sent, gratis, to every magazine that so wished it, much better pictures of the interior of the sacred edifice than those that had been offered them for money. Each picture was accompanied by a proper description, telling the purpose for which each object portrayed was used in the Plan of Salvation. Thus, was a great and an effective missionary labor undertaken, and, thereby, thousands who never would have had the Gospel principles presented to them, now had them explained in a simple and persuasive manner. In this we can see the marvelous ways of the Lord in bringing to serve His honor and glory, the wicked designs of men.

Mosiah 12 21Verse 21

Mosiah 12 21How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings. The magnificent and stately language used by Isaiah in proclaiming this great event of prophecy, sets it apart, making more bright and beautiful, the exalted and majestic picture he here presents. "How beautiful upon the mountains" expresses his jubilation as Isaiah proclaims the coming of Him, who is King. Not any king, but the King of kings. The term mountains, or mountain is used throughout the Scriptures, and usually means, when not referring to a particular mountain, the glory, or the power, or the Temple of God. The whole earth is God's Temple; its Holy of Holies is in our hearts. It is that place where we bring our prayers, and our praise, and our offerings of homage to Him. It is a temple, not made with hands. It is a "mighty fortress of our God," whose parapets shine with the burnished armour of His servants.

Mosiah 12 21"Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord and who shall stand in His holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not taken My name in vain, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. Such is the generation of them that seek Thee; that seek Thy presence, O God of Jacob." (Ps. 24; Hebrew translation)

Mosiah 12 21"And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Micah 4:2; Isa. 2:2-3)

Mosiah 12 21The words of the Psalmist find fulfillment here: "Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary." (Ps. 96:6)

Mosiah 12 21As Jerusalem was centered with mountains round about, the Jews, conscious of the mighty defense these mountains afforded their beloved city, making it a citadel, understood the words of the prophet. The imagery created by Isaiah's lofty comparison appealed to the subtle and discerning minds of those who had waited the coming of Him of whom the prophets had long foretold. He was their King, and to them, a Messenger of Salvation, their Rock and their Redeemer. He, they had been told for ages, would lead them into battle and would bring them peace through victory over their enemies. Jerusalem would be enthroned above all the nations of the earth. Their praise of Him was bounded only by their hopes in Him, and by the vision of His glorious appearing which Isaiah announced anew.

Mosiah 12 21Thy God reigneth. This is the grand and final message their King proclaims. All the others are subordinated. Peace, good tidings of man's Redemption are published by Him whom they see approaching on the distant mountains. They watch Him as He draws nearer; His feet are like stars; His raiment, new, like the dawn of day; His voice is like thunder, the reverberations of which shake the earth. He declares His message, "Thy God reigneth." Not, "Thy God will reign," or "He will be King," but "He is King," now and forever. Yesterday, today, and tomorrow, He is the same; our King, our Deliverer, our All. They see the King, they hear His voice. "Peace, God's most precious gift to man," is now declared to be his portion. The Jews remembered the words of the Psalmist, "The Lord will give strength unto His people; the Lord will bless His people with peace." (Ps. 29:11)

Mosiah 12 22Verse 22

Mosiah 12 22Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice. This verse refers not to the watchmen who are set about Jerusalem in its towers to warn of approaching enemies, but to all the holy prophets who in times past have raised their voices to declare His coming, and, like watchmen, notify the people of Jerusalem of evil purposes when they first become known. Who, we may ask, were the first to see the King? The prophets whom Isaiah calls watchmen. The King had sent them as His emissaries to warn the city and to prepare it for things that were to come. They never slept. The words of King David were ever with them, "Except the Lord keep the city, the watchmen waketh in vain." When they behold His glorious appearance and hear His triumphant shout, they unite themselves in His joyful march, at the same time they bid everyone to join in the exultant cry, "Behold, the King! Our God reigneth!" They see eye to eye with Him; their united purpose is the Redemption of Zion. Their joy is serving the King; their gladness is praising Him. But, we may ask by way of interpolation, "How can we praise Him unless we do His will?"

Mosiah 12 22Watchmen. The inspired teachers of God's children, the watchmen set out at night, are like keepers of sheep. They work for only one Master. They lead His flock to pleasant places; they guide them along the right paths to where the Good Shepherd awaits their coming. He knows them all, and calls them by name. He loves each one. Some have fallen by the way; some are lost; some are hunted by the wolf; others are hungry, helpless, and cold. All need His care. "Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;...Behold I, even I, will both search My sheep, and seek them out.... I will strengthen the sick, and will bind up that which was broken.... I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be.... I will feed my flock.... "(See Ezekiel Chapter 34) Great comfort to ancient Judah was the promise of His coming. I will "seek them out," are the words of the Lord. We will rejoice with them because we are assured "He will find them, and will take them in His arms, and will carry them to His fold," and will rejoice with them, for, "Together they shall sing...when the Lord shall bring again Zion." (Isa. 52 v. 8) (The Targum renders it, "When He shall bring back His Shekinah (Spirit) to Zion." The Dead Sea Scroll ends the last line by adding, "in mercy.")

Mosiah 12 23Verse 23

Mosiah 12 23He hath redeemed Jerusalem. Redeem means, (1) To buy again something that has been sold, by paying back the price that bought it. (Lev. 25:25; 27:20) (2) To deliver and bring out of bondage those who were kept prisoners by their enemies. (Deut. 7:5; 32:6) Cruden's Concordance of the Bible. Jerusalem had been sold, figuratively speaking, by the apostate Jews. They had perverted the ways of the Lord, and, too, they had abandoned the covenant their fathers had made with the Lord at Mount Sinai. The land of Jerusalem was the land of their inheritance. The Mosaic Law provided that land which had been sold, among other things, could be redeemed. However, a price was demanded for its redemption. What was the price? Jerusalem had not been bartered away for gold or for silver, nor was it sold as common merchandise. There was only One who could meet the prescribed terms. That One was their King! Isaiah said, "He hath redeemed Jerusalem"; not with money or with the might of a great army, but He hath Redeemed it with the blood that was shed on Mount Calvary; the Redemption brought about by Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.

Mosiah 12 24Verse 24

Mosiah 12 24The Lord hath made bare His holy arm. The power and authority of God, often referred to as His holy arm, is, in the Redemption of Jerusalem, made manifest to all nations. When Isaiah says, "Jerusalem," we may interpret it as meaning the entire earth and all mankind. "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein." (Ps. 24:1) The Salvation of His children is the great purpose to which all God's providences are consecrated, and in them, all the people of the earth will behold His Redemption.

Mosiah 12 24Break forth into joy. The glorious appearance of the King and His royal entourage brought forth shouts of joy that swelled into a mighty "Hosanna." Isaiah now bids all, "Break forth into joy." (Lit. "Break forth, sing together.") All ye who have grown weary waiting for the King to come, also, ye who are become withered like an unwatered garden, ye, too, that love the Law of the Lord, "who wait for Him more than the watchmen wait for the morning." "Sing together." The Lord has not forgotten His people, neither will He see them perish. He hath redeemed Zion. Great is our King! Who is our King, but the Lord? And, who is the Lord, save He is God! "Lo the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice; let the fields exult, and all that is therein!" (Jewish Adage. See 1 Chr. 16:31-32) The Lord hath comforted His people. Sing aloud! Isaiah knew the strength of song.

Mosiah 12 24Singing was an important part of Israel's worship. Music was heard throughout the land. Songs of praise to God lifted the most menial of tasks to His service. The vine, the fruitful field, the harvest, the flocks, doves, lilies, sorrow, delight, and victory-all were remembered in songs of memorial to His goodness. Israel sought comfort in song. "When my cares are many within me, songs in Thy praise delight my soul." (Hebrew proverb) "For the Lord will comfort Zion: He will comfort all her waste places and will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody." (Isa. 51:3) In weakness, as in strength; in failure, as in success, they sang songs of joy and thanksgiving. In them, they expressed their innermost thoughts. "O sing unto the Lord, a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth. Sing unto the Lord; bless His name; proclaim His salvation from day to day." (Ps. 96:1-2. Jewish rendition)

Mosiah 12 24A good conception of the influence singing the songs of Zion had upon ancient Judah may be obtained by reading the first four verses of the 137th Psalm. Words of poetry memorializing this sorrowful experience in Israel's history are, today, sung by both Jews and their Christian brethren. These words are found in the Hymn Book of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They not only express Judah's sorrow in her Babylonian captivity, but also, as is pointed out in the King James Translation of the Bible, her "constancy under captivity."

Mosiah 12 24Down by the river' s verdant side,

Mosiah 12 24 Low by the solitary tide,

Mosiah 12 24There, while the peaceful waters slept,

Mosiah 12 24 We pensively sat down and wept,

Mosiah 12 24And on the bending willows hung

Mosiah 12 24 Our silent harps through grief unstrung.

Mosiah 12 24For they who wasted Zion's bowers

Mosiah 12 24 And laid in dust her ruined towers

Mosiah 12 24In scorn their weary slaves desire,

Mosiah 12 24 To strike the chords of Israel's lyre,

Mosiah 12 24And in their impious ears to sing

Mosiah 12 24 The sacred songs to Zion's King.

Mosiah 12 24How shall we tune those lofty strains

Mosiah 12 24 On Babylon's polluted plains,

Mosiah 12 24When low in ruin on the earth

Mosiah 12 24 Remains the place that gave us birth,

Mosiah 12 24And stern destruction's iron hand

Mosiah 12 24 Still sways oar desolated land.

Mosiah 12 24O never shall our harps awake,

Mosiah 12 24 Laid in the dust for Zion's sake,

Mosiah 12 24For ever on the willows hung,

Mosiah 12 24 Their music hushed; their chords un-strung;

Mosiah 12 24Lost Zion! city of our God,

Mosiah 12 24 While groaning 'neath the tyrant's rod.

Mosiah 12 24Still mold'ring lie thy leveled walls

Mosiah 12 24 And ruin stalks along thy halls.

Mosiah 12 24And brooding o'er thy ruined towers

Mosiah 12 24 Such desolation sternly lowers,

Mosiah 12 24That when we muse upon thy woe,

Mosiah 12 24 The gushing tears of sorrow flow!

Mosiah 12 24And while we toil through wretched life

Mosiah 12 24 And drink the bitter cup of strife,

Mosiah 12 24Until we yield our weary breath,

Mosiah 12 24 And sleep released from woe in death,

Mosiah 12 24Will Zion in our memory stand-

Mosiah 12 24 Our lost, our ruined native land.

Mosiah 12 25Verse 25

Mosiah 12 25And now Abinadi said unto them. Abinadi did not immediately answer the priest's question. He turned from being the one questioned, to the questioner. From the prosecuted, he became the prosecutor. His indictment of the priests was serious. He charged that they were hypocrites and frauds. They had long pretended to understand the Scriptures, and by the spirit of prophecy to teach the people what was meant therein. Now they asked him the meaning of Isaiah's words.

Mosiah 12 26Verse 26

Mosiah 12 26If ye understand these things, ye have not taught them. Ye have perverted the ways of the Lord, is his solemn accusation. Pervert means "to turn." (1) To cause to turn from what is considered right, natural, or true; misdirect; lead astray; corrupt. (2) To turn to an improper use, misuse. (3) To change or misapply the meaning of; misinterpret; distort; twist. (4) To bring into a worse condition; debase. (Webster's New World Dictionary.) Any one of these definitions, or all of them would fit the depraved purposes of the priests.

Mosiah 12 27Verse 27

Mosiah 12 27What teach ye this people? Wisdom and understanding lie in knowing the meaning of the prophet's words. Abinadi accused the priests: You have not sought to discern evil, but through the prophecies seek to excuse your wicked ways. Only through the precepts of the Lord will come understanding, and with it, wisdom. You seek neither. Without them, "What teach ye this people?"

Mosiah 12 28Verse 28

Mosiah 12 28We teach the Law of Moses. The Nephites were of Israel. All Israelites of ancient times were taught to accept the Law as their guide. It was emblematic of things to come. It pointed out the way to Christ, the Messiah, whose coming they awaited, By their faith they saw these things as though they had already happened. The Law thus promised Salvation to everyone who looked to Christ for Redemption. Faith in that which is to come is not unusual, nor is it strange. There is no doubt, faith imposes burdens, but its rewards are sure. The plowman plants his seed because he is assured a time of harvest will come; the merchant buys his goods because he believes he will get a profit in their sale; the mariner has confidence he will reach a distant strand, one which, perhaps, he has never seen, by following a course marked out for him. So he starts out on his voyage; the plowman plants his seed; the herdsman cares for his flock, and the merchant buys his goods. All things are done by the power of faith. Israel, in the days of Moses, as now, walked by faith. Ancient Israel looked forward to His coming; we look back. Both visions are equally effective.

Mosiah 12 29Verse 29

Mosiah 12 29If ye teach the Law of Moses why do ye not keep it? If one teaches the principles of moral conduct then to demonstrate their worth, he must observe them. To set an example to the learner is the proper way to teach any truth. Ill-begotten wealth, immorality, wrongful influence are the results of lives spent in unbridled pretense of justice. By their actions, these priests led King Noah's people to commit all manner of sin and grow in wickedness. To warn them of the punishment that was in store for them if they did not repent, the Lord sent Abinadi.

Mosiah 12 30Verse 30

Mosiah 12 30Know ye not that I speak the Truth? The spirit of prophecy that was with Abinadi gave him power of speech to declare to the iniquitous priests the folly of their ways. This spirit led him to see their secret paths, which, they thought, were known only to them. The spirit of prophecy is always the spirit of truth. Jacob, the brother of Nephi and the son of the Prophet Lehi, in speaking of prophesying, once said, "It speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be." (Jacob 4:13) Evil and error quake in its presence, the wicked fear and tremble.

Mosiah 12 31Verse 31

Mosiah 12 31Doth salvation come by the Law of Moses? Abinadi again pronounces evil against the wrongdoers, and warns them that to say the Law of Moses is given as a guide, and then not to teach its observance, is only compounding iniquity. If man refuses to walk in the way of his guide, no matter who he is, for him to advise others is wicked foolishness. They may do as he does. "All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep His covenant and His testimonies." (Ps. 25:10) The Lord gave the Law of Moses to guide the humble in justice and to teach them His way. But Abinadi says that only by obedience to all its requirements, its statutes and judgments, can their salvation come. "What say ye?"

Mosiah 12 32Verse 32

Mosiah 12 32They said salvation did come by the Law of Moses. In answer to the question asked by Abinadi, the priests of King Noah said that salvation did come by the Law of Moses.

Mosiah 12 33Verse 33

Mosiah 12 33I know if ye keep the commandments of God ye shall be saved. Again, Abinadi used the knowledge that was imparted to the priests by the Hebrew Scriptures, a copy of which was in their possession. Abinadi quoted passages to them from the Book of Moses which has now been divided into five parts. (See p. 205, v. 23, also p. 450, Vol.. I, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON) These five parts, or books, are known as the Pentateuch. Deuteronomy is the last book of the Pentateuch, or the fifth of the Bible. With what is now called Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers, it was included on the brass plates of Laban. It means"the repetition of," or "the second time the Law is given.

Mosiah 12 33"Principally, Deuteronomy contains three sermons preached by Moses to all Israel at the end of their long sojourn in the wilderness. Israel was then encamped on the Plains of Moab, eastwardly of the Dead Sea. This was at the time just prior to their crossing of the Jordan River and the subsequent march of the armies of Israel, under Joshua, into the Promised Land.

Mosiah 12 33In his sermons, Moses told Israel of God's love for those who served Him diligently, and reminded them of God's watchful care over them during their forty year exodus. He reviewed the experience of their wanderings and renewed to them the commandments and ordinances God had given them at Mount Sinai.

Mosiah 12 33During their years of bondage, many of the Children of Israel had forgotten the "God of their fathers" and had adopted the customs and habits of the Egyptians. They toiled, as did their taskmasters, on the day the Lord had set apart as their day of rest and one on which to think of Him. They took great oaths, as did also the Egyptians, and they made for themselves gods of wood and gods of stone and of precious metals. To these they bowed down and worshiped. Moses then gave them, what the Master called, "The first and great commandment." (Matt. 22:38)Moses said, "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children... "(Deut. 6:4-7) (See p. 483, Vol.. I, Verse 2, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON.)

Mosiah 12 33A short time previous to giving the "first and great command," "Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes, and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them." (Deut. 5:1)

Mosiah 12 33"Hear O Israel; hear and heed, hear and remember, hear, that you may learn, and keep, and do; else your learning is to no purpose. When we hear the word of God we must set ourselves to learn it, that we may have it ready to use on all occasions, and what we have learned we must put in practice, for that is the end of hearing and learning; not to fill our heads with notions, or our mouths with talk, but to rectify and direct our affections and conversations." (Matthew Henry)

Mosiah 12 33In the words of an inspired prayer, Moroni said, "... and witness unto thee, O God the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them." Moro. 4:3)

Mosiah 12 33This is the prayer of all the Saints who have dwelt in this land. (See Morm. 9:36-37)

Mosiah 12 33"Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it: That thou mightest fear the Lord your God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life;...Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it...." (Deut. 6:1-3)

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36Verses 34-36

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36Thou shalt have no other God before me. In enumerating to the Children of Israel the requirements of the "Law," great emphasis, by way of constant repetition, is placed upon this commandment, number one of the Ten Words, or Ten Commandments. Moses further warned his people, "... Beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name. Ye shall not go after other gods.... "(Deut. 6:12-13)

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36Abinadi, like the great Law Giver, Moses, made the fact important that God, the Lord Omnipotent, is the mighty Ruler of all, that He is the Giver of all good, who must be obeyed. Abinadi also showed that by God's power, their fathers were brought out from Egyptian bondage and were led, by His watchful care, to a land where His purposes would find fulfillment.

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36"Great and marvelous are the works of the Lord," hence, "Thou shalt have no other God before me." The commandment given does not only mean lesser gods, but all other gods who, in some hearts, may rival the pre-eminence of the True and Living God. But the commandment is that thou shalt have no God save Yahweh, the Creator and the Maker of all. Of Yahweh they knew; He it was who went before them out of Egypt in a pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night; He cared for them through tribulation, and He provided for their wants. There was no other God, real or unreal, to whom they owed obeisance. "Who is like unto Thee, Almighty God?" "The Lord, our God, is not many gods, but one Lord." Therefore, Moses taught that ye shall bow down and worship Him, the only "True and Living God." In his teaching this commandment, Abinadi was filled with the spirit of prophecy.

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36The priests of King Noah grew in laziness. In their desire to please the people, the priests spent their days in idle praise and in placing before the king's subjects the vain hope that the gods they made of wood, and stone, and metals, which they could both see and touch, would bring them joy and happiness far beyond any promised by the "God of their fathers" whom they had never seen. The flattering words of Noah's priests caused his people to pay, willingly, the burdensome taxes that he put upon them. "Thus did the people labor exceedingly to support their iniquity," and thus did the laziness of the priests and the wickedness to which it gave birth lead the people to become worshipers of idols and gods they fashioned after the things they imagined controlled every turn of life.

SC Mosiah 12 34 Mosiah 12 35 Mosiah 12 36Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. (See Mosiah Chapter 13:12.)

Mosiah 12 37Verse 37

Mosiah 12 37Have ye done all this? Have ye taught this people that they should do all these things? (See Mosiah Chapter 13)

General Notes

The Day of the Lord Foretold by Isaiah and all the Holy Prophets.

In the beauty of holiness, in power and authority, surrounded by an unnumbered concourse of angels singing praises to His name, the Lord Omnipotent, He who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, the mighty Prince of Peace, shall comedown from heaven to reign in great glory upon the earth.

No language, however sublime, can declare the majesty of His coming; no words can tell the glorious splendor of His habitation, when He shall, again, abide in His Holy Mountain. From Mount Zion shall go forth the Law and the Word of the Lord. "How beautiful," says the prophet, "upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings; that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good; that publisheth salvation; that sayeth unto Zion, Thy God reigneth."

Surely, He is our King, our Lord and our God, our Light and our Salvation. Good tidings of man's redemption through Him shall resound from one end of the earth to the other. Christ's millennial reign shall be inaugurated. Peace shall fill the earth. Not the peace that is purchased on the field of battle, not the peace that is woven into treaties in the far-away capitals of the world, not the peace of political accord, but peace that is founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by the righteousness of God's children everywhere. Any peace not preserved by righteousness is "Peace, peace, when there is no peace!" It is the work of righteousness, ever, to establish peace. Peace, the Lord's peace, is our portion; it is the source whence springs our fullness of joy, and our gladness; our happiness and content; our love for God's Law. "Great peace have they which love Thy law."(Psalm 119: 165)

Let us remember, too, "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple... "(Psalm 19:7-10) The Lord is our God, and, "beside Him there is none other."

When that peaceful day, the day of the Lord, shall come; when all men shall invoke His holy name, when evil and error are no more, when hatred shall disappear, when His name shall be worshiped in all the earth, then shall our children be taught of the Lord, and great shall be their peace. (See 3 Ne. 22:13)

In that day, the lamb, unafraid, shall lie down at the side of the lion; "the olive and the palm will grow in the soil that is now beaten hard by the tramp of the soldier's feet." The understanding of God's Law shall fill the earth, and men shall observe it with their whole hearts. The voice of the Almighty One heard by the righteous people of Lehi-Nephi, yea a pleasant voice as if it were a whisper, shall swell into a mighty anthem, ceaselessly rendered, and universally heard, "Peace, peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well Beloved, who was from the foundation of the world." (Hel. 5:47) Then all Israel shall see Him, and shall hear His voice, and they shall know that "I am He that doth speak." (3 Ne. 20:39) "Thy God reigneth."

In that day, and in our midst; in the midst of those whom He loved so well, but who nailed Him to a cross, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, shall be enthroned above all and shall be crowned King of kings and Lord of lords. Then will the hosts of heaven unite with the people of the earth in, not saying, but shouting, "Glory! Honor! Might! Majesty! and Dominion! be unto Him, for He has been crowned our King, and He shall reign for ever and for ever."
