Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 14

Abinadi quotes Isaiah to the priests of king Noah-Compare Isaiah 53.

For behold, Isaiah spake many things which were hard for many of my people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews....

Wherefore, hearken, O my people, which are of the house of Israel, and give ear unto my words; for because the words of Isaiah are not plain unto you, nevertheless they are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy....

Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, for I came out from Jerusalem, and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the Jews, and I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews.

(II 1 Ne. 25:1-4-5)

This is one of the celebrated Servant Poems, or Songs, written by the Prophet Isaiah. It is a glorious paean in praise of Him who is the Servant of all. It is not a lament, but a song of rejoicing. Israel's strength is often expressed in its powerful songs. "And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." (Isa. 35:10) Today, with the same exultant voices, the faithful sing songs of joy in God's Salvation. Singing the songs of Zion will uphold the willing heart, and, in the end, quicken one that is dead in trespass and in sin.

"Come, come, ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear," are the beginning words of a song sung by modern Israel. It imparts courage to the faint and hope from above, and though it mentions sorrow, yet it is a hymn of joy and thanksgiving. It indicates that grief may be the portion of the righteous, yet it heralds God's blessings.

Singing songs of praise to God strengthens the weakest of Saints; it also comforts those who mourn. Isaiah knew the strength of song. The same spirit-the spirit of prophecy-that enlightened Isaiah was with William Clayton when he wrote his immortal poem. A strong parallel is found when both are compared. The Saints of each period of time needed spiritual help and comfort.

Commentators of the Old Testament are not united in fixing the identity of the Servant. Many expose themselves to the idea that Judah, itself, is that one. They point to the history of the Jews as fulfilling every requirement concerning the Servant that the lofty poem even suggests. The Jews, they say, were despised and hated by all; to recognize them as friends was, by their neighbors, thought to be an ill omen.

In spite of the traditions that had grown up around them, and their religion that, for ages, had bound them together, the Jews became obdurate, and proud in the thought that they were God's chosen people. Their pride and stubbornness weakened them, and they became the prey of their ambitious neighbors. Time and time again, hordes of warriors from Babylon, Chaldea, and Egypt came upon them. The Jews, themselves, were not without blame. Within and without the Kingdom of Judah, hatred, envy, strife, and angry passions ruled their relations with each other. This is not all; the worship of the True and Living God, which had been bequeathed to them through their fathers, became a shelter for those who interpreted the Law to serve their own devious ends. They grew arrogant, avaricious, and unkind, even to their own fellows. It is said of them, "They were an unattractive people," little esteemed by their neighbors, and were afflicted by enemies who could pierce them, and humiliate them in degrading bondage.

But, the Servant of Isaiah is not a nation, neither is He a number of nations joined as one. The Servant is an individual. His sufferings may be likened to the travail and oppression to which the Jews were subjected, however, there the likeness ends. The Jews were servants, but He is the Servant of servants. It is said, "He who is greatest in the Kingdom of God, let Him be the servant of all."

In Chapter 53. Two great things which the Spirit of Christ in the Old Testament prophets testified beforehand were the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow. (1 Pet. 1:11) And that which Christ himself, when he expounded Moses and all the prophets, showed to be the scope of them was that He ought to suffer and then enter into his glory. (Luke 24:26-27) But nowhere in the Old Testament are these two things so plainly and fully prophesied as here in this chapter, out of which many passages are quoted with application to Christ in the New Testament. This chapter is so replenished with the unsearchable riches of Christ that it may be called the gospel of the "evangelist" Isaiah rather than the prophecy of the "prophet" Isaiah.

We may observe here:

By mixing faith with the prophecy of this chapter we may improve our acquaintance with Jesus Christ and him crucified, with Jesus Christ and him glorified, dying for our sins and rising for our justification. (Matthew Henry, Commentary on the Bible, Vol.. IV, p. 300, Fleming H. Revell Company.)

This chapter foretells the sufferings of the Messiah, the end for which he was to die, and the advantages resulting to mankind from that illustrious event. It begins with a complaint of the infidelity of the Jews, 1; the offense they took at his mean and humble appearance, 2; and the contempt with which they treated him, 3. The prophet then shows that the Messiah was to suffer for sins not his own; but that our iniquities were laid on him, and the punishment of them exacted of him, which is the meritorious cause of our obtaining pardon and salvation, 4-6. He shows the meekness and placid submission with which he suffered a violent and unjust death, with the circumstances of his dying with the wicked, and being buried with the great, 7-9; and that, in consequence of his atonement, death, resurrection, and intercession, he should procure pardon and salvation to the multitudes, insure increasing prosperity to his Church, and ultimately triumph over all his foes, 10-11. This chapter contains a beautiful summary of the most peculiar and distinguishing doctrines of Christianity.

That this chapter speaks of none but Jesus must be evident to every unprejudiced reader who has ever heard the history of his sufferings and death. The Jews have endeavoured to apply it to their sufferings in captivity; but, alas for their cause, they can make nothing out in this way. Allowing that it belongs to our blessed Lord, (and the best men and the best scholars agree in this) then who can read verses 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, without being convinced that his death was a vicarious sacrifice for the sins of mankind? (Dr. Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Old Testament, Vol.. IV, p. 205, Edition of G. Lane & P. P. Sanford, 1843)

Mosiah 14 1 Verse 1

Mosiah 14 1 Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We prefer to render this passage of scripture: "Who hath believed our words of Him in whom the power and authority of God is made known?," or, "Who hath believed our words of Him in whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" (See Mosiah 12:24) In the translation of the manuscripts used by the eminent scholars who prepared the King James Version of the Holy Bible, the question asked by the Prophet Isaiah appears to be two queries. But it is not; it is one! The translators failed to understand the purport of the prophet's words. They render the last part of his question, "To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" This is incorrect. The Servant is the central figure of the poem, not someone else. He is the Lord, Jesus Christ. The whole poem is written concerning Him; His growth as a child, His ministry, death, and resurrection, and the manner of the reception to be accorded Him by the Jewish nation, which then was apostate.

Mosiah 14 1 We eliminate the conjunction and. In the place of to, we substitute the preposition in. Doing so makes the entire poem appear more to our understanding. Many of the commentators on Isaiah either neglect or deliberately overlook the fact that he was a great advocate of the coming of the Lord, the Messiah, Jesus Christ, who in this lyrical song, he calls the Servant. Isaiah, and it may be said of all the Hebrew prophets, understood the mission of the Messiah whose coming he foretold. He talked of Christ; he rejoiced in Christ; he preached of Christ; he prophesied of Christ, and he wrote according to the prophecies. (See 2 Ne. 25:26)

Mosiah 14 1 Every translator is, indeed, a commentator. The words he chooses to use are limited to his own understanding; thus he gives color, and shape, and sometimes improper form to much he does not comprehend. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol.. I, p. 67, Notes)

Mosiah 14 1 Before any objections are considered to the changes made by us in the rendering of the first verse of Isa. 53, it is well to remember that the division of the books of the Bible into chapters and verses and even sentences, is not a part of the original arrangement of the sacred book.

Mosiah 14 1 "The present divison of the Scriptures into chapters and verses...are not of divine origin, nor are they of great antiquity. The Vulgate was the first version divided into chapters: a work undertaken by Cardinal Hugo, in the 13th Century, or as Jahn thinks, by Lungton, archbishop of Canterbury, 1227. He introduced the division into chapters only. The Hebrew Scriptures were similarly divided by Mordecai Nathan, in 1445, and in 1661 Athias added in his printed text, the division into verses. The New Testament was divided in the same way by Robert Stephens, who is said to have completed it in the year 1551, during a journey (inter equitandum), from Paris to Lyons.

Mosiah 14 1 "As might be expected, these divisions are very imperfect, and even when not inaccurate, they tend to break the sense and to obscure the meaning." (Bible Handbook, by Dr. Joseph Angus, p. 60.)

Mosiah 14 1 Let us remember, too, that the ancient Hebrew scribes did not write the vowels; they used few, if any, conjunctions or prepositions. They did not punctuate, and they wrote their words using a long, single scroll which formed, as it were, a continuous block of writing.

Mosiah 14 1 When they, the translators of Isaiah, render the second part of his question "to whom," they do so capriciously, and with little understanding of the text. We choose to say, "in whom," because it magnifies the service rendered by the Servant, and it acknowledges Him to be the particular Servant of God.

Mosiah 14 1 The question stated, is asked by Isaiah for himself and all the holy prophets, "Who hath believed our words," and the implied answer is, "No one." None, or few, recognized the divine message they bore, or saw in it the working of God's power in His Servant, Jesus Christ.

Mosiah 14 1 A thought that may have merit, is expressed by some of the most learned students, including Dr. Adam Clarke, who have made a study of Old Testament prophecy and religion. They refer to a portion of the second part of Isaiah's question in which "the arm of the Lord" is made mention. They contend the translation of the word arm is wrong, "the connexion broken, and the sense obscured." The Hebrew word, zeroa, is translated arm, from the root, zara, which, contrary to the interpretation given it by the translators, means, to sow, or plant; also, it means seed. If, they argue, we translate the word zeroa in the sense that it means seed, the true meaning of the text would then be given.

Mosiah 14 1 The same word, zeroa, meaning seed, can be found in Gen. 3:15; 22:17; 26:4, and in Gen. 28:14. Isaiah, in effect, calls the offspring of the Patriarch Abraham, "The seed (children) of the Lord." Zara115, then in this place, should be understood to mean not only "the seed of herbs, but also children, offspring, or posterity." Thus, zara should be understood to mean Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ, by the power and authority of God, is the one who is made known. If we agree with this as being the right interpretation of the word, zeroa, or its root-word, zara, the passage with our correction would read, "Who hath believed our words of Him, in whom the seed of the Lord (i.e. the Child is born, and a Son is given, or as John says, 'the Son of God, the only Begotten of the Father') is revealed."

Mosiah 14 2 Verse 2

Mosiah 14 2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant. For many ages their wise men and poets had told the Jews that their Lord and their Redeemer, the Messiah for whom they waited, would come among them exhibiting great power. As a conquering hero, He would lead them into battle which in every case would be victorious, and would thus subdue all Judah's foes. When that long-awaited day should come, Jerusalem, the beloved city of the Jews, would be the capital of the world, and they would rule the nations of the earth in regal splendor.

Mosiah 14 2 The Messiah would be their king, and they would be His loyal subjects. He was to be of noble parentage, a "Son" of King David; of a family whose great name was "like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth." (2 Sam. 7:9) His emissaries, they were told, would be princes and nobles.

Mosiah 14 2 But, when Christ was born in Bethlehem, He came of a family whose home was with the despised inhabitants of the Roman Province of Galilee. His father was a carpenter, and most of His relations were fishermen. He was born in a manger, the only lodging obtainable in the city where Joseph, His father, went to pay taxes. Jesus' birth, however, brought to pass a prophecy uttered many hundred years before, "But, thou, Bethlehem, Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." (Micah 5:2)

Mosiah 14 2 The humble birth of Jesus was not what the Jews expected of the Messiah. And Nazareth by the blue waters of Galilee, where, as a child, He played, grew to manhood, and studied, was of such little repute that when Philip told Nathaniel, "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph," Nathaniel replied, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" (John 1:45-46)

Mosiah 14 2 Truly, Christ's fathers were of the kingly and illustrious "House of David," but when He came, its glory had long since departed, and its splendor was remembered only in song.

Mosiah 14 2 As a root out of dry ground. "And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots." (Isa. 11:1) Jesse was the father of King David, but when the "fruit of his loins," (Acts 2:30) Christ, was raised up to sit on David's throne, the age of prophecy had passed. The Jews had rejected any new Word coming from God; many of His servants were slain, and the laws given by Him, through Moses, had been changed to meet the ambitious purposes of priests and kings.

Mosiah 14 2 As a nation, the Jews were apostate. There appeared to be a famine in the land. "... not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." (Amos 8:11) When the Psalmist wrote of "green pastures" and "still waters," he had in mind, hearing the word of God. Hearing it, restores the soul; by it, He leads one in the paths of righteousness. (See Ps. 23)

Mosiah 14 2 The voice of God's holy prophets had been stilled. The Jews roamed in the twilight of a brilliant past. As a "watered garden" when prophets and patriarchs ministered to them, now, desert and stones were in the place where formerly were fields of grain and fountains of water. Out of "dry ground" means out of "spiritual dearth," a starving spiritual environment.

Mosiah 14 2 He hath no form nor comeliness. "He hath no form, nor any beauty, that we should regard him; nor is his countenance such that we should desire him." (Symmachus, an ancient historian and translator who reduced the Old Testament into idiomatic Greek, and who it seems, many scholars have noted, has interpreted this passage "rightly.")

Mosiah 14 2 He shall grow up as a tender plant. He shall grow up under the watchful care of God, and not before men; in the nurture of a tender and loving Father, the Servant, who is Christ, our Lord, will go from strength to strength, from infancy to manhood, always waxing greater in knowledge and wisdom.

Mosiah 14 2 As a tender plant, whose beauty is often seen in a desert place and sometimes growing out of the rocky soil, His Father, the great Multi-florist of the universe, will hedge it about, will water it, and will protect it. He will preserve it at all times.

Mosiah 14 3 Verse 3

Mosiah 14 3 A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. Some MSS. say, "Familiar with grief," others, "and knowing grief."

Mosiah 14 3 And we hid as it were our faces from him. We looked the other way when we saw Him. His sorrows begat no compassion within our hearts. This recalls the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke 10:30-37) "A certain man," the Savior said, "went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the same place, came and looked at him, and passed by on the other side," etc. Although this story was told to teach a different lesson, that of the good neighbor, we may draw from it a clear conception of the way the Jews received Jesus Christ. They passed Him by, and pretended not to see Him.

Mosiah 14 3 He was despised and rejected, rejected by men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. He gave His back to the smiters, and His cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, He hid not His face from shame and spitting. (Handel, The Messiah. Text by Charles Jennens)

Mosiah 14 3 He was despised...and we esteemed him not. Many commentators, familiar with the Hebrew text, prefer to say,

Mosiah 14 3 "He was despised...and we held him of no account."

Mosiah 14 3 In the coming of the Messiah, the disappointment evinced by the Jews, culminating in their denial of Him, is made to appear all the more bitter when we read the beautiful words written in commemoration of that great event. These words are found in the Hymn Book of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Mosiah 14 3 A poor wayfaring Man of grief

Mosiah 14 3 Hath often crossed me on my way,

Mosiah 14 3 Who sued so humbly for relief

Mosiah 14 3 That I could never answer, Nay.

Mosiah 14 3 I had not power to ask his name,

Mosiah 14 3 Whereto he went, or whence he came;

Mosiah 14 3 Yet there was something in his eye

Mosiah 14 3 That won my love; I knew not why.

Mosiah 14 3 Once, when my scanty meal was spread,

Mosiah 14 3 He entered, not a word he spake;

Mosiah 14 3 Just perishing for want of bread,

Mosiah 14 3 I gave him all; he blessed it, brake,

Mosiah 14 3 And ate, but gave me part again;

Mosiah 14 3 Mine was an angel's portion then,

Mosiah 14 3 For while I fed with eager haste,

Mosiah 14 3 The crust was manna to my taste.

Mosiah 14 3 I spied him where a fountain burst

Mosiah 14 3 Clear from the rock; his strength was gone;

Mosiah 14 3 The heedless water mocked his thirst;

Mosiah 14 3 He heard it, saw it, hurrying on.

Mosiah 14 3 I ran and raised the sufferer up:

Mosiah 14 3 Thrice from the stream he drained my cup,

Mosiah 14 3 Dipped and returned it running o'er;

Mosiah 14 3 I drank and never thirsted more.

Mosiah 14 3 Twas night; the floods were out; it blew

Mosiah 14 3 A winter hurricane aloof;

Mosiah 14 3 I heard his voice abroad and flew

Mosiah 14 3 To bid him welcome to my roof.

Mosiah 14 3 I warmed and clothed and cheered my guest

Mosiah 14 3 And laid him on my couch to rest,

Mosiah 14 3 Then made the earth my bed, and seemed

Mosiah 14 3 In Eden's garden while I dreamed.

Mosiah 14 3 Stript, wounded, beaten nigh to death,

Mosiah 14 3 I found him by the highway side;

Mosiah 14 3 I roused his pulse, brought back his breath,

Mosiah 14 3 Revived his spirit, and supplied

Mosiah 14 3 Wine, oil, refreshment, he was healed;

Mosiah 14 3 I had myself a wound concealed,

Mosiah 14 3 But from that hour forgot the smart,

Mosiah 14 3 And peace bound up my broken heart.

Mosiah 14 3 In prison I saw him next, condemned

Mosiah 14 3 To meet a traitor's doom at morn;

Mosiah 14 3 The tide of lying tongues I stemmed,

Mosiah 14 3 And honored him 'mid shame and scorn-

Mosiah 14 3 My friendship's utmost zeal to try,

Mosiah 14 3 He asked if I for him would die;

Mosiah 14 3 The flesh was weak; my blood ran chill;

Mosiah 14 3 But the free spirit cried, "I will!"

Mosiah 14 3 Then in a moment to my view

Mosiah 14 3 The stranger started from disguise;

Mosiah 14 3 The tokens in his hands I knew;

Mosiah 14 3 The Savior stood before mine eyes.

Mosiah 14 3 He spake, and my poor name he named,

Mosiah 14 3 "Of me thou hast not been ashamed;

Mosiah 14 3 These deeds shall thy memorial be,

Mosiah 14 3 Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

Mosiah 14 4 Verse 4

Mosiah 14 4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Some Mss. have it, "Surely our afflictions he hath borne, and our sorrows he carrieth them." (Seventeen MSS., two being ancient, belonging to Dr. Kennicott's collection, and two of De Rossi's, have the word, hu, "he" before sebalam, "carrieth them," in the text. (Dr. Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Old Testament, Vol.. IV, p. 206, published by G. Lane & P. P. Sanford, New York City, 1843) Dr. Clarke observes, "This adds force to the sense, and elegance to the construction."

Mosiah 14 4 In spite of the service the Servant rendered, and all else He did, we judge that God had stricken Him, inflicting upon Him the appearance of that which was considered impure, or unnatural. We withdrew from His presence as though we heard a voice crying, "Unclean, unclean!"

Mosiah 14 4 The victims of dread leprosy were, in ancient times, thought to be grievously afflicted by Providence because of some transgression known only to the one stricken. Some commentators believe that Isaiah had this in mind, when he likened the Servant's appearance to one whose aspect was pitiable to behold.

Mosiah 14 5Verse 5

Mosiah 14 5The chastisement of our peace was upon him. The word, chastisement, is a noun, and while its meaning here is obscure, we may understand it to be, burden, or the burden of establishing. We prefer the latter. Our peace, is the peace which comes to one who serves the Lord. It is founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness. Any peace that is not founded on righteousness is, "Peace, peace, when there is no peace." (Jer. 6:14) "And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever." (Isaiah 32: 17)

Mosiah 14 5When the Children of Israel were wanderers in the Wilderness of Arabia, and early in the period of their famous exodus from Egyptian bondage, the Lord said, "I will bless them." At that same time He commanded Moses to instruct Aaron and his sons to also bless them and say to His people, "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace." (Num. 6:24-27; See 3 Ne. 19:25)

Mosiah 14 5The Jews always remembered this remarkable blessing commanded by the Lord. It was a benediction pronounced upon all Israel by the great Giver of All Good. "Peace, God's most precious gift to man" is declared to be "Israel's portion."

Mosiah 14 5But in time the different tribes of Israel apostatized from the inspired teachings of the prophets, and began all manner of false worship. Some even offered human sacrifice. They forgot the God of their fathers, the Only True and Living God. For many centuries they quarreled among themselves, and also with their neighbors. Battles were fought and cities destroyed. Cruel bondage awaited the vanquished. Hatred, envy, and malice towards each other leavened the meal that sustained their lives. They ate the bread of sorrow and drank from the cup of bitterness.

Mosiah 14 5"Thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and giveth them tears to drink in great measure." (Ps. 80:5)

Mosiah 14 5Nor, is that all; oriental rant and rancor stirred the bitter passions of many, and thereby all thoughts of God were crowded from their hearts. Bickering took the place of rejoicing; turmoil, instead of peace with healing in its wings, begat grief and sorrow.

Mosiah 14 5It was only a short path that lead from the confusion surrounding the Jews to where they offered pretexts and excuses. Many were beguiled to follow this way and that. They sought to justify slothfulness by making sin a pleasure, and they hoped to vindicate the wicked by interpreting the Law to feed the hunger of infatuation and greed. The history of the Jews at this time reminds us of the words of the Lord to Cain, the brother of Abel, "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." (Gen. 4:7) Surely, sin was at the door of Judah.

Mosiah 14 5"There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isa. 57:31)

Mosiah 14 5Now, Isaiah proclaims that the burden is upon the Servant to re-establish the peace they once had, to bring back to them "a state of peace and favor with God" which they once enjoyed. The Servant, by accepting punishment for sins He did not commit, shifted the weight of transgression from the backs of the transgressor to Himself. Thus, the Prophet says, "And with his stripes we are healed." He meant by that, that by the sufferings He, the Servant, endured, our peace is restored, our favor with God is re-established, and we are become as we formerly were, whole.

Mosiah 14 5Again, we are reminded of the words of the Psalmist, "Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock;...stir up thy strength, and come and save us. Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved." (Ps. 80)

Mosiah 14 6Verse 6

Mosiah 14 6And the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. Isaiah begins the sentiment he here expresses with the unhappy conclusion, "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way." In other words, he says, we have sought for that which would please the fancy, or satisfy our whims. We care little, or nothing for the welfare of Zion, the fold of Israel's sheep. "The sheep of Israel's fold," has been the favorite comparison of God's holy prophets when they speak of His children. The Savior often likened His disciples to a flock of sheep, He being the "Good Shepherd." "I will feed my flock," is the promise of the Lord through the prophet. (Ezek. 34:15)

Mosiah 14 6Yet, in spite of the tender appeal God made to be vigilant and "follow me," when He likened His disciples to a flock of sheep over whom He ceaselessly watched, we have gone, some here and some there, all to places we deemed more pleasant, and where the pastures, we thought, were greener.

Mosiah 14 6O ye workers of iniquity; ye that are puffed up in the vain things of the world, ye that have professed to have known the ways of righteousness nevertheless have gone astray, as sheep having no shepherd, notwithstanding a shepherd hath called after you and is still calling after you, but ye will not hearken unto his voice!

Mosiah 14 6Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. (Alma 5:37-38)

Mosiah 14 6But, God is long suffering, slow to anger, always ready to forgive the repentant sinner, and has provided ways and means whereby he can be saved. All God's purposes are eternal. The Salvation of His children is the purpose to which His glory is consecrated. "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (Morm. 8:22)

Mosiah 14 6God promised Salvation to every one of His children, but they cannot be saved in their sins. A Savior, whom Isaiah calls "the servant," has been provided, and upon Him the Lord hath laid the iniquity of us all.

Mosiah 14 6He substituted himself in the room of sinners, as a sacrifice. He made his soul an offering for sin; he himself explains this (Matt. 20:28), that he came to give his life a ransom for many... Thus he shall bear the iniquities of the many that he designed to justify (v. 11) and shall take away the sin of the world by taking it upon himself. (John 1:29)...Whenever we think of the sufferings of Christ, we must see him in them bearing our sin.(Commentary on the Bible, Matthew Henry)

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Verses 7-8

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he openeth not his mouth. And who shall declare his generation? Here, the Prophet continued the description of the reception accorded the Servant by the Jews. He was despised by them, and as their long-awaited Messiah, he was rejected. He was of sorrowful mien, and, plainly, One who carried many burdens. He came from Galilee, of a poor, contemptible family. They said that He was of no account, a law-breaker, one who broke the Sabbath.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8 Isaiah says, "He was oppressed." We may understand from these words that He was trampled down by abuse of power and authority vested in the Jewish Hierarchy. Seventy-one of its elders and wise men formed a council known as the Sanhedrin which, under their Roman conquerors, had complete jurisdiction over the religious, civil, and criminal affairs of the people. They sought to crush Him, and scatter His followers.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8He was afflicted. This same Sanhedrin which oppressed Him, not only permitted Him to be abused, (-their duty was to protect Him-) but also, its members joined in the cries against Him, and suffered Him to be wounded. They heaped sorrows (pains) upon Him that amounted to physical calumny.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Yet, he openeth not his mouth. Notwithstanding the harsh treatment afforded Him by the Jews, and in spite of the many false accusations His enemies made against Him, He offered no excuses, no apologies, no pretexts, to extenuate His course or make it more pleasing to them, but calmly, and even joyously He went about teaching His Gospel of Salvation.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Notwithstanding the many attempts of Jewish scholars to mitigate and explain the actions of the Sanhedrin in the part it took in the trial and condemnation of Jesus, the legal benefits of the Jewish law of which He was deprived stand out more and more clearly as their arguments to free it from the consequences of its guilt are made known. The more they explain, the weaker becomes their position. They declare themselves to be, not the defenders of truth, the advocates of more light, but the purveyors of falsehood, the sowers of bad seed.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Dr. Adam Clarke in his Commentary on the Old Testament previously cited, gives one example of the many customs to which Jesus had an appeal, but of it He had not benefit. Dr. Clarke says:

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8A learned friend has communicated to me the following passages from the Mishna,216 and the Gemara of Babylon, as leading to a satisfactory explication of this difficult place. It is said in the former, that before anyone was punished for a capital crime, proclamation was made before the prisoner by the public crier, in these words: col mi shioda lo zachoth yabo vayilmad alaiv, "Whosoever knows any thing of this man's innocence, let him come and declare it." Tract. Sanhedrim. Surenhus. Part iv, p. 233. On which passage the Gemara of Babylon317 adds, that "before the death of Jesus this proclamation was made for forty days; but no defence could be found." On which words Lardnet observes: It is truly surprising to see such falsities, contrary to well-known facts." Testimonies, Vol.. 1, p. 198. The report is certainly false; but this false report is rounded on the supposition that there was such a custom, and so far confirms the account given from the Mishna. The Mishna was composed in the middle of the second century according to Prideaux; Lardner ascribes it to the year of Christ 180.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Casaubon has a quotation from Maimonides which farther confirms this account:-Exercitat. in Baronii Annales, Art. lxxvi, Ann. 34. Num. 119: "It was customary when sentence of death was passed upon a criminal, and he was led out from the seat of judgment to the place of punishment, a crier went before, and spoke as follows:-'This man is going to suffer death by ........................ because he has transgressed by ........................ such a transgression, in such a place, in such a time; and the witnesses against him are ........................ He who may know any thing relative to his innocence, let him come and speak in his behalf.'

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Now it is plain from the history of the Four Evangelists, that in the trial and condemnation of Jesus no such rule was observed; though, according to the account of the Mishna, it must have been in practice at that time, no proclamation was made for any person to bear witness to the innocence and character of Jesus; nor did anyone voluntarily step forth to give his attestation to it. And our Savior seems to refer to such a custom, and to claim the benefit of it, by his answer to the high priest, when he asked him of his disciples and of his doctrine: I spoke openly to the world;I ever taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort in secret have I said nothing Why asketh me? ask them who heard me, what I have said unto them, behold, they know what I said." (John 18:20-21) This, therefore; was one remarkable instance of hardship and injustice, among others predicted by the prophet, which our Savior underwent in his trial and sufferings.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8He was stricken. Ancient translators add to these words and render them, "He was smitten to death." (The Septuagint reads lemaveth, which, in the Greek into which the Old Testament was translated, means "to death.") The Coptic and Saidic versions of the Old Testament also include these words; however it may be that they are had from the Septuagint,418 which is the older.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8And who shall declare his generation? This has been interpreted, "And his manner of life who would declare?" Although we quote concerning the meaning stated of the question that is asked, we prefer to believe that it refers to the growth of the numbers of Christ's followers. "Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. (Isa. 9:7) "And he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end." (Luke 1:33)

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Some, by His generation understand "His spiritual seed." Who can count the vast numbers of converts that shall, by the Gospel, be begotten to Him, like the dew of the morning?

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8When thus exalted he shall live to see

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8A numberless believing progeny

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Of His adopted sons; the godlike race

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Exceed the stars that heav'n's high arches grace.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8Sir R. Blackmore.

SC Mosiah 14 7 Mosiah 14 8(Quoted by Matthew Henry, Commentary on the Bible)

Mosiah 14 9Verse 9

Mosiah 14 9And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death. Some commentators have thought that the words, kibro, "His grave," and bemothaiv, "in His death," have been transposed by editors or secretaries who copied the words of the prophet. They suggest that a better translation of them would be:

Mosiah 14 9Yea, His death was appointed among the wicked;

Mosiah 14 9And with a rich man, His tomb.

Mosiah 14 9If we agree that such a transposition was actually made, the text is more agreeable to our understanding.

Mosiah 14 10Verse 10

Mosiah 14 10And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. That the purposes of the Lord shall be brought about, and all His words be fulfilled wherein He promised Eternal Life to mankind, the Lord permitted His righteous Servant to suffer and make His life an offering for sin. That we may be pardoned of our sins and receive Salvation in His Kingdom was the end for which the Servant, Jesus Christ, suffered and died; "He was smitten to death."

Mosiah 14 10The exact completion of this prophecy by Isaiah will be fully shown by adding here the several circumstances of the burial of Jesus. All are collected from the accounts of the evangelists:

Mosiah 14 10There was a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, a member of the Sanhedrin, and of a respectable character, who had not consented to their counsel and act. He went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. He laid it in his own new tomb, which had been hewed out of the rock, near the place where Jesus was crucified; having first wound it in fine linen with spices, as the manner of the Jews was to bury the rich and great."

Mosiah 14 10 (Dr. Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Old Testament)
