Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 18

SC Mosiah 18 1 Mosiah 18 2 Verses 1-2

SC Mosiah 18 1 Mosiah 18 2 Alma went about privately among the people, and began to teach them the words of Abinadi. Mindful of his own safety, yet anxious in the cause of the Lord, Alma, from the seclusion of his hiding place, taught to everyone who would listen, the same great saving truths that he, as one of King Noah's priests, had heard Abinadi proclaim.

SC Mosiah 18 1 Mosiah 18 2 These teachings had sunk deeply into Alma's heart; he not only realized their truth, but also he comprehended their saving value. The first lesson they impressed upon his mind was the necessity of his own complete repentance. This he did, sincerely, and then he began to teach others the same lesson. Fearing the king, he did not teach openly, but secretly as the opportunities permitted. Alma had written down the words of Abinadi. We may presume, that they, who listened to him, had copies of the Hebrew Scriptures transcribed from the Plates of Brass. From them Alma was able to explain and expound the doctrines of the Resurrection of the Dead, the Redemption of Mankind, Christ's Atoning Sacrifice, His Resurrection, and His Ascension into Heaven. All of these doctrines, foreshadowed in the Law of Moses, the righteous Nephites thoroughly understood.

SC Mosiah 18 3 Mosiah 18 4 Mosiah 18 5 Mosiah 18 6 Mosiah 18 7Verses 3-7

SC Mosiah 18 3 Mosiah 18 4 Mosiah 18 5 Mosiah 18 6 Mosiah 18 7Those who believed in Alma's words went to a place which was called Mormon. Alma's preaching of God's holy word was successful. Many accepted the truth with joy. Then they gathered to a place that was convenient, a spot on the borders of the wilderness not far from their city. This place was known as Mormon, having had that name given it by the king. It was admirably suited for a hiding place. It had formerly been infested by ravenous wild beasts, and was dreaded and avoided by the people. Near by was a thicket, or forest of small trees. Here the Gospel believers could hide should they be pursued by the king's servants; here also was a fountain of pure water, excellently adapted for the purposes of baptism. Here, Alma, with others of those who had shown a sincere repentance of their sins, organized the Church of Christ, and here, in the solitude of this primeval forest, the sacred rite of baptism was first administered to them that they, too, might obtain a remission of their sins.

SC Mosiah 18 8 Mosiah 18 9Verses 8-9

SC Mosiah 18 8 Mosiah 18 9Behold, here are the waters of Mormon. Alma was anxious to establish the Church of God in this land, as, no doubt, it had existed in the days when Nephi stood as its earthly head. Alma recognized that his brethren wanted to enter into the fold of Christ, and he also realized that they, too, desired to be called God's people, and wished to serve Him in deeds of loving-kindness to one another, and also that they might ease each other's burdens. Alma called on his converts to comfort the aching hearts of those who mourned, and also to bear witness of God at all times, not only by word of mouth, but also by keeping all His commandments, "that ye may have eternal life."

SC Mosiah 18 10 Mosiah 18 11 Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16Verses 10-16

SC Mosiah 18 10 Mosiah 18 11 Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16If this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord? If, they, being willing to assume the obligations enumerated, and if they desiring to be redeemed of God, and longing to be numbered with those of the First Resurrection, he then asked, "What have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord?"

SC Mosiah 18 10 Mosiah 18 11 Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16He explained to them, that as individuals, they would do this as a witness before God that they entered into a covenant with Him to do His will, and to keep His commandments. The blessings of the Lord would then be poured out upon them more abundantly.

Mosiah 18 11Verse 11

Mosiah 18 11This is the desire of our hearts. The Sacred Record says that a goodly number heard this appeal made by Alma. Then, "They clapped their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our hearts." They evidently showed in some manner that they approved what Alma had said. A demonstration of this kind is little different than our exclamation, Amen, or the outcry of others when they shout, "Hear, Hear," or "Please Lord."

SC Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16Verses 12-16

SC Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16 Alma took Helam, and went and stood forth in the water. The first to go down into the waters of Mormon for baptism were Alma and a fellow believer named Helam. When they entered the water Alma lifted his voice in prayer, and besought the Lord for His Holy Spirit. This blessing having been bestowed, Alma proceeded with the sacred ordinance. The words of the ordinance which were later given by the Risen Redeemer to His servants in the Land Bountiful are different from those delivered by Alma on this occasion. Alma included a prayer for, we surmise, the benefit of Helam and also to impress on him and the others who waited for this glorious ministration, the importance of the covenant they made at that time. Alma then baptized Helam, immersing himself simultaneously.

SC Mosiah 18 12 Mosiah 18 13 Mosiah 18 14 Mosiah 18 15 Mosiah 18 16Others, even unto the number of 204 souls, followed Helam into the waters of baptism, but in all these cases Alma did not again bury himself beneath the wave, but only the repentant sinners, or those who evidenced their determination to serve God. From this time we may date the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ in that land, and henceforth its members assembled for worship and testimony once a week.

Mosiah 18 17Verse 17

Mosiah 18 17And they were called the church of God, or the church of Christ. See Concordance of the word Church at end of this chapter (18).

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23Verses 18-23

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23Alma...ordained priests. Alma, having baptized all those who desired it and who showed by their works that they fully deserved to have the sacred ordinance performed, went a step further in the organization of the new Church. Holding the Holy Priesthood himself, he ordained other priests to teach the members of the Church "concerning the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." Alma appointed one priest to every fifty members of the Church who was to preach to them and lead them as he should direct.

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23Alma's instructions to the priests he had appointed were definite. He saw many pitfalls in the paths they had recently trod under the leadership of Noah's priests. Things that had been taught by these priests were unworthy of God's children, and, besides, many of their teachings were downright wicked. Therefore, Alma commanded those over whom he presided to teach nothing save they already had heard him declare it to be true.

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23Teach and preach nothing save it be "repentance and faith on the Lord, who had redeemed his people."

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23If we, in preaching the Gospel, would abide Alma's instructions, how many differences of opinion would we avoid. Repentance from wicked ways is necessary, and then baptism133 is enjoined upon us. These doctrines are undisputable among us, but when we venture outside what is divinely made known we enter a realm of imagination where "houses of cards" are built. Sooner or later, when opposition arises, they will fall as will a house built upon sand. Then we will find that we have been false interpreters of a grand and glorious Plan which in the end will save all men through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23In this verse Alma speaks of the Lord as having already redeemed His people. Many of the ancient prophets spoke of Him in this tense. It is called, prophetic past.

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23 Alma cautioned the newly ordained priests against contention among themselves. He said that they were not to tolerate any personal opinions, but to unitedly pro-

SC Mosiah 18 18 Mosiah 18 19 Mosiah 18 20 Mosiah 18 21 Mosiah 18 22 Mosiah 18 23claim "one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love towards another." (See Eph. 4:4-5)

Mosiah 18 23Verse 23

Mosiah 18 23 Alma commanded the priests to observe the sabbath day. This commandment repeated by Alma leads us to believe the people of Lehi-Nephi had been negligent in obeying the Fifth of the Ten Commandments given by the Lord to all Israel. (See Chapter 13:16-19)

SC Mosiah 18 24 Mosiah 18 25 Mosiah 18 26Verses 24-26

SC Mosiah 18 24 Mosiah 18 25 Mosiah 18 26The priests...should labor with their own hands. When the Nephite Kingdom was first established the people were so few that they could not possibly sustain the expenses incidental to royalty. This, also, was true of those who held the priesthood, and spent a goodly portion of time in the work of the ministry. It became the rule for the kings to supply themselves with the necessary things of life, and to maintain the dignity of the office they held.

SC Mosiah 18 24 Mosiah 18 25 Mosiah 18 26 Alma commanded that this same excellent custom should be adopted by the priests he had appointed, and this same course of action was continued by the Nephites as long as they were ruled by kings, and even throughout the times when their nation had grown rich and numerous.

SC Mosiah 18 24 Mosiah 18 25 Mosiah 18 26 Alma sensed the responsibility of the priests in teaching the word of the Lord to the people; he also knew that if the burden of providing for their wants was put on the shoulders other than their own, they might become slothful and indolent. His thought was that if the priests were forced to rely on the abundant strength the Lord had given them, that then they would increase in grace and in the knowledge of His glory. We must not forget that knowledge is power, and in that knowledge they would teach "with power and authority from God." They would grow in the favor of God.

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29Verses 27-29

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29 Alma commanded that every one should impart of his substance. It is not strange to us that the same ideals which inspired the early followers of Christ, also the Saints of this dispensation as well as those wherever His Church is organized, are alike.

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29One of the Prophet Joseph Smith's first teachings was concerning the poor and the needy. He wanted no poor among us; from those who were rich as to the things of the world, he demanded a considerable portion. He gave to the needy, and to the sick and afflicted he provided for their wants; he kept little for his own.

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29In Acts of the Apostles, Second Chapter, verses 41-47, it tells when the great experiment of rendering equal all members of the Church was made a reality:

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29"And all that believed were together, and had all things common;

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29"And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need."

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29One of the first Church fathers, who was born in the year A.D. 104, truthfully said to the Emperor at Rome:

SC Mosiah 18 27 Mosiah 18 28 Mosiah 18 29"Those of us who before delighted in impunities now rejoice in sobriety; those who practiced the magical arts now have devoted themselves to the benevolent and eternal Father; those who sought to acquire wealth, above all things, now have their possessions in common, and give to him that needeth; those who hated and slaughtered each other, and being of different tribes had no intercourse after the appearance of Christ, living in the same communion, pray for enemies and endeavor to convert those that unjustly hate us." Justin Martyr.

SC Mosiah 18 30 Mosiah 18 31 Mosiah 18 32 Mosiah 18 33 Mosiah 18 34 Mosiah 18 35Verses 30-35

SC Mosiah 18 30 Mosiah 18 31 Mosiah 18 32 Mosiah 18 33 Mosiah 18 34 Mosiah 18 35They took their tents and their families and departed into the wilderness. "and these things were done in the borders of the land, that they might not come to the knowledge of the king." (v. 31) Notwithstanding the care and secrecy with which the members of the Church acted, Noah soon discovered that there was some hidden movement among his subjects, and by the help of his spies he discovered what was taking place at Mormon. Making the tyrants' usual excuse, that the Christians were in rebellion against him, he sent his armies to capture and destroy them. But a greater than he stretched forth His arm to preserve His people. The Lord warned Alma of the king's intentions, and by divine direction he assembled his people, some 450 souls, gathered their flocks and herds, loaded up their grain, provisions and other supplies, and departed into the wilderness.

Baptism

When Lehi was only a few miles away from Jerusalem, whence the Lord had commanded him to depart, he saw in a vision many of the great and important things that pertained to his descendants. The Prophet told his children about the things he saw, and Nephi, his son, wrote down many of them. Later, Nephi recorded them on metal plates which the Lord had instructed him to prepare.

Great and marvelous were the things Lehi spake concerning what he had seen.

And he spake also concerning a prophet who should come before the Messiah, to prepare the way of the Lord-

Yea, even he should go forth and cry in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for there standeth one among you whom ye know not: and he is mightier than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose. And much spake my father concerning this thing.

And my father said he should baptize in Bethabara, beyond Jordan; and he also said he should baptize the Messiah with water.

And after he had baptized the Messiah with water, he should behold and bear record that he had baptized the Lamb of God, who should take away the sins of the world. (1 Ne. 10:7-10)

Nephi, believing his father, was also desirous of seeing and hearing the same things that had been shown to him. One day while meditating upon these things, he was caught up by the Spirit of the Lord and was carried into an exceeding high mountain, where he saw in vision, among other things, the life and ministry of the Messiah, who was yet to come.

In the vision, an angel of the Lord acted as Nephi's guide, and explained to him the different scenes that were presented. The angel said, "Look," and Nephi later wrote:

And I looked and beheld the Redeemer of the world, of whom my father had spoken; and I also beheld the prophet who should prepare the way before him. And the Lamb of God went forth and was baptized of him; and after he was baptized, I beheld the heavens open, and the Holy Ghost come down out of heaven and abide upon him in the form of a dove. (1 Ne. 11:27)

The great truths Nephi learned, here, were taught to his brothers and were, also, engraved by him upon the plates he had made. He cautioned his brothers, saying,

Wherefore, I would that ye should remember that I have spoken unto you concerning that prophet which the Lord showed unto me, that should baptize the Lamb of God, which should take away the sins of the world.

And now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfil all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water!

And now, I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the Lamb of God did fulfil all righteousness in being baptized by water?

Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments.

Wherefore, after he was baptized with water the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove.

And again, it showeth unto the children of men the straightness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them.

And he said unto the children of men: Follow thou me. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?

And the Father said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my Beloved Son.

And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism-yea, by following your Lord and your Savior down into the water, according to his word, behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; and then can ye speak with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel.

But, behold, my beloved brethren, thus came the voice of the Son unto me, saying: After ye have repented of your sins, and witnessed unto the Father that ye are willing to keep my commandments, by the baptism of water, and have received the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, and can speak with a new tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angels, and after this should deny me, it would have been better for you that ye had not known me.

And I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.

And now, my beloved brethren, I know by this that unless a man shall endure to the end, in following the example of the Son of the living God, he cannot be saved.

Wherefore, do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost.

And then are ye in this straight and narrow path which leads to eternal life; yea, ye have entered in by the gate; ye have done according to the commandments of the Father and the Son; and ye have received the Holy Ghost, which witnesses of the Father and the Son, unto the fulfilling of the promise which he hath made, that if ye entered in by the way ye should receive.

And now my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save. Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life. (2 Ne. 31:4-20)

For many centuries after Lehi and his family left the Land of Jerusalem, the inspired teachers among the Nephites, promulgated the same doctrines and requirements that both Lehi and his son, Nephi, had proclaimed. About 147 years before the Savior was born in Judea, Alma, a righteous leader who grew up among a wayward people, uttered these words concerning baptism which were engraved upon the records of that people, who were descendants of one Zeniff. These words are part of the abridgment of the Larger Plates of Nephi, made by Mormon hundreds of years later:

Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?

And now when the people had heard these words, they clapped their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our hearts.

And now it came to pass that Alma took Helam, he being one of the first, and went and stood forth in the water, and cried, saying: O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that he may do this work with holiness of heart.

And when he had said these words, the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he said: Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God, as a testimony that ye have entered into a covenant to serve him until you are dead as to the mortal body; and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may he grant unto you eternal life, through the redemption of Christ, whom he has prepared from the foundation of the world.

And after Alma had said these words, both Alma and Helam were buried in the water; and they arose and came forth out of the water rejoicing, being filled with the Spirit.

And again, Alma took another, and went forth a second time into the water, and baptized him according to the first, only he did not bury himself again in the water.

And after this manner he did baptize every one that went forth to the place of Mormon; and they were in number about two hundred and four souls; yea, and they were baptized in the waters of Mormon, and were filled with the grace of God. And they were called the church of God, or the church of Christ, from that time forward. And it came to pass that whosoever was baptized by the power and authority of God was added to his church. (Mosiah 18:10-17)

And now it came to pass that when Mosiah had made an end of speaking and reading to the people, he desired that Alma should also speak to the people. And Alma did speak unto them, when they were assembled together in large bodies, and he went from one body to another, preaching unto the people repentance and faith on the Lord. And he did exhort the people of Limhi and his brethren, all those that had been delivered out of bondage, that they should remember that it was the Lord that did deliver them. And it came to pass that after Alma had taught the people many things, and had made an end of speaking to them, that king Limhi was desirous that he might be baptized; and all his people were desirous that they might be baptized also. Therefore, Alma did go forth into the water and did baptize them; yea, he did baptize them after the manner he did his brethren in the waters of Mormon; yea, and as many as he did baptize did belong to the church of God; and this because of their belief on the words of Alma. (Mosiah 2.5: 14-18)

The Lord instructed Alma, saying:

And he that will hear my voice shall be my sheep; and him shall ye receive into the church, and him will I also receive. For behold, this is my church; whosoever is baptized shall be baptized unto repentance. And whomsoever ye receive shall believe in my name; and him will I freely forgive. (Mosiah 26:21-22)

Previously, Alma said,

And again, believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you; and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:10)

And it came to pass that whosoever did not belong to the church who repented of their sins were baptized unto repentance, and were received into the church. (Alma 6:2)

And it came to pass that the people came to him throughout all the borders of the land which was by the wilderness side. And they were baptized throughout all the land. (Alma 8:5)

And now I, Alma, do command you in the language of him who hath commanded me, that ye observe to do the words which I have spoken unto you. I speak by way of command unto you that belong to the church; and unto those who do not belong to the church I speak by way of invitation, saying, Come and be baptized unto repentance, that ye also may be partakers of the fruit of the tree of life. (Alma 5:61-62)

When the Risen Redeemer visited the Nephites shortly after His resurrection, it is recorded in Third Nephi:

And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him.

And it came to pass that he spake unto Nephi (for Nephi was among the multitude) and he commanded him that he should come forth.

And Nephi arose and went forth, and bowed himself before the Lord and did kiss his feet.

And the Lord commanded him that he should arise. And he arose and stood before him.

And the Lord said unto him: I give unto you power that ye shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven.

And again the Lord called others, and said unto them likewise; and he gave unto them power to baptize. And he said unto them: On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no disputations among you.

Verily I say unto you, that whoso repenteth of his sins through your words and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them-Behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them.

And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying:

Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water.

And after this manner shall ye baptize in my name; for behold, verily I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one.

And according as I have commanded you thus shall ye baptize. And there shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been. (3 Ne. 11:16-28)

Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away.

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, I will declare unto you my doctrine.

And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto me; and I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me; and I bear record that the Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in me.

And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God.

And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and I bear record of it from the Father, and whoso believeth in me believeth in the Father also; and unto him will the Father bear record of me, for he will visit him with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

And thus will the Father bear record of me, and the Holy Ghost will bear record unto him of the Father and me; for the Father, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one.

And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise receive these things.

And again I say unto you, ye must repent and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them.

Therefore, go forth unto this people, and declare the words which I have spoken, unto the ends of the earth. (3 Ne. 11:30-41)

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do; (3 Ne. 27:20-21)

Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in my name. (Ether 4:18)

And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. (Moro. 6:4)

Now, there are many who suppose that Salvation comes by moral precept alone. They say they believe that everyone who is good and pure will receive that priceless gift, Eternal Life in the Kingdom of God. This is not true. A life of goodness and purity may mark a just and an upright person; the desire to do good may be the first showing of a contrite heart. But neither goodness nor moral excellence will prepare one to receive exaltation in the Kingdom of God.

One passage of Scripture often quoted by those who believe that morals, alone, can save, is found in the teachings of Micah: "He hath showed thee, O man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." (Micah 6-7) It must be remembered, however, that "to walk humbly with thy God" means to go where He goes, and to do the things which He has commanded.

The notion that there is "saving grace" in goodness and piety alone, is wrong. Who is good, and who is pure? Who of us can say; we do not know. Jesus said that 'It is high to be a judge." Those who entertain such beliefs, probably believe that there are many roads that lead to heaven, every one choosing the path he will take. One might as well say that, "All roads lead to London." They do not, and neither do all roads lead to the "Holy City." It must not be forgotten, however, that good moral precepts strengthen faith in Jesus Christ. (See Alma 25:16)

There are also those who have the idea that only a few will receive a remission of their sins, and be saved in the Kingdom of our Father. This belief, too, is not true. They think that it matters not what one does, or what one does not do, if one is to be saved, it is fate so to be. They believe that one is predestined to be saved, or predestined to be damned. This conception of God's love and His grace is not compatible with the teachings of Him before whom there is no inequality nor preference. All men must walk the same path if they are to enter the "Celestial Abode."

Centuries before the time of the Savior's earthly ministry, the Prophet Nephi, in exhorting his brothers to follow the way that had been marked for them, said, "Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden." (2 Ne. 26:28)

Nephi also said to his brothers: "Wherefore, do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Savior should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter." And that gate, he said, "Is repentance and baptism by water." (2 Nephi 31: 17)

Eternal Life is the reward of the faithful. It is the heritage of them who keep the Lord's commandments, and of them who endure to the end. Jesus said, "And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God." (3 Ne. 11:33) At almost the same time He said, "And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise receive these things." (3 Ne. 11:37)

Why childlike? Because a little child is willing to learn. He is content with the arrangements of his father and mother, his teachers, his lawful governors, to whom he is bound by love, admiration, and respect. Because of this disposition he fits perfectly in his place in the family, the school, or in society. It is also true with those who have experienced repentance, been born anew, or "born again," and have become as a little child in their willingness to serve the Lord. They can have a place in the Kingdom. They are never rebellious. They are as a stone laid in its proper place in the structure reared on the "Eternal Rock." (See 3 Ne. 11:39)

And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests, and teachers were baptized; and they were not baptized save they brought forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it.

Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repented of all their sins.

And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end. (Moro. 6:1-3)

But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven. (Moro. 6:8)

And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. (Moro. 7:31)

And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins. (Moro. 8:25)

Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me. (Moro. 8:8)

And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children.

Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach-repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins.

But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism!

Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell.

Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity, for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell.

For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child became of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism.

Wo be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after this manner, for they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear.

And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation.

For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity.

Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ.

For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing-

But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works. (Moro. 8:9-23)

When Nephi received his glorious vision, showing him the life and the mission of the Messiah which was to come, Nephi heard the voice of the Father say,

Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my Beloved Son,

And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye see me do. (2 Ne. 31:11-12)

At the time Christ preached His Gospel to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful, He said,

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do. (3 Ne. 27:20-21)

And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. (Mosiah 3:17)

And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God, without end. Amen. (2 Ne. 31:21)

General Notes

In the discussion of the doctrine, Baptism, it is singularly important to combine the plain truths enunciated by the Nephite servants of God with those of His holy prophets who have dwelt among the children of men since the world began. Their teachings agree.

Moses wrote in "words as plain as words can be," the manner in which Adam was taught the necessity of obeying the Gospel Plan, which Plan had been taught him from the beginning of things.

And as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled, and could not stand in his presence.

And he said unto them: Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe.

Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God.

But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.

And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good. And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment. Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time. Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children... (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 6:47-58)

Alma, the Elder

Alma, The Elder was an Israelite of the Tribe of Manasseh, a direct descendant of Nephi the son of Lehi. He was born in the land of Lehi-Nephi, or a region contiguous, 173 years before the advent of the Redeemer, when Zeniff was king in that portion of the South American continent. He is first introduced to the readers of the Book of Mormon shortly before the martyrdom of the prophet Abinadi as a young man associated with the apostate and iniquitous priesthood of king Noah, the son of Zeniff. Unlike his soul-seared associates his heart was pricked by the warnings and teachings of Abinadi for he knew that his denunciations of the prevailing wickedness were true. Inspired with this knowledge he very courageously went to the tyrant Noah and pleaded for the prophet's life. His appeal in behalf of the devoted servant of the Lord was ineffectual; the infuriated and besotted king would not hearken to Alma's appeal for justice and mercy but on the contrary he ordered the young priest to be cast out from the midst of the people and when Alma fled from his anger he sent his servants to slay him. Alma, however, successfully hid from his pursuers and during his concealment wrote the words he had heard Abinadi speak, which teachings now form one of the most important of the doctrinal portions of the Book of Mormon.

The power, the importance, the efficiency of Abinadi's teachings had sunk deep in the heart of Alma; he not only realized their truth but he comprehended their saving value. The first lesson they impressed upon his mind was the necessity of his immediate and thorough repentance, combined with unfaltering faith in the Savior who was to come to redeem mankind. In much tribulation he sought the Lord with all his powers and the Great Father vouchsafed to him an abundant soul-satisfying answer. From this time Alma began to preach privately to the people the words of Gospel truth. To do this he received power from On High. We have no account of the time of his ordination, whether when a lad he had received the holy priesthood under the hands of some one of God's servants, before the days that Noah led his people into iniquity and corrupted the priesthood, or whether at this time he was ministered to by messengers from heaven. Perhaps both; but the time and place is but a secondary consideration, the important fact remains that he was commissioned by God to officiate in His name, which commission he ever after magnified to the salvation of his fellow-men. Alma's preaching of God's holy word was not without fruit. Many received the truth with joy. These gathered to a convenient spot on the borders of the wilderness but not far from their city. This place was called Mormon. It was admirably suited for a hiding place, having formerly been infested by ravenous beasts and was dreaded and avoided by the people. Near by was a thicket of small trees in which the Gospel believers could hide should they be pursued by the king's servants; here also was a fountain of pure water most excellently adapted for the purpose of baptism. Here in the midst of the luxuriance of tropical vegetation and by the side of the inviting stream did Alma proclaim the principles of everlasting life; here the people entered into covenant to serve the Great Father of all; here were the repentant believers baptized unto Christ for the remission of sins and here was the Church of God organized, the Holy Priesthood conferred and the work of God rounded in power.

Alma and another servant of the Lord, named Helam, were the first to enter the water and when there Alma lifted his voice in prayer and besought the Lord for his Holy Spirit. This blessing having been bestowed he proceeded with the sacred ordinance. Addressing his companion he said, "Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God, as a testimony that ye have entered into a covenant to serve him until you are dead as to the mortal body; and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may he grant unto you eternal life, through the redemption of Christ whom he has prepared from the foundation of the world." Alma having said these words both he and Helam were buried in the water whence they came forth rejoicing, being filled with the Holy Spirit. Others to the number of two hundred and four souls followed Helam into the waters of baptism but in all these cases Alma did not again bury himself beneath the liquid wave but only the repentant believers. From this time we may date the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ in that land and henceforth its members assembled for worship and testimony once a week.

Notwithstanding the care and circumspection with which the members of the Church acted, Noah soon discovered that there was some secret movement among his subjects and by the help of his spies he discovered what was taking place at Mormon. Making the tyrant's usual excuse, that the Christians were in rebellion against him, he sent his armies to capture and destroy them. But a greater than he stretched forth His arm to preserve His people. The Lord warned Alma of the king's intentions and in obedience to divine direction he assembled his people, some 450 souls, gathered his flocks and herds, loaded up his grain, provisions and other supplies and departed into the untrodden wilderness.

Being strengthened by the Lord, notwithstanding that they were impeded by their flocks and families, the pilgrims traveled with sufficient rapidity to escape the pursuing forces of King Noah, who were reluctantly compelled to return to the Land of Nephi without having accomplished the object of the expedition. At the end of eight days Alma's company ceased their flight and settled in a very beautiful and pleasant land where there was an abundant supply of pure water. We have no direct information with regard to the course taken by this colony but it is evident from the details of their later history that the new settlement lay somewhere between the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla, though possibly somewhat aside from the most direct route. We think it far from improbable that it was situated at the head waters of some one of the numerous tributaries to the Amazon that take their rise on the eastern slopes of the Andes.

The colonists, whose industry is especially referred to by the inspired historian, immediately set to work to till the soil and build a city. The city, with the surrounding territory, they named the City and Land of Helam. Now that they were established as a separate people, independent of both Lamanite and Nephite princes, they desired a form of temporal government with Alma as their king. This honor he declined. He rehearsed to them the history of their fathers; he pictured to them the infamies of King Noah's reign; he showed them how a wicked ruler could lead his subjects into all manner of evil and how such things led to bondage; and on the other hand how much better it was to have the Lord as their King and Ruler and to be guided by His servants under His inspiration. This counsel the people wisely accepted. Alma, though not bearing the title of king, acted as their leader, as their High Priest and Prophet and as the mouthpiece of God to them whenever His holy word was graciously given them. In this happy state the people of Helam continued for some years, the Lord greatly prospering them and crowning their labors with abundant increase.

How long these blissful days lasted is not defined in the sacred record of the Book of Mormon; but as the Lord chastens those whom He loves, so, after a time, He permitted the Lamanites to discover their secluded and happy home and to bring them into bondage.

It so happened that a Lamanite army corps (that had been pursuing a body of fugitive Nephites under Limhi, the son of Noah, who had broken away from their bondage in the land of Nephi,) lost themselves in the wilderness. While traveling hither and thither, not knowing which way to go, they came across a body of men who had once been the priests of King Noah but who had fled from the face of their fellows to escape the just indignation their continued iniquities had aroused. These priests, at the instigation of Amulon, their leader, joined the Lamanite troops and unitedly endeavored to get back to the land of Nephi. While thus engaged they wandered near the city of Helam.

When the people of Alma first perceived the approach of this body of men they were occupied in tilling the soil around their city, into which they immediately fled in great fear. In this perilous hour the faith and courage of Alma was conspicuous. He gathered his people around him, called upon them to cast aside their unsaintly fears and to remember the God who had delivered those who trusted in him. The words of their leader had the desired effect; the people silenced their fears and called mightily upon the Lord to soften the hearts of the Lamanites that they might spare their lives and those of their wives and little ones. Then, with the assurance in their hearts that God would hearken unto their prayers, Alma and his brethren went forth out of their city and delivered themselves up to their former foes.

The Lamanites were in a dilemma, therefore they were profuse in promises. They were willing to grant the people of Helam their lives and liberty if they would show them the way to the land of Nephi. Having obtained this information and reached home in safety they broke their promises and made Amulon king over a wide district of country, including the land of Helam.

Alma and Amulon had known each other in the days when they both belonged to King Noah's priesthood and with the venom so often conspicuous in apostates, the latter soon commenced to persecute those who were faithful to the Lord. He placed task-masters over them, he imposed inhuman burdens upon them and otherwise afflicted them grievously.

In their affliction the people of Alma cried unremittingly to heaven for deliverance but even their prayers were an annoyance to their task-masters and they were forbidden to lift up their voices in supplication to the Lord. But the tyrants could not prevent them from pouring out their hearts to Him who knoweth the inmost thoughts of all men. He answered in His own way; He did not bring them immediate deliverance but He strengthened their backs to bear the heavy burdens placed upon them, and, strong in the faith of their ultimate release from this bondage they toiled on with cheerfulness and patience.

In His due time the Lord delivered them. Having revealed His intentions to Alma, that the people might make ready, He caused a deep sleep to come upon the Lamanite guards and task-masters. The hour to strike for liberty had arrived but it was obtained at a heavy cost, that of their homes and possessions. Under the guidance of Alma they departed into the wilderness. At eventide they rested in a beautiful valley which they called Alma but they did not tarry there. The next day they pushed farther into the wilderness and continued their journey until they arrived at the land of Zarahemla, which they reached in twelve days' travel from the valley of Alma. Their arrival amongst their Nephite kindred was the occasion of great joy both to them and to the people of King Mosiah, which joy was intensified by the fact that Limhi and his subjects had also arrived in safety at the home of their forefathers a short time previously, thus uniting all the Nephite people (except the few apostates with Amulon) in one land and under one king.

Alma and his people must have dwelt in the land of Helam quite a number of years as he is called a young man at the time of Abinadi's martyrdom and at the time he led his people into the land of Zarahemla he was fifty years old, possibly several years older.

On the arrival of Alma in the land of Zarahemla King Mosiah gave him charge of the spiritual concerns of the Nephites. He became the High Priest to the whole nation. In this capacity he gathered the people together and in words of power and plainness he reminded them of their duties to heaven. Nor had he unwilling hearers; numbers hearkened to his words, renewed their covenants with God, went down into the waters of baptism and recommenced a life of godliness and faith. From place to place Alma bent his way, preaching, counseling, reproving, comforting, instructing, as the Holy Spirit led. Through these labors seven Churches, or rather seven branches of the Church, were established in Zarahemla, while great prosperity attended the faithful. As years rolled by the hearts of those who loved the Lord were pained by the unbelief and wickedness of the rising generation. Many of these not only rejected the truth but persecuted and reviled those who were righteous. This unholy crusade received great strength and assumed great effrontery owing to the fact that the four sons of King Mosiah and the son of the High Priest Alma were their ringleaders. Vain were the exhortations of these holy men to their wayward sons; they rebelled against their father's admonitions, and set their authority at defiance. Great was Alma's grief. The Lord of Hosts was his only recourse. In much sorrow, but with much faith, he earnestly and unceasingly prayed for his loved but rebellious son. The Lord heard his faithful servant's petitions, sent His angel to stay the young man's mad career and bring him to a knowledge of the truth. There, overpowered by the presence and message of the angel, he was struck dumb and paralyzed. When the news of this visitation reached his father he greatly rejoiced for he knew it was the power of God. He gathered his people to witness the miracle and assembled the priests that they might join him in prayer and fasting for his son's perfect restoration. Their prayers were heard; not only were the natural powers of the body restored but Alma became a changed man and from thenceforth was a valiant soldier of the Cross-a help, a comfort and a joy to his father who was now beginning to feel the effects of advancing years.

Before his death, Alma who had ordained his son a High Priest, gave the latter charge concerning all the affairs of the Church and then, full of years and honor, he departed this life. His death took place (B.C. 91) when he was eighty-two years old, five hundred and nine years having passed from the time Lehi and his family left Jerusalem.

Helam

A Nephite of the land of Lehi-Nephi, in the days of King Noah. He accepted the teachings of Alma, the elder and was the first man baptized by him in the waters of Mormon. One thing remarkable about his baptism is that both he and Alma were together buried in the water and they arose and came forth out of the water rejoicing, being filled with the Spirit of God. We have no further mention of Helam but from the fact that the land (eight days' journey from Mormon) to which Alma and the Saints soon fled, received the name Helam from him, it is highly probable that Helam was one of the leading officers of the Church established by Alma, and was greatly respected by the people.
