Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Chapter 29

SC Mosiah 29 1 Mosiah 29 2 Mosiah 29 3 Mosiah 29 4 Mosiah 29 5 Mosiah 29 6 Mosiah 29 7 Mosiah 29 8 Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10Verses 1-10

SC Mosiah 29 1 Mosiah 29 2 Mosiah 29 3 Mosiah 29 4 Mosiah 29 5 Mosiah 29 6 Mosiah 29 7 Mosiah 29 8 Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10 Mosiah desires to know who should be king. Mosiah now felt that it was time that the question of the succession to the Nephite throne should be settled. In his magnanimity he sent among his people to learn whom they would have for their king.

SC Mosiah 29 1 Mosiah 29 2 Mosiah 29 3 Mosiah 29 4 Mosiah 29 5 Mosiah 29 6 Mosiah 29 7 Mosiah 29 8 Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10They chose Mosiah's son, Aaron, but Aaron would not accept the royal powers; his heart was set upon converting his fellow men to the Gospel.

SC Mosiah 29 1 Mosiah 29 2 Mosiah 29 3 Mosiah 29 4 Mosiah 29 5 Mosiah 29 6 Mosiah 29 7 Mosiah 29 8 Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10Aaron's refusal troubled the mind of Mosiah. He apprehended difficulties if Aaron, at some future date should change his decision and would demand his rights to the sovereignty.

SC Mosiah 29 1 Mosiah 29 2 Mosiah 29 3 Mosiah 29 4 Mosiah 29 5 Mosiah 29 6 Mosiah 29 7 Mosiah 29 8 Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10Mosiah, therefore, issued another address to his much loved subjects. As usual, it was full of wisdom and affection. In it, after recounting the peculiarities of the troubled situation, he said, "Let us be wise and consider these things, for we have no right to destroy my son, neither should we have any right to destroy another, if he should be appointed in his stead."

SC Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10Verses 9-10

SC Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10If my son should turn again to his pride. Aaron, by right of his birth-his being the eldest of King Mosiah's sons-had already rejected the kingship to which he was heir. He chose, rather to spend his time in missionary work. His father feared the prospect that Aaron might return to his evil ways.

SC Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10 Mosiah saw far enough into the future to see that if Aaron should ever recall the decision he had made to serve the Lord many would support his contentions, and this would divide the people.

SC Mosiah 29 9 Mosiah 29 10"Let us be wise," said Mosiah. Now is the time to obviate any conditions that may otherwise arise from such an exigency. Look forward to this possibility, and dispose of it with understanding. Thereby we will preserve the peace that has brought so many blessings to this favored people.

SC Mosiah 29 11 Mosiah 29 12 Mosiah 29 13 Mosiah 29 14 Mosiah 29 15 Mosiah 29 16 Mosiah 29 17 Mosiah 29 18 Mosiah 29 19 Mosiah 29 20 Mosiah 29 21 Mosiah 29 22 Mosiah 29 23Verses 11-23

SC Mosiah 29 11 Mosiah 29 12 Mosiah 29 13 Mosiah 29 14 Mosiah 29 15 Mosiah 29 16 Mosiah 29 17 Mosiah 29 18 Mosiah 29 19 Mosiah 29 20 Mosiah 29 21 Mosiah 29 22 Mosiah 29 23Therefore I will be your king the remainder of my days. King Mosiah, always seeking the righteous course to direct his people, warned them of the iniquity which follows the reign of a wicked monarch. He reminded them of King Noah and his profligate priests-how through unrestrained debauchery and lewdness Noah had led his people into committing sins which in turn brought them into bondage. "And were it not for the interposition of their all-wise Creator, and this because of their sincere repentance, they must unavoidably remain in bondage until now."

SC Mosiah 29 11 Mosiah 29 12 Mosiah 29 13 Mosiah 29 14 Mosiah 29 15 Mosiah 29 16 Mosiah 29 17 Mosiah 29 18 Mosiah 29 19 Mosiah 29 20 Mosiah 29 21 Mosiah 29 22 Mosiah 29 23 Mosiah paid great tribute to his father, King Benjamin, saying that if kings like unto him could be had that ruled in righteousness, "then it would be expedient that ye should always have kings to rule over you." He also drew to the attention of his people, a fact which they well knew, because that with their own eyes they had seen it-Mosiah had brought peace to his people, they had greatly prospered; no wars nor contentions marred their happiness. He had labored with his whole heart and soul to teach them the commandments of God. Few crimes were committed among them, and, besides, he had not arbitrarily punished any man but had meted out just judgments according to the "law which had been given to us by our fathers." In justice, he had administered the laws of the land, which in most cases were the laws of God.

SC Mosiah 29 11 Mosiah 29 12 Mosiah 29 13 Mosiah 29 14 Mosiah 29 15 Mosiah 29 16 Mosiah 29 17 Mosiah 29 18 Mosiah 29 19 Mosiah 29 20 Mosiah 29 21 Mosiah 29 22 Mosiah 29 23But, King Mosiah explained many other reasons why kings are sometimes not desirable rulers, therefore, he suggested a different form of government be set up to guide the people aright and also to protect them in the new liberty he proposed should be theirs.

SC Mosiah 29 24 Mosiah 29 25 Mosiah 29 26 Mosiah 29 27 Mosiah 29 28 Mosiah 29 29 Mosiah 29 30 Mosiah 29 31 Mosiah 29 32 Mosiah 29 33 Mosiah 29 34 Mosiah 29 35 Mosiah 29 36Verses 24-36

SC Mosiah 29 24 Mosiah 29 25 Mosiah 29 26 Mosiah 29 27 Mosiah 29 28 Mosiah 29 29 Mosiah 29 30 Mosiah 29 31 Mosiah 29 32 Mosiah 29 33 Mosiah 29 34 Mosiah 29 35 Mosiah 29 36Choose you by the voice of this people, judges. Inspired and directed by the Lord, the king further advised many changes of the law, so that all things might be done by the voice of the whole people. These changes were gladly accepted by the people as they gave them greater liberty and a voice in all important national affairs.

SC Mosiah 29 24 Mosiah 29 25 Mosiah 29 26 Mosiah 29 27 Mosiah 29 28 Mosiah 29 29 Mosiah 29 30 Mosiah 29 31 Mosiah 29 32 Mosiah 29 33 Mosiah 29 34 Mosiah 29 35 Mosiah 29 36As a law maker, Mosiah may be regarded among the most eminent this world has produced. We regard him in some respects as the Moses, in others the Alfred the Great, of his age and his nation. But besides him being a king, he was also a seer. The gift of interpreting strange tongues and languages was his. By this gift he translated from the twenty-four plates of gold, found by the people of King Limhi, the records of the Jaredites.

SC Mosiah 29 24 Mosiah 29 25 Mosiah 29 26 Mosiah 29 27 Mosiah 29 28 Mosiah 29 29 Mosiah 29 30 Mosiah 29 31 Mosiah 29 32 Mosiah 29 33 Mosiah 29 34 Mosiah 29 35 Mosiah 29 36No wonder that a man possessed of such gifts, so just and merciful in the administration of the law, so perfect in his private life, should be esteemed more than any man by his subjects, and that they waxed strong in their love towards him. As a king, he was a father to them, but as a prophet, seer, and revelator, he was the source from whence divine wisdom flowed unto them. We must go back to the days of the antediluvian patriarchs to find the peers of these three kings (the two Mosiahs and Benjamin), when monarchs ruled by right divine, and men were prophets, priests, and kings by virtue of heaven's gifts and God's will.

SC Mosiah 29 24 Mosiah 29 25 Mosiah 29 26 Mosiah 29 27 Mosiah 29 28 Mosiah 29 29 Mosiah 29 30 Mosiah 29 31 Mosiah 29 32 Mosiah 29 33 Mosiah 29 34 Mosiah 29 35 Mosiah 29 36The sons of Mosiah having started on their mission to the Lamanites, he chose Alma, the younger, and gave the sacred plates and the other associate holy things into his care. The elder Alma made this same son of his the presiding High Priest of the Church, and the people chose him for their first Chief Judge. The Church, the records, the nation, all being thus provided for, King Mosiah passed away to the joys of eternity. He was sixty-three years old, and he had ruled his people in righteousness for thirty-three years. When he passed away no fierce convulsions wrecked the ship of state, the political atmosphere was calm, the people joyfully assumed their new responsibilities, and the first of the judges succeeded the last of the kings without causing one disturbing wave on the placid waters of the national life.

The Law of the Nephites Under the Kings

The Laws of the Nephites-The Roman and Nephite Civilizations-The Laws under the kings-Position of the Priesthood-Slavery-Criminal Offenses.

If the existence of wise, just and liberal laws, administered in righteousness, be the rule by which we can judge of the true greatness of a nation and of the happiness and prosperity of its citizens, then the Nephites were a far happier and more prosperous people than were their contemporaries on the eastern continent. If this be not so, then we have not read history aright.

The Nephite nation was co-existent with the great Roman power that for so long triumphed over and crushed the surrounding people in Europe, Asia and Africa. True, Rome was founded more than a century before Lehi left Jerusalem,135 but at the time of his exodus its growing power had scarcely begun to be felt outside of Italy. At the time that Moroni's record closed, the Nephites, as a nation, had become extinct, and the glory of the mistress of the world was rapidly fading away. Rome had been sacked by barbarians, the empire had been divided into two governments, the legs of Nebuchadnezzar's great image were forming; people and nations were rebelling and throwing off the iron yoke, and the idea of universal empire had become a thing of the past.236 But how different the theory and genius of the two nations! The Nephite rulers governed by the power of just laws, the Romans by the might of the unsheathed sword. Among the former, every man was a free man, with his rights as a citizen guaranteed and protected by just laws. Among the latter, few could assert, as did the Apostle Paul, Civis Romanus Sum-I am a Roman citizen. The vast majority of the millions who formed its people were either abject allies, vanquished enemies or degraded slaves.337 Neither of these had many rights that the Roman citizen felt himself called upon to respect. We are apt to be awed by the grand military exploits of the Roman generals, and to be dazzled with the magnificence of Rome in art and architecture, but we must recollect that the history of that city is the history of tyranny. Its power, during the greater portion of its continuance, was in the hands of the few, who used it for the interest of their class. The masses of the population were the subjects of oppression and violence.

No language could so well describe the spirit of Roman aggrandizement as that used by the prophet Daniel when interpreting to the Babylonish king the import of the terrible image he had seen in his dream. These are his words: And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. (Dan. 2:40.) And thus did Rome rule the eastern world as with a rod of iron. We need not refer to the other nations that existed on the eastern continent, for the people that Rome neither conquered nor destroyed were barbarians, who, during the existence of the Nephites, filled but a small page in the world's history.

These facts are presented as worthy of the consideration of all who study the social and political condition of the great and highly-favored people who flourished on this continent for so many centuries; and we imagine the student cannot fail to be impressed with the thought that they were at least a thousand years in advance of their fellow men in the science of true government; and in their polity find a type of the most advanced and most liberal forms of government of the present age. That this should be so, will not surprise us when we consider that they were a branch of the house of Israel, a people who enjoyed more political liberty (until their own follies had cut them off therefrom) than any of the other nations of antiquity, and that to the law of Moses they had added the divine teachings of the everlasting gospel, which in themselves are a perfect law of liberty. Further, it is a noteworthy fact which stares us in the face from the beginning to the end of the Book of Mormon, that when the people departed from gospel principles, it was then and then only that they fell into bondage, of whatever nature that bondage might be.

The political history of the Nephites may be consistently divided into five epochs:

First.-When they were governed by kings.

Second.-The republic, when they were ruled by judges and governors.

Third.-A short period of anarchy when they were divided into numerous independent tribes.

Fourth.-The Messianic dispensation, when they were controlled entirely by the higher law of the holy priesthood.

Fifth.-The chaotic state of internecine war which preceded their final extinction as a nation and as a race.

The first portion of the history of the Nephites when they were governed by kings, covers almost exactly one half of their national existence, or from the time of the landing of the colony on the coast of Chili to 509 years after the departure of Lehi from Jerusalem. Of the laws by which the people were governed during this period, which, however, we are told were exceedingly strict, we have few details, for the reason that the plates from which the greater portion of the Book of Mormon relates to this period was taken contain the records of their prophets rather than the annals of their kings. With regard to these kings, they of whose lives we have any particulars, viz: Nephi, the first king, and Mosiah I, Benjamin and Mosiah II, the three last, were eminently virtuous, just and merciful men, who reigned as all monarchs should, but few do-with an eye single to the good of their subjects. Of their kings in general the prophet Jarom, about 400 years before Christ, remarks: Our kings and our leaders were mighty men in the faith of the Lord: and they taught the people the ways of the Lord. Indeed, we recollect no intimation, in any place in the sacred record, of tyranny on the part of those who reigned over the main body of the nation. The government may, we think, be justly considered to approximate nearest to a limited monarchy, in which, as in ancient Israel, the prophet often exercised more power than the king. Though this is true of the central government, it unfortunately cannot be so stated of the colony which returned to the land of Nephi in the days of King Benjamin; that people suffered beyond description from the tyranny and wickedness, and the consequences resulting therefrom, of their second king, Noah, the murderer of the servants of the true and living God.

Of the life and character of the first king of the Nephites, the father of his people, Nephi, the son of Lehi, we need say nothing here. History affords no better model of the true prince. So thought his people, and they, to retain in remembrance his name, and to perpetuate the recollection of his virtues, called his successors, second Nephi, third Nephi, etc., no matter what their original name might have been.

The right of choosing his successor appears to have been vested in the reigning sovereign. When Nephi became old, and saw that he must soon die, he anointed a man to be a king and a ruler over his people. King Benjamin chose his son Mosiah to reign in his stead, and then gathered the people to receive his last charge and ratify his selection. Mosiah gave the people yet greater liberty, and instead of nominating his successor directed them to make their own choice. The people highly appreciated this act of grace on the part of their beloved king, and selected Aaron his son. Aaron, whose heart was set upon the salvation of the Lamanites, declined the kingly authority, when Mosiah very wisely advised his subjects not to select another to fill the throne, lest it give rise, in the future, to bloodshed and contention, but to elect judges to be their rulers, instead of kings, which proposition they accepted with great joy.

With regard to the Nephite laws in the days of the kings, and the manner of their execution, we can learn most from the parting addresses of kings Benjamin and Mosiah II to their subjects. We are frequently told by the sacred writers, from Nephi, the founder, to Nephi, the disciple, that the people observed the law of Moses, modified, we judge, in some of its details to suit the altered circumstances of the Nephites from those of their brethren in the land of Palestine. As an instance we draw attention to the fact that, as there were none of the tribe of Levi in the colony that accompanied Lehi from Judea, the priestly office must necessarily have been filled, and the required sacrifices and burnt offerings offered by some of the members of the tribes who were with them. Nephi (doubtless by the direction of the Lord) appointed his brothers Jacob and Joseph to be the priests for the people, they being of the tribe of Manasseh, and the care of the sacred records remained with the descendants of the first named for several generations. The members of the various orders of the priesthood, when not actually engaged in the work of the ministry, in the duties of the temple, or the service of the sanctuary, were required to labor for their own support, that they might not prove burdensome to the people. A merciful provision was, however, made for the sustenance of members of the priesthood in cases of sickness or when in much want.

Though the laws were strict, they were mercifully and equitably administered, which gave much greater stability to the government and respect for the law than if they had been adjudged loosely, and with partiality towards classes or persons. It has been wisely observed that it is not the severity of the law but the sureness of the punishment that deters the evil doer, and in this respect the Nephite nation had cause for thankfulness. All men were alike before the law, there were no privileged classes as in Rome, or in feudal Europe in later years. Mosiah says, Whosoever has committed iniquity, him have I punished according to the law which has been given to us by our fathers.

From the charge of king Benjamin to his son Mosiah we learn that slavery was forbidden. All the inhabitants of the continent being of the house of Israel, they could not observe the law of Moses and enslave their brethren.

Murder, robbery, theft, adultery and other sexual abominations were punished by law, as also was lying or bearing false witness.

Mormon states that in king Benjamin's days the false Christs, etc., were punished according to their crimes; but we are not informed if those crimes consisted in false personation, etc., or in fomenting, aiding and abetting treason and rebellion, as was almost universally the habit of those who apostatized from the gospel and sought to establish false religions in its place. King Benjamin also states that he had not permitted the people to be confined in dungeons; but we are uncertain whether to infer from this remark that the king intended his hearers to understand that he had not done this, as so many tyrants do, without cause and without trial, or that some other more effectual means had been found of punishing those transgressors not deemed worthy of death. We incline to the former opinion.

When the Nephite kingdom was first established the people were so few that they could not possibly sustain the expenses incidental to royalty. Thus it became the rule for the kings to sustain themselves. This unique, though most excellent custom continued as long as the monarchy lasted, even when the nation had grown rich and numerous. King Benjamin reminds his subjects that he had labored with his own hands that they might not be laden with taxes. Of Mosiah, his successor, it is written that he had not exacted riches of the people and that he had granted unto his people that they should be delivered from all manner of bondage.

We must not forget that, in connection with the civil law, the law of the gospel was almost unceasingly proclaimed during the whole period of the monarchy. Various false Christs and false prophets had arisen at different times, but the power of the priesthood had remained, ministering in holy things, rebuking iniquity and aiding in the suppression of vice. The kings of the Nephites, as we before observed, were, as a rule, men of God, holding the priesthood, and were often prophets and seers as well as temporal rulers. To this happy circumstance we must attribute greatly the peace and good order that so generally prevailed; the respect for the law that was so widespread; the large amount of liberty accorded to the people and the few abuses they made of that freedom. To use the idea of the Prophet Joseph Smith, for long years, they were taught correct principles, and they (to a great extent) governed themselves.

In the course of the centuries, as the people increased and spread far and wide over the land, they appear to have introduced local customs to suit their differing circumstances, or in some eases their whims and notions. Thus, until king Mosiah II established uniformity by law, nearly every generation and each section of the country had its own moneys, weights, measures, etc., which were altered from time to time according to the minds and circumstances of the people. This custom naturally caused confusion, annoyance and distrust, and to obviate these, and possibly greater evils, Mosiah consented to newly arrange the affairs of the people; and, if we may so express it, to codify the law. This code became the constitution of the nation under the rule of the Judges, which limited the powers of the officials and guaranteed the rights of the people. This compilation was acknowledged by the people, whereupon the historian remarks, Therefore they were obliged to abide by the laws which he had made. And from that time they became supreme throughout the nation. It is stated in another place that this change was made by the direct command of Jehovah.

Alma, the Younger

Alma, the Younger, was born either in the land of Mormon, when his devout and intrepid father was there organizing the Church of Christ, or after the little colony of Christians had removed to the land of Helam. From a casual observation made in one of his discourses we are inclined to think it was in the latter place.

With his father, he came to the land of Zarahemla, and there, as the son of the Presiding High Priest of the entire Church, he became the associate and companion of the sons of the king. Their course was one too often pursued by the children of the great. They took pleasure in evil-doing; they had no faith in the revelations of God, while they ridiculed, mocked, and persecuted those who had.

We can well understand the anxiety, the distress, the sorrow this course caused their God-fearing parents; we can realize how Frequent and how fervent were the prayers offered by the king, the high priest, and the people for those misguided youths. And their prayers did prevail before God.

As Alma and the sons of King Mosiah were trying to destroy the Church and to lead the people of the Lord astray, an angel descended in a cloud and stopped them on their way. When he spoke, his voice was as thunder and caused the earth to tremble beneath their feet. Naturally, this manifestation of the power of God spread terror and dismay in the hearts of those who witnessed it; simultaneously they fell to the ground. So confused and terrified were they, that they failed to understand the words of the holy messenger, "Arise, Alma and stand forth." When Alma arose his eyes were open to see who stood before him.

"Why persecutest thou the Church of God?" he was asked, "for the Lord hath said, This is my Church, and I will establish it; and nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of my people."

He further said, "If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed seek no more to destroy the Church of God."

In addition, the angel spoke of Alma's Father's Fervent prayers in his behalf and that because of those prayers of faith he, the angel, was sent to convince him of the power of God. He also recounted to Alma the captivity of his fathers in the lands of Helam and Nephi and of their miraculous deliverance. But Alma heard none of this, for the terrors of the first salutation had overpowered him.

Alma, bereft of the presence of the angel, dismayed and soul-stricken, sank to the ground. When his companions gathered around him, they found he could not move, neither could he speak; outwardly he was dead. The torments of the damned had taken hold of his soul, and in the most bitter pain and mental anguish he lay racked with the remembrance of all his past sins. The thought of standing before the bar of God to be judged for his iniquities overwhelmed him with horror; he would have rejoiced in annihilation; he desired to become extinct, both body and soul, without being brought before his abused Creator. Thus he continued for three days and three nights to suffer the pains of hell which, to his tortured conscience, must have seemed an eternity.

When his companions found that he could neither speak nor move, they carried him to his Father and related to him what had happened. Strange as it must have seemed to them, the elder Alma's heart was filled with joy and praise when he looked upon the body of his much-loved son For he realized it was God's power that had wrought all this and that his long-continued prayers had been answered. In his joy he gathered the people to witness this mighty manifestation of the goodness and might of Jehovah. He assembled the priests, and sought their cooperation. Unitedly, in God's own way, they prayed and fasted for the stricken youth. For two days they continued their supplications, at the end of which time Alma stood upon his feet and spoke. He comforted them by declaring, "I have repented of my sins and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit."

In later years Alma, in relating to his son, Helaman, the details of his conversion, described the causes that led him to bear this testimony.

Behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world. Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death. And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy. Yea, methought I saw, even as our father Lehi saw, God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their God; yea, and my soul did long to be there.

From that time to the end of his life, Alma labored without ceasing to bring souls to Christ and to guide his fellowmen in the paths of salvation.

Alma was the foremost man of his age and nation, the presiding high priest and chief judge of a mighty people, a great prophet filled with the spirit of his calling, an unceasing missionary, an undaunted soldier, a lucid expounder of the principles of the Everlasting Gospel, a proficient organizer of men, a distinguished warrior, and a triumphant general. There is a parallel in his conversion, extended missionary journeyings, and elaborate discourses on saving truths with Saul of Tarsus. We are also reminded of the recollections of Joshua, the son of Nun, as the great leader and prophet of his people and the victorious commander-in-chief of their armies.

The change in the life of Alma brought down upon him the persecutions of the wicked. They now treated him as he had previously treated the Saints. But in none of these things was he daunted or dismayed, for he had joy in preaching the word and in the conversion of many from their ungodliness.

So conspicuous as a champion of the cause of God did he become that Mosiah considered him the proper person to whom to confide the custody of the sacred plates and to act as the recorder of the nation's affairs and progress. In addition, when Aaron, the son of Mosiah, declined to succeed his father on the Nephite throne and it was wisely determined by the people that they would be ruled by judges for the future, Alma was chosen by the united voice of his countrymen to be their first chief judge. He was also their presiding high priest, his having been consecrated to this exalted position by his father, who shortly before his death, gave him charge of the affairs of the church throughout all the land (91 B.C.).

Five hundred and nine years had now passed away since Lehi left Jerusalem during which time the Nephites had been ruled by kings, the successors of the first Nephi. A wonderful but bloodless revolution now took place. The monarchy was merged into a republic, but so wise had been the steps taken by Mosiah, so equitably had he arranged the laws, that the change was made without tumult or disorder in the affairs of state. Indeed, the change was hailed with unbounded satisfaction by the people who greatly rejoiced in the more extended liberties now guaranteed to them.

In Alma, as their first chief judge, they had a man admirably adapted for the situation. He had the confidence of the people inasmuch as he was the Lord's mouthpiece to them; his worth and abilities claimed their trust and respect. He was a man of great talent, courage, faith, and energy, an unwearied worker for good, and as a judge he judged righteously. Still his position was not one of unmixed delights-apostates from the Church, pride and unbelief in its members, assaults and invasions from the national enemies, all combined to require his undiminished energies and undaunted faith. But above and beyond all, as compensation for these trials and annoyances, he had the right to receive the word of the Lord which was given to him as he needed or his people required.

The first year of Alma's judgeship was troubled by the apostasy of Nehor, a man of many personal attractions and great persuasiveness of manner. Nehor went about among the people preaching a kind of universalism-that all men would be saved. He also established priestcraft, making a lucrative business of spreading his pernicious ideas. His success in turning the hearts of the people was unfortunately extensive and the cause for many of the troubles that afterwards afflicted the Nephites. The individual career of Nehor, however, was short; he met an aged servant of the Lord named Gideon, and because the latter would not accept his dogmas but withstood him with the words of God, Nehor drew his sword and slew the venerable disciple. For this offense he was brought before Alma, tried by the law, found guilty, and condemned to death.

Notwithstanding the development of those follies and departures from the strictness of Gospel law, there was continued peace in the land until the fifth year of Alma's judgeship when a great division took place among the people. The corrupt portion wished to restore the monarchy and make a man after their own heart, named Amlici, king. The movement grew to so much importance that it was referred to the decision of all the people who gathered in large groups throughout the land and expressed their wishes for or against Amlici's elevation to the throne in the way prescribed by the law. The result was that Amlici's ambitious schemes were defeated by the voice of the majority, and the liberties of the republic were preserved.

This should have ended the matter, but it did not; the turbulent minority, incited by Amlici, would not accept this constitutional decision. They assembled and crowned their favorite as king of the Nephites and he at once began to prepare for war so that he might force the rest of the people to assent to his government.

Nor was Alma idle; he also made ready for the impending contest. He gathered his people and armed them with all the weapons known to Nephite warfare.

The two armies met near a hill, Amnihu, on the east bank of the River Sidon. There a bloody battle followed in which Amlici's forces were disastrously defeated with a loss of 12,532 men, while the victors had to mourn the loss of 6,562 warriors slain. After pursuing the defeated monarchists as far as he was able, Alma rested his troops in the Valley of Gideon. There he took the precaution to send out four officers with their companies to watch the movements and learn the intentions of the retreating foe. These officers were Zeram, Amnor, Manti, and Limher. The next day these scouts returned in great haste and reported that the Amlicites had joined a vast host of Lamanites in the land of Minon, where unitedly they were slaying the Nephite population and ravaging their possessions, and at the same time they were pushing rapidly towards the Nephite capital with the intent of capturing it before Alma's army could return.

Alma at once started his troops for Zarahemla and with all haste marched towards it. He reached the crossing of the Sidon without meeting the enemy, but while attempting to pass to the western bank, he was confronted by the allied armies. A terrible battle ensued. The Nephites were taken somewhat at a disadvantage, but being men of faith, they fervently sought heaven's aid and in the increased fervor this faith inspired, they advanced to the combat. With Alma at their head, the advance guard forded the river and broke up the enemy who stood awaiting them. By the fury of their charge they drove into the ranks of the enemy. As they pushed onward, they cleared the ground by throwing the bodies of their fallen foes into the Sidon, thus making an opening for the main body to obtain a foothold.

In this charge Alma met Amlici face to face, and they fought desperately. In the midst of this hand-to-hand combat, Alma prayed for renewed strength that he might not be overpowered but live to continue to do good for his people. His prayers were answered, and thereby he gained new vigor to battle with and eventually to slay Amlici. With Amlici slain, Alma now led the attack to the place where the king of the Lamanites fought. But that monarch retired before the impetuous valor of the high priest and commanded his guards to close in upon his assailant. The order was promptly obeyed, but it did not succeed.

Alma and his guards bore down upon them with such fury that the few of the monarch's warriors who escaped made a hasty retreat. Pushing steadily on Alma kept driving the allies before him until his whole army had crossed the Sidon. There the enemy, no longer able to meet his well-ordered advance, broke in all directions and retreated into the wilderness that lay to the north and west. They were hotly pursued by the Nephites as long as the latter's strength permitted and were met on all quarters by patriots rallying to the call of the commonwealth who slew them by thousands. A remnant eventually reached that part of the wilderness known as Hermounts. There many died of their wounds and were devoured by the wild beasts and vultures with which that region abounded.

To the Nephites was left the sad task of burying the unnumbered dead, many of whom were women and children who had become victims to the ravages of the foe.

A few days after this decisive battle, another invading Lamanite army was reported. This one advanced along the east bank of the Sidon. It appears to have been the plan of their military commanders to invade the Nephite territory with two separate armies, both traveling northward toward the city of Zarahemla but on opposite sides of the Sidon. That advancing on the west side moved the most rapidly and was met, conquered, and dispersed by Alma. Later the other army met the same fate at the hands of one of Alma's lieutenants, because he was too seriously wounded in one of the preceding battles to lead his troops in person.

The great loss sustained by the Nephites in war, not only of warriors but also of women and children, together with the vast amount of property destroyed, had the effect of humbling them and softening their wayward hearts, so that many thousands during the next few years were added to the church by baptism. But the recollection of their former disasters was quickly worn away by prosperity. Only three years later there was great inequality in the Church. Some were poor and some were rich, and the more powerful abused and oppressed their weaker brethren. This course proved a great stumbling-block to those who were not numbered with the church, as well as being the cause of much sorrow and ill-feeling among its members. Finding that no man could properly attend to the duties of his many offices, Alma determined to resign the chief judgeship and devote his entire time to his duties as the earthly head of the Church. Preparatory to his resignation, he selected one of the leading elders, Nephihah, to be his successor as chief judge. This choice was confirmed by the people (83 B.C.).

The cares of the state having thus been removed from his shoulders, Alma commenced his ministerial labors at Zarahemla the chief city of the nation and then proceeded throughout the land. As often happens in other nations, the capital was the center of pride, vanity, envy, hypocrisy, and class distinctions. These evils Alma severely rebuked. At the same time, he guided the minds of the people to the contemplation and understanding of the beauties and saving powers of redemption's wondrous plan. He also exhorted everyone to become members of Christ's holy church. His call was heeded by many; the church was set in order; the unworthy were disfellowshiped; elders, priests, and other officers were ordained to preside and watch over the Saints.

After this was accomplished, Alma took his journey eastward, crossed the River Sidon to the city of Gideon, where he happily found the church in a prosperous condition. Alma's teachings to this people were full of prophecies concerning the coming of the Messiah, which show how clearly he and his faithful fellow servants understood the details of the advent and life of the promised Redeemer. Having made firm the Church in Gideon, Alma returned to Zarahemla to rest and recruit for a short time before visiting other portions of the land.

At the commencement of the next year (82 B.C.) Alma turned his face eastward. He first visited the land of Melek where his labors were crowned with abundant blessings. Having satisfied himself with the good that he had accomplished, he "traveled three days' journey on the north of the land of Melek," to a great and corrupt city named Ammonihah. Here he found a godless people, filled with the falsehoods of Nehor and living in the committal of all manner of abominations without repentance, because they cherished the flattering lie as the foundation of their creed, that all men would be exalted.

The city was in the hands of a corrupt clique of judges and lawyers who stirred up sedition, tumult, and rioting, that they might make money out of the suits that followed such disturbances. Further than this, they were secretly plotting to overthrow the government and rob the people of their highly-prized liberties. Among such a people Alma labored in vain, but no one would listen, and no one would obey. No one offered Alma rest or food. Instead, scorn and mockery were his reward, and he was spat upon, maltreated, and cast out of the city for his pains.

Weary in body and sick at heart because of the iniquity of the people after his many fruitless efforts, fervent prayers, and long fastings, Alma left the city to seek some other people more worthy of salvation's priceless gifts. He bent his way towards the city of Aaron; but as he journeyed an angel of the Lord (that same angel that had been the agent in his conversion to God) stood before him and blessed him. He told Alma to lift up his heart and rejoice for, because of his faithfulness, he had great cause to do so. The angel then directed Alma to return to the sin-cursed city he had just left and proclaim unto its godless citizens the awful message, "Except they repent the Lord will destroy them."

Speedily the prophet obeyed the angel's words. By another road he drew near the doomed city which he entered by its south gate. As he passed in he was an hungered and asked a man whom he met, "Will you give an humble servant of God something to eat?" With joy the man took him to his home and fed, clothed, and lodged him. Furthermore, Amulek, for this was his name, told Alma that he also had received a visit from an angel who had informed him of the high priest's coming and directed him to receive him into his house. Alma blessed Amulek and all his household and tarried and recruited under the generous hospitality which his home afforded. But his rest was not to be a lengthened one; the people waxed stronger in sin; the cup of their iniquity was nearly full. "Go," came the word of the Lord, "Go forth, and take with thee my servant Amulek and prophesy unto this people, saying, Repent ye for thus saith the Lord, except ye repent I will visit this people in mine anger; yea, I will not turn my fierce anger away."

Filled with the Holy Ghost, these servants of Israel's God went forth and valiantly delivered their terrible message. From place to place they went raising their Jonah-like cry. The heathen Ninevehites hearkened and repented; the sin-stained Israelites of Ammonihah laughed, scorned, mocked, and turned contemptuously away. A few, indeed, received the word but that only increased the anger of the majority, who, led and urged on by their still more depraved rulers and teachers, persecuted the prophets and martyred the believers.

The account given of the teachings of Alma and Amulek, their disputations with Zeezrom and other lawyers and rulers in Ammonihah, is given at length in the Book of Mormon and in consequence thereof, we have had handed down to us some of the plainest and profoundest teachings on the atonement, the resurrection, and the powers of the priesthood that are to be had. We cannot follow them here through all the varied incidents that led to the final catastrophe.

Faithfully the prophets warned Ammonihah of its approaching desolation; scornfully and incredulously the hardened people hurled back their words of warning with defiance. The few that believed, of which the crafty, hair-splitting Zeezrom was the most notable example, were east out of the city, while Alma and Amulek were bound with strong cords and under false accusations of having reviled the laws, were cast into prison.

Having consigned Alma and his companion to a prison cell, the infuriated people hunted up the wives and the little ones of the believers whom they had cast out, with such others as had accepted the truth who still remained in the city, and gathering all of them in a body, they burned them in one great martyr's fire. Into the flames they also cast the records that contained the Holy Scriptures, as though they imagined in their blind fury that they could thereby destroy the truths that were so odious to them. In the refinement of their devilish cruelty they brought Alma and Amulek to the place of martyrdom, that they might be witnesses of the agonies of the suffering innocents and listen to the crackling and the roaring of the flames. With jeers, with mouthing, and derisive gestures they called upon the prophets to rescue their dying converts. Amulek's noble heart was pained beyond endurance; he besought Alma to exercise the power of God that was in them and to save the victims from the consuming flames. But Alma replied that the, "... Spirit constraineth me that I must not stretch forth mine hand, for behold the Lord receiveth them up unto himself in glory and he doth suffer that they may do this thing unto them, according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments which he shall exercise upon them in his wrath may be just and the blood of the innocent shall stand as a witness against them the last day." Then Amulek said, "Perhaps they will burn us also." To which Alma responded, "Be it according to the will of the Lord. But, behold, our work is not finished; therefore they burn us not."

When the fire had burned low, and the precious fuel of human bodies and sacred records were consumed, the chief judge of the city came to the two prophets as they stood bound and mocked them. He smote them on the cheek and sneeringly asked them if they would preach again that his people should be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone. But neither answered him a word. Seeing that they had no power to save those who had been burned, neither had God exercised his power in their behalf, he then smote them again and remanded them to prison.

After they had been confined three days, they were visited by many judges and lawyers, priests, and teachers after the order of Nehor who came to exult in the misery of their prisoners. They cross-questioned and badgered them, but neither would reply. They came again the next day and went through the same performance. They mocked, they smote, they spat upon the two disciples. They tantalized them with outrageous and blasphemous questions, such as, "How shall we look when we are damned?"

Patiently and silently all this was borne; day after day it was repeated; harder and harder grew the hearts of the Ammonihahites towards their prisoners; fiercer and stronger grew their hatred. They stripped Alma and Amulek of their clothes and when naked, bound them with strong ropes. They withheld food and drink from them and in various ways they tortured their bodies and sought to aggravate, tantalize, and harrow up their minds.

On the twelfth day of the tenth month of the tenth year of the Judges (82 B.C.) the chief judge and his followers again went to the prison. According to his usual custom he smote the brethren, saying as he did so, "If ye have the power of God deliver yourselves from these bands and then we will believe that the Lord will destroy this people according to your words." This impious challenge the crowd one by one repeated as they passed by the prophets and smote them in imitation of their leader. Thus each individual assumed the responsibility of the defiance cast at the Almighty and virtually said, "Our blood be upon our own heads."

The hour of God's power had now come-the challenge had been accepted. The prophets in the majesty of their calling rose to their feet; they were endowed with the strength of Jehovah; like burned thread the cords that bound them were snapped asunder and they stood free and unshackled before the terror-stricken mob. To rush from the prison was the first impulse of the God-defying followers of Nehor; in their fear all else was forgotten, some fell to the earth, others, impelled by the mob behind, stumbled and fell over their prostrate bodies until they became one confused, inextricable mass, blocking each other's way, struggling, yelling, cursing, pleading, fighting; frantically, but vainly, endeavoring to reach the outer gate.

At this moment of supreme horror an earthquake rent the prison walls; they trembled, then tottered, then fell on the struggling mass of humanity below, burying in one vast, unconsecrated grave, rulers and judges, lawyers and officers, priests and teachers. Not one was left of all the impious mob, who a few moments before defied heaven and challenged Jehovah's might. Alma and Amulek stood in the midst of the ruins unhurt. Straight way they left the scene of desolation and went into the city. Here the horrified people fled from them as a herd of goats flee from before two young lions.

Alma and Amulek, being so commanded, left the doomed city and passed over to the land of Sidom. Here they found the Saints who had been cast out of Ammonihah. To them they told the sad though glorious story of their martyred kin. With many words of wisdom and consolation they encouraged them to lives of devotion to Christ. Here, also, they found Zeezrom, the lawyer, racked in spirit with the recollection of his former infamies and tortured in body by the heat of a burning fever. At Zeezrom's request the two servants of the Most High visited him. They found he had repented in much tribulation for the past and that faith had developed in his heart.

Alma then exercised the power of his calling. Appealing to heaven, he cried, "O Lord, our God, have mercy on this man, and heal him according to his faith, which is in Christ." Zeezrom thereupon leaped upon his feet; his fever had left; he was made whole by the grace of God, while the people wondered and were astonished at this manifestation of God's goodness. Zeezrom was then baptized by Alma and became a zealous and faithful advocate of divine law.

The more complete organization of the Church in Sidom was the next work accomplished by Alma, which, having been satisfactorily attended to and the proper officers of the priesthood having been ordained and appointed, Alma, accompanied by his faithful friend, Amulek, returned to his home in Zarahemla.

The following year Ammonihah was destroyed. Less than four months had elapsed since the two inspired disciples had left it to its fate, when the Lamanites fell upon it like a whirlwind in its suddenness and as an avalanche in its utter destruction. For one day the fierce flames consumed the walls and towers of Ammonihah. The great city was no more; the word of the Lord had been fully accomplished; not one of its children remained. A desolation and a desert remained where dogs, vultures, and wild beasts struggled for the carcasses of the slain. Having resigned the office of chief judge, Alma no longer led the armies of Nephi. A righteous man named Zoram was their commander. Without delay he gathered his forces and prepared to meet the invading Lamanites. Knowing that Alma was the mouthpiece of God, he and his two sons went to the high priest and inquired how the campaign should be conducted. The word was given, its instructions were carried out, victory perched upon the Nephite banners. The Lamanites, utterly routed, retreated to their own lands. Then there was continued peace throughout the continent for three years.

During this period of peace Alma and his fellow priesthood members preached God's holy word in the power and demonstration of the Spirit and with much success. Great prosperity came to the Church throughout all the lands of the Nephites. At this happy time "there was no inequality among them, the Lord did pour out His Spirit on all the face of the land," as Alma supposed, to prepare the hearts of his people for the coming of Christ. With this object full in view he labored and rejoiced, preached, blessed, and prophesied, never tiring in his energies and feeling sorrowful only because of the hard-heartedness and spiritual blindness of some of the people.

In one most glorious event he had unspeakable joy. The companions of his youth, the sons of King Mosiah, returned from a fourteen years' mission among the Lamanites, during which time, after many sore trials and great tribulation, they, by the grace of their Father, had brought many thousands of that benighted race to a knowledge of the principles of the Everlasting Gospel.

Alma was traveling south on one of his missionary journeys from the land of Zarahemla to the land of Manti when he met Ammon and his brethren coming from the land of Nephi. On hearing the story of their mission, he at once returned home with them to Zarahemla. Here the condition of affairs among the Lamanites was rehearsed to the chief judge who laid the whole subject before the people so that whatever was done in relation to the Christian Lamanites might be done by common consent. The Nephites decided to give the land of Jershon, which lay south of the land of Bountiful, to these people for an inheritance. With this cheering news, Ammon, accompanied by Alma, returned into the southern wilderness, to the place where his people were awaiting the decision of the Nephites. Here they were ministered to and comforted by Alma and others after which they resumed their march to the land designated for their future abode.

We pass over the next few years of Alma's life, during which period he was laboring with his usual zest and devotion, to the latter portion of the seventeenth year of the Judges (75 B.C.). It was then that Korihor, the anti-Christ, appeared. His pernicious doctrines savor much of certain classes of modern religious delusion, but his principal arguments were directed against the advent and atonement of the Redeemer. From land to land he journeyed among the Nephites, spreading his false theories and notions. But as he claimed that as he taught so he believed, the law could not touch him for it was strictly forbidden in the Nephite constitution that any one should be punished on account of his belief; freedom of conscience was guaranteed to all. At last, not knowing what to do with him and as he was fomenting dissension and endangering the peace of the community, the local officers sent him to Alma and the chief judge for them to decide in the matter.

When he was brought before these officers, he continued, with great swelling words of blasphemy, to ridicule the holy principles of the Gospel and to revile the servants of God, falsely accusing them, among other things, of glutting themselves out of the labors of the people.

In Alma's answer to this charge we have a pleasing insight into his private life. He said, "Thou knowest that we do not glut ourselves upon the labors of this people, for behold, I have labored, even from the commencement of the reign of the judges until now, with mine own hands for my support, notwithstanding my many travels around about the land to declare the word of God unto my people; and notwithstanding the many labors I have performed in the church, I have not so much as received even one senine for my labor; either has any of my brethren, save it were in the judgment seat and then we have received only according to law for our time."

Korihor continued to withstand the prophet until in compliance with his impious importunities a sign was given him-an unwelcome and unexpected sign to him-he was struck dumb by the power of God. He was east out from the face of society, a wanderer and a vagabond, begging from door to door for bread to sustain life. While thus dragging out a miserable existence, he was run over and trodden to death in the city of the Zoramites.

The Zoramites were a dangerous body of dissenters who also taught that there should be no Christ. They deluded themselves with the idea that they were the peculiar objects of heaven's favor, born to be saved, predestined to eternal glory while the rest of the world were the rejected, the foreordained damned. This consoling creed, to the corrupt and crime-stained, was rapidly growing and gaining influence at the time of Korihor's death and became the next object of Alma's ever-watchful care.

Accompanied by Amulek, Zeezrom, three of the sons of King Mosiah and two of his own sons, Alma went over to the regions inhabited by these apostates. This mission was one of the most important of his life and, like that to Ammonihah, was partially successful. As soon as Alma discovered the gross iniquity of this people and the peculiarities of their forms of worship, he held a council meeting with his fellow-missionaries, and having prayed fervently to the Lord, "he clapped his hands upon all who were with him. And behold, as he clapped his hands upon them they were filled with the Holy Ghost. After that they did separate themselves one from another; taking no thought for themselves what they should eat, or what they should drink, or what they should put on." And in all these things the Lord provided for them.

The missionaries labored diligently, they visited the people in their homes, they preached in their synagogues, they proclaimed the truth in their streets but the flattering errors of their false faith had so thoroughly taken possession of them that they rejected the truth and persecuted and even attempted to slay some of Alma's companions. However, this rejection was not universal. A number of the poorer and more humble Zoramites accepted the divine message in consequence of which they were soon driven from their homes and out of their country by their more numerous, more influential, and also more corrupt fellow-citizens.

When Alma and his associates had done all the good that seemed to them practicable, they retired to the land of Jershon where the Ammonites dwelt; there the believing Zoramites followed when they were expatriated by their fellow countrymen. In Jershon they were kindly received by its inhabitants and welcomed as brethren. Here Alma again ministered to them. Having done this, he and most of his co-laborers returned to Zarahemla.

Alma was now growing old. Notwithstanding his unceasing efforts and fervent prayers, the Nephites were again backsliding into iniquity. To every Nephite city and to every Nephite land he went, or sent, to revive the Gospel fires in the souls of the inhabitants. But many became offended because of the strictness of the Gospel's laws which forbade not only sin itself but also the very appearance of sin. As this feeling grew, Alma's heart became exceedingly sorrowful and he mourned the depravity of his people. Like many of the ancient patriarchs, when they felt that their mortal career was drawing to a close, he called his sons to him and gave them his last charge and blessing; speaking to each as the spirit of instruction and prophecy inspired. To Helaman, his eldest, he transferred the custody of the sacred plates with many words of warning and caution. With hearts strengthened and renewed by the inspiration of his fervent admonitions, his sons went forth among the people; nor could Alma himself rest while there was a soul to save or a wrong to make right. He also went forth once again in the spirit of his holy calling and raised his voice in advocacy of the principles of the everlasting gospel.

Another bloody war now commenced, one that before its close drew out the whole strength of both Nephites and Lamanites. The youthful but brilliant and God-fearing Moroni took charge of the armies of Nephi. He, not willing to trust to his own powers, sent to Alma for the divine word to direct his movements. As was his wont, the high priest was favored with the revelation of heaven's will which, being conveyed to Moroni, was in faith implicitly followed. We need not enter into the details of the terrible battle that ensued; victory crowned the inspired general's efforts. With the account of this battle, the record of Alma closes.

It was in the nineteenth year of the Judges (73 B.C.) that Alma took his beloved son, Helaman, and after having discovered through divers questions, the strength and integrity of his faith, he prophesied to Helaman of many important events which should transpire in the distant future, especially with regard to the destruction of the Nephites. This prophecy he commanded Helaman to record on the plates but not to reveal to any one. Alma then blessed Helaman and also his other sons. Indeed, he blessed all who should stand firm in the truth of Christ from that time forth. Shortly after this he departed out of the land of Zarahemla, as if to go to the land of Melek and was never heard of again. Of his death and burial no men were witnesses. Then the saying went abroad throughout the Church that the Lord had taken him, as he beforetime had taken Moses. This event occurred exactly one hundred years from the time of the elder Alma's birth.
