Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

Book of Mormon Names in American Geography

Book of Mormon Names in American Geography

"There is a continuity in language which nothing equals; and there is an historical genuineness in ancient words, if but rigidly interpreted, which cannot be rivalled by manuscripts, or coins, or monumental inscriptions." MAX MULLER, The Beginning.

In Palestine and other Bible lands the wanderer frequently finds himself in localities, cities, towns, or villages, the names of which are familiar to him from the Sacred Scriptures. He enters, perhaps, the sun-kissed city of Nazareth by the blue waters of the Sea of Galilee, where Joseph and Mary had their permanent home and where Jesus grew up, played, and labored and studied; or he ascends the Mount of Transfiguration, where he may enjoy an unexcelled view of the Holy Land; or he passes through one of the famous gates of Jerusalem, the Holy City, with its sacred temple grounds and the ever-memorable environs.

He takes, perhaps, a walk to Bethlehem, where, on the nearby fields, angels sang of peace and good will, and reverently he bows at the manger and lifts his heart in prayer to God; he may bathe in the crystal brine of the Dead Sea, or the turbulent waters of the Jordan; he may ascend to the roof of the house of Simon, the tanner, at Jaffa, where Peter, the Apostle, by revelation learned one of the most vital principles of the Gospel; he will travel over the Plains of Sharon, where the glory of the lilies surpasses even the splendor of the gold and purple of the famous King Solomon; he may climb to the top of Carmel, the mountain of Mighty Elijah.

On such a pilgrimage, his heart will be filled with awe, joy, peace, wonder, love, gratitude, humility, ecstacy-all blending into one and inspiring the immortal spirit with a vision of the gates of its eternal home.

Such a pilgrimage has more than just emotional value. It is an experience that is sure to lend strength to the faith of the believer, for such names as those mentioned, and many others, furnish irrefutable evidence for the authenticity of the books of the Bible, and especially for their historic accuracy.

This observation renews in the minds of thoughtful students of the Book of Mormon, at least two closely-related questions.

First: Of about 200 proper names appended to the latest editions of the Sacred Record, are any of them found among Indian names that have become known since the discovery of the Western Continents?

Second: Since it is claimed that a considerable part of the aborigines of America are of Semitic descent and that the Book of Mormon is the record of peoples of Hebrew origin, it is pertinent to ask, "Are there Hebrew words in the Book of Mormon? Have the Indians retained any Semitic names in their vocabularies? Is there, in other words, any linguistic evidence for the asserted relationship of the Indians with Semitic, especially Hebrew ancestry?" That class of evidence is as important to the student of the Book of Mormon as it is to the reader of the Bible.

But in considering these questions, we must first bear in mind that we cannot expect to find the same abundance of linguistic evidence for the Book of Mormon, in America, as has been found for the Bible in Palestine, Syria, Chaldea, and Egypt.

America was for centuries practically cut off from the rest of the world. During this time of isolation, peoples and individuals were so entirely occupied with strife, war, migrations to and from different parts of the country, and the unavoidable struggle for existence, that the preservation of their language, or languages, in the original form was out of the question. During this time their speech naturally suffered changes. Tribal dialects multiplied. Each developed within its own limited sphere, and, in the process lost original words and grammatical forms. History, as far as it was passed from tribe to tribe, from generation to generation, became myths and saga, and in this loose sand the traces of words were too often eliminated. Thus the facilities for a comparison of proper names and common nouns from the American languages with those of other tongues, and consequently also with the vocabulary of the Book of Mormon, are rather limited. That is one reason we may not expect too much from this otherwise valuable class of evidence.

But the Book of Mormon is written in a language which Nephi tersely describes as "the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians." That can only mean that the language which Lehi brought to this continent was not that of the golden age of Hebrew literature, represented by David, Solomon, Isaiah, and some of the other early prophets, but a vernacular influenced by foreign, and especially Egyptian, elements. It is traces of this idiom that we may expect to find in the American languages.

However, the student who may be interested in this particular branch of inquiry must proceed carefully. The field is beset with difficulties. Hasty conclusions do not, as a rule, lead to truth. Words written may look alike, or when spoken may sound alike, or very nearly so, without being even distantly related. Take as an illustration the two words desert (an uncultivated region) and desert (that which is deserved). They look alike on paper, and, but for the accent, sound alike. And yet, the dictionaries tell us that one comes from desero (to forsake) and the other from deservio (to do service). On the other hand, consider the name of the famous explorer Americus Vespucius. Americus or, as it is also written, Merigo, does not look like, and does not sound like Amalrich. But that is said to be the German ancestor of that name. "Amerigo is an Italianized form of the old German Amalrich, not Emmerich, which in medieval French became Amury and in Latin, Americus." (John Fiske, Myths and Myth Makers)

One entirely unacquainted with the mysteries of etymology would hardly suspect Merigo and Amury of being the same word or name.

One rule that it is well to keep in mind is that phonetic changes nearly always tend toward simplification. Longer words are made shorter, and harsh sounds are softened. Many illustrations of this rule could be given. The great name Lincoln is said to be an abbreviation of Lindum Colonia. The old Greek Melitia is now Malta. Macoraba has become Mekka. Chumley was originally Cholmondely. Sissiter was Cirencester. Affleck was Auchinleck.

As an illustration of the changes names undergo, the Hebrew peleshet, from palash, "to go," "to rove," "to wander," may be mentioned. It has become Philistia and then Palestine. The Arabian Djebel-al Tarik, "the mountain on the road," has become Gibraltar. According to Fiske in Myths and Myth-makers, the name Odin, the chief god of the Teutonic races, which name was originally Guodan, has become God in English, the same as Gott in German and Gut in the Scandinavian languages. Fiske also shows that the English words Divinity and Devil may be traced from the same origin, the Zend dev, and the Sanskrit deva. In some languages this became devil, teufel, djevul, djofull. In others it became Deus, Theos, Diewas, Dieu, Dios, and our divinity, divine.

If we keep such transformations in mind, those of known words, the suggestions and arguments in the following paragraphs will not appear far-fetched. There will be little difficulty in accepting the conclusions, and their importance as evidence for the Book of Mormon will be apparent.

For the sake of emphasis we want to repeat that the Bible student knows the value of proper names as evidence of the truth of a sacred record. He knows that, while Bible names have been lost, some possibly forever, others, such as Carmel, Jordan, Bethlehem, Ephesus, Syria, Egypt, Palestine, Persia, are still familiar to travelers and students, and they are unimpeachable witnesses to the authenticity of Scripture history.

The same may be said of Book of Mormon names. Many of them may be lost, or distorted beyond recognition, but others are still found in easily recognized forms.

The following list of Book of Mormon names is submitted, not as an infallible product of scientific research, but rather as a suggestion indicating what such research may be expected to yield.

Yucotan

This is a peninsula which divides the Gulf of Mexico from the Caribbean Sea, and borders on British Honduras and Guatemala on the south. It was at one time part of the Maya Empire, and the ruins of Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Izamal, Mayapan, and others, bear witness to its former glory. It is now part of Mexico, and has a population in excess of 350,000, mostly Maya Indians.

Many attempts have been made to derive that name from different sources, but a satisfactory solution of its etymology has not been found. Our suggestion is that Yucatan was so named by the original settlers in memory of Joktan, the younger son of Eber.

We are told that Eber, who was the son of Shem, had two sons, Peleg and Joktan. (Gen. 10:25-30) Further, that Peleg (which means "division") was so named, "for in his days was the earth divided," which evidently refers to the allotment of the habitable portions of the earth to various families, tongues and nations after the flood, under patriarchal inspiration. (See Gen. 10:32; 11:8) Concerning this division of the land we are also informed (Deut. 32:8) that the Lord, in his allotment, had special reference to the number of the Children of Israel. The text referred to is, "When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel." In other words, he planned to reserve adequate place for the chosen race.

Now, the descendants of Shem through Eber, generally located in Chaldea, Armenia, and Syria. His descendants through Joktan went eastward to Jemen, and from there toward India, and perhaps to China. The Jemen Arabs still have preserved the tradition that they are the descendants of Joktan, whom, in their language, they call Kachtan. They consider themselves as "genuine" Arabs, different from the descendants of Ishmael.

It is not improbable that Jared and his wonderful brother, along with their companions in their miraculous voyage, came from this branch of the sons of Shem. They were, in other words, Joktanites.

The promise of the Lord to Jared and his brother was that He would go before them into a land "which is choice above all the lands of the earth." That is the entire America. "And there will I bless thee and thy seed," the Lord said, "and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth." (Ether 1:43) Accordingly, we may suppose that some of the Jaredites, in the course of time, came to Yucatan and perpetuated the name of their ancestor, by naming the country after him, in his honor.

Tale

It has been stated that according to the famous chronicler Bernal Diaz, the word tale, presumably in the Maya language means such little hills as those in which the Yucca plant grew. That seems to be a word of pure Semitic origin. For tel both in Hebrew and Arabic means a "hill," particularly a heap of stones. It was a place name in Babylon, (Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Tel-abib) and also in Egypt (Tel-el-Amarna). There is a modern Tel-abib in Palestine, a very flourishing city.

The word tale, which we take to be identical with the Semitic tel, certainly points to a Semitic ancestry of the first settlers of this part of America. It was part of their language, even if it was not part of the name of their country, Yucatan.

Angola

Angola was the name of a city which the Nephites occupied and fortified, under the leadership of Mormon, about A.D. 326 when the Lamanites drove them out into the north. (Morm. 2:4) The word occurs in the Lenape annals on the creation, and is a genuine Indian word. Rafinesque149 observes: "This account of the creation is strikingly similar to the Mosaic and oriental accounts." He is also of the opinion that the angel-atawiwak of this story are the Elohim of the Hebrews, the angelos of the Pelasgians and the h'ello (old men) of the Egyptians.

Anti

There are several words in the Book of Mormon in which anti is one of the component parts, as for instance, Ani-Anti, the name of an Amalekite village in which Aaron, Muloki, and Ammah preached the Gospel. (Alma 21:11) Anti-Nephi-Lehi, the name of a king and also of a people. (Alma 24:1-5) Antion, a piece of gold used as money. (Alma 11:19) Antipas, the name of a mountain. (Alma 47:7) All are instances, with others, that denote that the word was in common use among the people of Nephi.

The Indian word Quichua corresponding to anti is, we are assured, anta, which Garcilasso de la Vega250 tells us means copper.

From anta the magnificent mountain chain that forms the backbone of South America was called the Andes, possibly because of the abundance of metal, especially copper, found in these mountains.

In the Book of Mormon, anti means a "mountain" or a "hill." When it is used to denote a country, it probably means a hilly or mountain country, and when the name is applied to a city, it may indicate its location in a mountain region. In the same way Anti-Nephi-Lehies may mean that they were located in a hilly or mountainous country. As applied to a piece of money, the word would indicate that they were made of an alloy in which copper formed a considerable part.

Anti appears in Antisuyu, the name given by the Peruvians to the eastern part of their vast domain; that is, to the part that was traversed by the loftiest ridges of the Andes Mountains. That proves, beyond question, that the Peruvians used the word exactly as we find it used in the Book of Mormon.

Anitpas

This is a name of a mount or hill on the summit of which Lamanite armies on one occasion had gathered themselves for battle. (Alma 47:7)

This is a genuine Indian word. On the mountain slopes of the Cordilleras, in the upper Amazon Basin, there is, according to Dr. Brinton,351 a tribe of Indians, of the Jivaro linguistic stock, known as the Antipas. They are described as "rather tall, of light color, with thin lips, aquiline noses, straight eyes, prognathic jaws, hair black or with reddish tint."

Hagoth

In the Book of Mormon, Hagoth, we are told, built an exceedingly large ship on the borders of the Land Bountiful, by the Land Desolation, and launched it forth into the West Sea, by the narrow neck of land which led into the land northward. Afterwards other expeditions were undertaken. This was about 55 B.C.

California Indians attribute a large artificial mound of mussel shells and bones of animals, on Point St. George, near San Francisco, to a prehistoric people which they call Hohgates. Whether this name is the Book of Mormon Hagoth is a question that seems pertinent.

According to the traditions, the Hohgates were seven strangers, who arrived from the sea and who were the first to build houses in which to live in that part of the country.452 They hunted deer, sea lions, and seals. They gathered mussels on the nearby rocks, and the refuse from their meals was piled up around their dwellings. One day-so the tradition runs-they saw a gigantic seal into which they managed to drive a harpoon. The wounded animal fled seaward, dragging the boat with it toward the unknown world. At the moment the mariners were about to be engulfed, the seal disappeared and the boat was flung up into the air. Since then, the Hohgates, changed into stars, to return no more.

It is more than probable that there is an historic basis for this beautiful legend. That sea voyages were not entirely unheard of in prehistoric America is evident from the many traditions still told by the inhabitants of the islands of the Pacific Ocean.

Jacobugath

Jacobugath was the name of a great city mentioned in 3 Ne. 9:9. It was inhabited by the people of King Jacob, and, as gath means a wine press, it may have received its name from the fact that wine was made there, causing the wickedness for which it was finally destroyed.

The word should be compared with Intibucat, the name of an Indian dialect of the Lenca stock, spoken in Central Honduras in and about the pueblo of the same name,553 not because the two are identical, but because their construction is the same.

Laban

Laban was the name of a prominent resident of Jerusalem, a contemporary of Lehi, and the owner of certain brass plates containing historical and genealogical data of the greatest importance. (1 Ne. 3:5.)

Laman, the name of the eldest son of Lehi (1 Ne. 2:5), and also of a king mentioned in Mosiah 7:21, is the same name as Laban. Lamoni is formed from this word by the addition of the suffix "i."

The word is Hebrew and means "white." Several forms of it are found in the Old Testament, such as "Laban," the father-in-law of Jacob; "lebanah," the "moon," because of its whiteness; "Libnah," a place name (Num. 33:20) "Libni the name of a person (Ex. 6:17) "Lebanon the well-known name of a mountain, and "Libnites," as the descendants of Libni were called (Num. 3:21.)

Nor is the word confined to the Semitic group of languages. Compare the Greek "alphos" and "Olympos"; also the Latin "albus," from which we have a number of words, such as "albino," "Albion," "Albany," "album," the latter being originally white tablets for writing. Some derive even "Alps" from the same root, while others claim that this name is from a Gaelic source meaning "height."

It would, indeed, be a surprise if we should not find that word, so common in the Old World anciently, in use among the prehistoric Indians. But it seems to have been just as common on this side of the world.654

Dr. Brinton tells us that the Yamcos Indians on the Maranon are also called Llameos, Lamas, and Lamistas. In the Lama linguistic stock he places the Alabonos, the Nahuapos, and the Napeanos.755 In A-labono we can easily recognize Labon, and in Nahuapos and Napeanos we seem to have the name of Nephi preserved, just as we have the name of Laban, or Laman, preserved in Lamas and Lamistas. Near Truxillo, in South America, there are also the Lamanos or Lamistas, of the Quichua linguistic stock.856

According to Reclus, quoted by Dr. Cyrus Thomas957 there is, or was, a tribe of Indians, of the Ulva stock, near Blewfields, called Lamans. The Blewfields River was also called the Lama River. Dr. Brinton does not classify the Lamans, but he mentions the Ramas as living on a small island in the Blewfield Lagoon, and the Lamans and the Ramas may be the same name, since "l" and "r" interchange in all languages.1058

In Yucatan we have the ancient city of Labna, which name certainly seems to be the same as Laban.

We are aware of the fact that Lab-na is said to mean "old house." But that does not say that the root of the word is not the same as the Hebrew "white." For white is often a sign of old age.

The word Laban means the same in the Indian, as in the Old World languages. In the Lenape, Rafinesque says, Lapan-ibi means "white water."59 Lumonaki, according to the same authority, "white land." This word is also spelled abnaki, with the initial "l" dropped. Dr. Brinton1260 says the Algonquins used to call their eastern kindred Abnakis, "our white ancestors," an expression which, since [l]abn means "white," would be the same as "our Lamanite ancestors"; aki, however, means "land," and "white land" is, therefore, a better translation.1361

Charles Christian Ravn, the Danish scholar, is authority for the statement that the Indians whom the Icelanders met when exploring the North American coast in the early part of the Eleventh Century, had a tradition concerning a country called, in Icelandic, Hvitramannaland, "White-men's-land." That would be identically the same name as Lumon-aki, or the land of Laman. Conjecture has located Hvitramannaland along the Chesapeake Bay, mending down into the Carolinas, and peopled it with "white" colonists, but it is more probable that it is the Lumonaki of the Algon-quins and the Lamoni of the Book of Mormon.

Lehi

In the Hebrew this word is Lechi, the "ch" being practically the same as our "h." In Palestine a hilly district in Judea, near Jerusalem, was known as Lehi. (Judg. 15:19) Samson, after his battle with the Philistines, threw away his unique weapon, the jawbone of an ass, and called the place of combat Ramath-Lehi, "the Hill of Lehi." Then he was thirsty, and the Lord, in answer to his prayer, opened a crevice in the hill,1462 and "there came water thereout." So he called the spring, En-hakkore, "the spring of him that called" (in answer to prayer), "which," we read, "is in Lehi unto this day." This incident is recalled by the name of the father of Nephi.

In the Lenape language the word is lechau, which is identical with the Hebrew lechi. In the Indian tongue it means a "fork of a river," and that may well have been suggested by the form of a jawbone of a donkey.

T. A. Joyce1563 mentions an Indian tribe in Colombia, located to the north of the Chibchas, which he calls the Laches, a name which seems to be identical with the Hebrew Lechi and the Book of Mormon Lehi.

In North America there are several places named Lehigh. The Lehigh River in Pennsylvania, which flows into the Delaware at Easton, Northampton Co., is well known. The one-hundred mile channel through which it winds its way is called Lehigh Valley, and there is a good sized county having the same name.

We have noticed that the name is known far away in the Hawaiian Islands. In the November number, 1921, of The Paradise of the Pacific, a magazine published in Honolulu, the statement occurs that the ancient name for Diamond Head, a prominent volcanic mountain, was Leahi. This is but a very slight variation in spelling, from the name, as it is given in the Book of Mormon.

Liahona

This interesting word is Hebrew with an Egyptian ending. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball or director he found outside his tent the very day he began his long journey through the "wilderness," after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel. (1 Ne. 16:10; Alma 37:88)

L is a Hebrew preposition meaning "to," and sometimes used to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated form of "Jehovah," common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian "City of the Sun," also known as Memphis and Heliopolis. L-iah-on means, therefore, literally, "To God is Light"; or, "of God is Light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final a reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Annu,1664 and that seems to be the form Lehi used.

Lehi had just received the divine command to begin his perilous journey. The question uppermost in his mind, after having received that call, must have been how to find the way. That must have been quite a problem. But he arose early in the morning, determined to carry out the command given. Undoubtedly he had prayed all night for light and guidance. And now, standing in the opening of the tent, perhaps as the first rays of the sun broke through the morning mists, his attention is attracted by a metal ball "of curious workmanship." He picks it up and examines it. And then, as he realizes that it is the guide for which he had been praying, he exclaims in ecstacy, L-iah-on-a! Which is as much as to say, This is God's light; it has come from him! And that became the name of the curious instrument. This was not a compass. It was a miraculously formed instrument which served both as compass and octant.

Now, the fact is that this manner of giving names was an ancient Semitic custom. Hagar, when her son Was perishing in the wilderness and she beheld the angel by the life-giving spring, exclaimed, Beer-lachai-roi! which means, literally, "Well, to live, to see." That is to say, "the well of him that liveth and seeth me," for that was the thought that came to her mind. (Gen. 16:13, 14.) And that became the name of the well. In the same way, Abraham called the place where he had offered Isaac on the altar, Jehovah-jireh, "the Lord will provide"; because the Lord did provide for himself a ram instead of Isaac, as Abraham had assured his son the Lord would do. (Gen. 27:7-14.) And that became the name of the Mount "to this day."

Lehi gave the metal ball a name commemorative of one of the great experiences of his life, just as these Old Testament worthies had done. And, furthermore, he gave it a name that no one but a devout Hebrew influenced by Egyptian culture would have thought of. Is that not the strongest possible evidence of the truth of the historic part of the Book of Mormon?

Manti

In the Book of Mormon this word occurs as the name of the hill upon which Nehor, the murderer, was executed. (Alma 1:15.) It was also the name of a Nephite soldier (Alma 2:22), and there was a Land of Manti, on the head waters of the river Sidon (Alma 16:6, 7) and a city of the same name (Alma 57:22).

The name is very ancient. It is mentioned in the earliest Egyptian inscriptions as the name of an Asiatic people, probably the same as the Hyksos, or Shepherds,1765 or, perhaps, rather a tribe of that people.

In this country there was at one time, in South America, the Manta Indians, on the coast north of the Gulf of Guayaquil. In Stanford's Compendium of Geography and Travel, the Mantas are referred to as an extinct Quito race of ten tribes.1866 There was also a city of Manti and a district of the same name, as in the Book of Mormon.

Another Manti

In 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and others, found it best, on account of apostasy and bitterness, to leave Kirtland and go to Far West, Mo., where the Saints were endeavoring to establish themselves. On September 25, they passed through Huntsville, Randolph Co., and the Prophet is said to have told the brethren that that place, where a stake of Zion had been established, was "the ancient site of the city of Manti." (Andrew Jenson, Hist. Rec., p. 601.)

Whether "the ancient site of Manti" refers to the Manti in the Book of Mormon is a question that has been debated. Some prefer to regard it as a reference to a later City of Manti, built by descendants of Nephi in Missouri.1967 In either case, the information is both important and interesting.

According to Garcilasso de la Vega, the Mantas worshiped the ocean, fishes, lions, tigers, serpents, etc., but special veneration was paid to an emerald which was larger than an ostrich egg. At their principal festival they exhibited this jewel, and people from near and far came to see it and to offer presents, especially emeralds, which the Indians regarded as the children of the big stone. An incredible number of emeralds were thus accumulated in the sanctuary in the Manta Valley. Many of these gems fell into the hands of the Spaniards, and some were destroyed because the conquerors did not know their value, but the large stone was hidden, and has never been found.

The word is found all over America. It is the familiar word manito. In the Lenape annals on the creation we read:2068

"It was then when the God-Creator made the makers or spirits-Manito-Manitoak; and also the angels, Angelatawiwak. And afterwards he made the man-being, Jinwis, ancestor of the men. He gave him the first mother, Netamigaho, mother of the first beings."

The manitos in this legend were spirits who had an existence before the first man appeared on earth.

In the Algonquin language the word is said to express divinity in its broadest sense. Schoolcraft2169 spells it monedo, and translates it "spirit," or whatever is mysterious. A monedo, or manitou, may be the Great Spirit, a witch or a wizard, a glass bead, a jewel, an insect, a reptile, or a place haunted by a spirit. It has frequently been translated "medicine," which may seem absurd, until we recall the fact that in early days all medicine was supposed to be "charms" and pharmacists were considered wizards. In Gal. 5:20 the word Pharmakei is translated witchcraft, showing how the Bible translators regarded pharmacy.

In the Haytian language, Rafinesque tells us, the word manati, evidently the same as manta and manito, means a great and eminent thing, and this would account for the naming of a hill Manti, as in the Book of Mormon.2270.

In Hebrew we have the word man, which means something mysterious, for the Children of Israel gave that name to the mysterious bread that came from heaven; for, they said, We "wist not what it was." That word Gesenius connects with mannah, to "divide," to "portion out," to "count." There is where we have obtained our word "money." If it is thought that manti and manito cannot be related to manah and money, because these words lack the "t," it should be remembered that the "t" re-appears in "mint," which also has something to do with "money." Manti should be compared with the English mantic, and the Greek mantikos.

Mormon

The Prophet Joseph, in a letter published in the Times and Seasons, Nauvoo, May 15, 1843,2371 furnished the following explanation concerning the meaning of the word:

"It has been stated that this word was derived from the Greek word mormo. This is not the case. There was no Greek or Latin upon the plates from which I, through the grace of the Lord, translated the Book of Mormon."

Then he quotes from the Book of Mormon (Morm. 9:32-34), where we are told that the characters used were the "reformed Egyptians." He continues:

"Here, then the subject is put to silence, for 'none other people knoweth our language'; therefore, the Lord, and not man, had to interpret, after the people were all dead. And as Paul said, 'The world by wisdom knew not God'; so the world by speculation are destitute of revelation; and as God, in his superior wisdom, has always given his Saints, whenever he had any on the earth, the same spirit, and that spirit, as John says, is the true spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I may safely say that the word Mormon stands independent of the learning and wisdom of this generation.

"Before I give a definition, however, of the word, let me say that the Bible, in its widest sense, means good; for the Savior says, according to the Gospel of John, 'I am the Good Shepherd'; and it will not be beyond the common use of terms to say that Good is among the most important in use, and though known by the various names in different languages, still its meaning is the same, and is ever in opposition to bad."

The Prophet further says:

"We say, from the Saxon, good; from the Dane, god; the Goth, goda; the German, gut; the Dutch, goed; the Latin, bonus; the Greek, kalos; the Hebrew, tob, and the Egyptian, mon. Hence, with the addition of more, or the contraction, mor, we have the word Mormon, which means literally, more good."

Here we have the interesting information that the first part of the word is an abbreviation of the English adverb "more," and that the second part is the Egyptian adjective "mon." In other words, the Prophet found, on the plates, as a proper noun, a compound word meaning, literally, "better," and, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, he solved the problem of transliterating it, by translating the first part into English and copying the second part, and making of the two, one word, half English and half Egyptian. This, we admit, is an unusual literary procedure, but we have an instance of it in our Bible, where a place called Maaleh-acrabbim (Josh. 15:3) is also called "The Ascent of Akrabbim," (Num. 34:4.) Here half of the name is translated into English and the other half is a foreign word. See also Gen. 23:2 and 35:27, where Hebron is called, in the first passage, Kirjath-Arba, and in the second, "The City of Arbah," the first half of the name being translated into English and the second being left untranslated.2472 This, then, is how the word Mormon originated.

And it means "more good"; that is "better."

The reference of the Prophet, in this connection, to the Bible would indicate that the good expressed in the word is the same as that which we call "good news," or "gospel," and that Mormon, therefore, means one who is the bearer of "good tidings."

It is probable that the mon in "Mormon" is akin to the mon or men in the Egyptian Amon or Amen. Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge, (The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol.. 2, p. 2) says that Amen is from a root men "to abide, to be permanent, eternal." Mon or men (the vowel is indifferent) would, then, mean "good" in the sense of permanency, just as nefer means "good" in the sense of physical beauty. We gather this from what Champollion (Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens, p. 91) on the authority of Eusebius says, viz., that the divinity which takes the name Amen and Kneph or Noub, alternatively, was by the Greeks called Agathodaimon, and that Nero, when assuming a divine title, called himself Neo-agathedaimon. Aga-thos is, of course, the Greek word for "good," and it must have been suggested by the Egyptian men or mon.

It is a very interesting fact that many American languages, perhaps most of them, form their comparatives and superlatives by the use of the adverbs "more" and "most." In the Aztec, "better" is ocahiqualli, which means, literally, "more good." In the Otomi language "better" is nra nho, which means "more good." In the Maya, the comparative is formed by affixing the last vowel of the adjective with an "l" added or by simply affixing the particle il. For instance, from Tibil, a "good thing," u tibil-il, a "better thing" is formed.2573

May we not ask, "What is the explanation of the singular fact that the Prophet Joseph seems to have had knowledge of how comparatives are formed in some of the principal American languages?"

Moroni

This is, as is well known, the name of the last of the Book of Mormon prophets, who finished the records of his father, Mormon, added his own abridgment of the plates of the Jaredites, and deposited the completed volume in the Hill, Cumorah, about A.D. 421 (Morm. 8:14; Moro. 10:2), in the same hill, where Mormon had deposited the original plates entrusted to his care, from which he had compiled his briefer history. (Morm. 6:6.)

Moroni was also the name of the great Nephite general who was the first to proclaim the American continents the Land of Liberty, or, as we should say, "The Land of the Free." (Alma 46:11-17.)

There was a City of Moroni on the East Sea, "on the south by the line of the possessions of the Lamanites" (Alma 50:13) and a Land of Moroni, "on the borders by the sea shore." (Alma 51:22; 62:25.)

The word is Semitic. At the beginning of our era it had found its way into the Syriac spoken in Palestine, and was so generally understood that Paul used it in his first letter to the Corinthians (16:22), although that document was written in Greek, when he says: "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha."

These words, Maranatha, have puzzled commentators, and various interpretations have been suggested, such as "In the coming of our Lord"; or, "Our Lord has come"; or, "Our Lord will come." Some read the word as two words, Marana tha, which would mean, "Come, Lord," and which is the very prayer that closes the Revelation by John, erchou, Kyvie Iesou. (Rev. 22:20.) It was, in all probability, a conventionalized expression of pious sentiment, something similar to the old, "Peace be with thee," or our own "adieu," or "goodbye," which, if spelled out, would, of course, be, "God be with you." But all agree that Marana, or as the word is transliterated in the Book of Mormon Moroni means "Our Lord." We have also, in the Book of Mormon, a longer form of the same word, Moronihah, which I take to mean, "Jehovah is my Lord," which gives us a meaning almost identical with that of the name El-i-jah, "Jehovah is my God."

This name, Marana, or Moroni, has been preserved in the name Maranon, which is the name by which the mighty Amazon River is known when it first begins its course towards the ocean.

74 In the valley of the Maranon remains of cyclopean buildings have been found, proving that the region was inhabited in prehistoric times. In 1840 a remarkable sculptured stone was found there, now known as the Chavin Stone, from the locality where it was discovered. It is 25 feet long by 2 feet 4 inches, and represents either some mighty ruler or some divine personage, standing under a number of rays, each ending in a serpent head, reminding one of an Egyptian pharaoh under the so-called Aten rays.

Dr. Brinton gives the name of a Morona tribe of Indians among the Zaparo linguistic stock, in the upper Amazon Valley.2775

On the east coast there is also a river named after the great prophet. The Maroni River2876 flows from the Tumakurak range and forms the frontier line between French and Dutch Guiana, and, after a course of about 380 miles, reaches the Atlantic.

The name Moroni is found even in Peruvian literature. The Peruvians had a drama, called Apu Ollantay, composed about the year 1470, long before the arrival of the Spaniards,2977 and first committed to writing in 1770. Sir Clements Markham has published an elegant translation of it. Von Tschudi, in his work on the Quicha language, also gives it in full.

The first act is supposed to depict something that happened at the end of the 14th century of our era. The other two acts cover the first ten or twelve years of the 15th century. The hero is the great chief Ollanta, and the story is about his love for Cusi Coyllur, a daughter of the proud Inca Pachacutec at a time when such a venture might have cost the lives of both. The first scene of the third act of this drama is laid in a street in Cuzo called Pampa Moroni.3078

We know not how far back this name as a street name in Cuzco goes. Montesinos3179 says the fifth king, Inti Capac Yupanqui, divided Cuzco into two districts, Upper and Lower, and divided the first into streets to which he gave names. If it was this Inca who gave the street or square referred to, the name of Moroni, that name must have been so well known in Indian tradition, in the first half of the fifth century A.D., as to suggest the propriety of naming a public place in the "holy city" of the Peruvians in his honor.

Mulek

Mulek is one of the very interesting words in the Book of Mormon. It was the name, or the title, of the young son of Zedekiah, who, with his attendants, escaped from the Babylonians, when Nebuchadnezzar had captured Jerusalem, about 599 B.C., and came to the Western Hemisphere, part of which became the "land north" (Hel. 6:10), "for the Lord did bring Mulek into the land north and Lehi into the land south." It was also the name of a city on "the east borders by the seashore" (Alma 51:26.) There was a land called Melek "on the west of the river Sidon" (Alma 8:3), which name is, clearly, but a variant of Mulek. From these words others are formed, such as Muloki (Alma 20:2), Amulek (Alma 8:21), and Amaleki and Amalickiah (Omni 30, Alma 46:3.)

There is, according to Mr. T. S. Denison3280 an Aryan root mol, Sanskrit mr, which means "to crush," "to grind," as in a mill. There is another root inkh, which means "to move." Molinkh, or molik with a slight variation, would, therefore, be one who makes the mill go; one who provides food, or who directs the work of preparing it.

In the Egyptian the "mill mover" became the "king," and so we have the Valley of the Kings, the Biban el Molouk, where royal bodies were interred, perhaps as far back as before the days of Moses.

There is a very interesting inscription in which the word has been discovered. In the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam, king of Judah, about 933 B.C., Shishak, the Egyptian pharaoh, invaded Judea (1 Kgs. 14). Dr. W. M. Flinders Petri3381 suggests that, as Solomon had married a near relative of Shishak but not recognized her son as heir to the throne, he undertook that expedition to avenge a supposed insult and at the same time to strengthen the relations between Egypt and the apostate kingdom of Israel. So he went through the land, plundered the temple and the royal palace, and carried off whatever valuables he could find, including, probably, the three hundred shields of gold made by Solomon and valued at over a million dollars in our money.82Dr. Clarke's Commentary.34 A record of this exploit was made upon one of the temple walls at Karnak, Egypt, and in this record there is a list of 156 names of places captured by the pharaoh. One of these places is called, as transcribed in Hebrew characters, Judah-Malech, but in English letters, Yuteh-Mark.3583 There is no real discrepancy in this, because the glyph representing an "l" could also represent an "r."3684 Champollion translates the name, "Kingdom of Judah," but Dr. Bird, more correctly, identifies it with the "City of the King of Judah," that is, Jerusalem.3785

Here we have some very important information. We learn that the kingdom of Judah, or the capital of the kingdom, was known by a name in which malech formed an essential part. But Malech in this Egyptian inscription is, undoubtedly, the Mulek of the Book of Mormon. The Mulekites, therefore, in naming the land of their first settlement, gave it a name by which Judah, or Jerusalem, was known in the Old World. We also learn that the Egyptian character for "l" in this word sometimes represents an "r," and this is of importance in studying the derivatives of the word.

In the Hebrew the molik of the Sanskrit has become malach, "to possess," "to rule," the same as the Arabian malaka. From malach we have melech "king," Malkoth, "kingdom," and such names as Malcham, Malchiel, Milcom, Moloch, Malcbiab, Melchizedek, Meleketh, and with the definite article, Hammelech, and Hammoleketh, and also such names as Marcus and Mark, where the "l" has become "r."

In the American languages there are a great many derivatives from the original molik. The Mexican word molic-tli, says Mr. Denison,3886 is the "mill mover," and its derivation seems clear. The ninth day of the Maya calendar is Muluc, and the eighth month is called Mol. Both names may be from the same root. Dr. Augustus le Plongeon in Queen Moo,3987 says that the Maya word mol means "to gather," and that och or ooch means "food," "provisions," "provender." The Maya moloch would, then, be the same as the original molik and the Mexican molictli-the mill-mover, the provider, the king.

The Peruvians had a word malqui, which signified the preserved body of the ancestors. But to them the ancestor of the tribe, or "lineage," was always the head, the king, and reverence was paid to him after death, as if he had been alive. The malqui was their melech.

From Rivero and Tschudi we gather that the malqui was sometimes called marca, changing the "l" into "r," as was noted in the consideration of the Egyptian inscription at Karnak. We read:4088

"The Llacuaces, as foreigners, have many huacas and much worship, and venerate their malquis, which, as we have said, are the bodies of their dead ancestors."

Again:

"What they call marcayoc (malquis)...is sometimes of stone, sometimes the body of some of their dead progenitors."

This makes it beyond question that the word malqui has the same meaning as melech and mulek, and also that marca is the same as Malqui.

The malqui or marca of the great Inca Tupac Yupanqui was shamefully desecrated by the Spaniards, and the priest guarding it, the malqui-villac, and his assistants, were put to death.4189

Now, the word marca, which, as we have seen, is the same as mulek and its relatives, is found all over America. We find it in Maracaibo, the name of the beautiful sheet of water in Venezuela; in Maracay and Maraca, names of two cities in that country; in Cundinamarca, the name of the highland plateau in Columbia; in Cunturmarca and Papamarca, places mentioned by Garcilasso de la Vega; in Caxamarca,42 90 the name of the Peruvian city in which Inca Atahualpa was murdered by Pizarro. It is, further, found in Antamarca, the name of the Peruvian city in which Inca Huascar, the brother of Atahualpa, was slain by his brother who was his rival in the struggle for the Incariat. In the Valley of Yucay-the Biban el Molouk of Peru-the places of interment on the steep mountain sides are called to this day, Tantamamarca.4391 In Argentina there is the province of Catamarca, and Joyce4492 mentions a river Maraca and an island, off the Amazon delta, having the same name. In the western division (the Chincasuyu) of the domain of the Incas there was a place called Uramarca, and the three towers of the fortress overlooking Cuzco, the Sacsahuaman, were called, respectively, Mayocmarca, Paucarmarca, and Saclacmarca,4593 not only because of their height but because they were royal towers, manned by the Incas and troops of the royal blood. One of them had a chamber profusely decorated with gold and silver ornaments, and the entire fort was dedicated to the sun, that is to say, to the omnipotent King and Ruler of the universe, of whom the sun was the most glorious, visible emblem.

The word Marca is, further, found in Maracana, the name of an Indian tribe which Fathers Cataldino and Moceta met in Paragua,4694 and perhaps in Mariche,4795 the name of some Indians in the highlands near Caracas, in the valley of Valencia, now extinct.

To this list should be added, we believe, the word maraka, the name given to a sacred instrument used by so-called medicine-men when engaged in miraculous healings. It is an Arawak word translated "rattle," and it denoted the authority wielded by an Indian clothed with the power and authority of some kind of priesthood among his people. It might better be called a scepter than a "rattle." It was an emblem of authority. It may be compared with the rod of Aaron (Ex. 7:10), or that of Moses (Ex. 9:23.) According to tradition the maraka was a gift of the spirits to man.4896

In Central America the word Marca is also found in proper nouns. I make this statement on the authority of Prof. Marcou, who, in a remarkable article on the name America published in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1875, says, in part:

"Americ, Amerrique, or Amerique is the name in Nicaragua for the high land or mountain range that lies between Juigalpa and Libertad, in the province of Chontales, and which reaches on the one side into the country of the Carcas Indians, and on the other into that of the Ramas Indians. The rios Mico, Artigua, and Carca that form the rio Bluefields; the rio Grande Matagalpa, and the rios Rama and Indio, that flow directly into the Atlantic; as well as the rios Comoapa, Mayales, Acoyapa, Ajoquapa, Oyale, and Teopenaguatapa, flowing into the Lake of Nicaragua, all have their sources in the Americ range. (See public documents of the Nicaragua government; and The Naturalist in Nicaragua, by Thomas Belt, 8vo, London, 1873.)

"The name of places, in the Indian dialects of Central America, often terminate in ique or ic, which seems to mean "great," "elevated," "prominent," and is always applied to dividing ridges, or to elevated, mountainous countries, but not to volcanic regions; as for instance, Nique and Aglasinique in the Isthmus of Darien."

The meaning of the Central American ic or ique identifies it with the marca of the South American languages. For, according to Sir Clements Markham,4997 marca, in the Quichua means a "hill," or a terrace or a village on a hill.5098 The idea of elevation or prominence seems to be its fundamental meaning when used in names of places, and possessions, leadership, excellence, such as is supposed to belong to royalty, when applied to persons. That is, it means "head," "chief," "king," the same as melech, malqui, mulek, and the original mol-ic.

Sir Clements Markham also furnishes a clue to the meaning of the word. He tells the story5199 of a certain Peruvian, Martin Huaman, who, having saved the life of a Spaniard named Ayala, at the battle of Huarina, adopted the Spanish name and called himself, Martin Huaman Malqui de Ayala, where Malqui seems to be equivalent to "lord" or "king" of the man whose life he had saved.

Prof. Marcou was of the opinion that America is the accepted form of the old Indian Americ or Amerique, and not, as generally held, a name coined in glorification of Amerigo Vespucci.52100 If this view is correct, America is, both in form and meaning, identical with the Book of Mormon names, Amaleki and Amalickiah, the meaning of which is, "The King of Jehovah," and, as applied to the country, '"The Land of the King of Jehovah"; that is to say, in other words, The Land of Zion.

Nephi

Elder George Reynolds traces this celebrated name to an Egyptian root. He says:53101

"Its roots are Egyptian; its meaning, good excellent, benevolent... One of the names given to this god [Osiris], expressive of his attributes, was Nephi, or Dnephi,...and the chief city dedicated to him was called N-ph, translated into Hebrew as Noph, in which form it appears in Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. Its modern English name is Memphis."

This agrees with a statement credited to Eusebius, to the effect that the Egyptians called the Creator Kneph, and they pictured him as a man with a coiffure adorned with feathers; or as a serpent; and sometimes as a man with a solar disk on his head. Noub, or Nouv, according to Champollion, was the Knouphis of Strabo, and the same as the Kneph of Plutarch and Eusebius.

It is necessary to note that all these forms, Nephi, Dnephi, Kneph, Noub, Nouv, and Knouphis, are variants of the same name.

Wm. Osburn54102 connects the name also with Noah, thus:

"Kneph, Nu or Noah was a local god of some city of the Mendesian nome in the northeast of the delta... A shrine dedicated to Kneph was found there by Mr. Burton. As we have explained, he was the god of the yearly overflow. His name was sometimes written (with hieroglyphics) which seem to mean, 'Nu (Noah) of the waters."

Isaiah calls the flood "The Waters of Noah."103.55

There is also a word nebhu, which Churchyard56104 says is a divine title meaning, the Everlasting, the Self-existent, the Eternal One.

Some Egyptian words have close relatives in the Hebrew, easily recognized. We believe this is one of them. Nebi, from Naba, is, evidently, the Nephi of the Book of Mormon, and the Kneph of the Egyptians. Naba, according to Gesenius,57105 in Niphil means "to speak under divine influence," as a prophet. One of the derivatives from this root is Nebo, a name given to the planet Mercury, by the Chaldeans, because they regarded that star as the celestial scribe.

How expressive the name Nephi is, when we understand its meaning! How well it corresponds with the character and mission of the great son of Lehi!

There are several names among American proper nouns, which seem to be derived from the same root as Nephi. In the northern part of Colombia, S.A., is a river and a city named Nechi. Compare the Hebrew spelling of Lehi (Lechi) with this and it is not too difficult, even for a novice, to see it is Nephi. And when we consider that the original inhabitants of America were a people who were versed "in the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians" it is not surprising to find the name "Nephi" in its Egyptian form Necho (Pharaoh). One of the affluents of the Amazon is Napo, and in the upper Amazon Valley there is a tribe of Indians, of the Zaparo linguistic stock, known as the Nepa Indians. The Nahuapos, the Napeanos, the Napos, and the Napotoas are among the tribes enumerated by Dr. Brinton.58106 And then there are the Nahuas, of the great Uto-Aztecan stock of which tribes have been found all the way from the Isthmus to the banks of the Columbia River.

This word should be given special attention.

The Nahuas had lost all the labial sounds except "p" and "u." The sound of "b" or "f" or "ph" they would represent by a "u." "The change of b, p, to u," says Mr. Denison,59107 "is of very wide geographical reach, as Mexican kuah, 'ape,' Sansk. kapi." He also points out that the pseudo-labial "u" may represent a labial, such as "b," "p," "f," "v," or "w"; or even a lost "g" or "r." The Word Nahua may, therefore, as far as the pronunciation indicates, be considered identical with Nephi.

The meaning of the word is variously given. Sahagun says that all who spoke the Mexican language clearly were called Nahoas. Molina traces the name through a verb meaning "to instruct," and especially in an occult sense. Brasscur de Bourbourg is more definite. He considers it a word of the Quiche language, meaning "to know," "to think," and, as a noun, "wisdom," "knowledge." It is, in fact, the Abbe suggests, identical with our "know-all," but it is frequently used to denote something mysterious, extraordinary, or marvelous.60108 According to these definitions, Nao is identical in meaning with the Hebrew naba, "to speak under divine influence," to "prophesy," and the Indian Nahua is the same as the Book of Mormon Nephi, and the Hebrew Nabi, a prophet.

The word nepohualtzitzin should be mentioned here. That, we are told, is an Aztec word.

Boturini makes the statement that the Nahuas used knotted cords, similar to the quipus of the Peruvians, to record events, but that their use had been discontinued before Aztec supremacy. Those knotted cords were called nepohualtzitzin. The Italian traveler even claims to have seen one of them in a very dilapidated condition at Tlascala, but Bancroft61109 rather doubts this. Be that as it may, the word itself is very instructive.

To begin with the last part of it, tzintzin, seems to be the Hebrew tsits which means "a shining forth," "brightness." It was the name for the shining plate of gold worn by the high priest, and upon which "holiness to the Lord" was engraved.110.62 Tsitsith was also the word by which the tassels or fringes prescribed in the Mosaic law111.63 were designated. The Nahua word tzitzin may, if of Hebrew origin, therefore, be understood to refer to either engraved plates, or to knotted cords, or fringes.

If Nepo, as I believe, is Nephi, and ual gives the word to which it is attached the value of an adjective, as, for instance, Nezahualcoyotl, "The fasting coyote"; Nezahualpilli, "The Faster-for prince";64112 Quetzalcoatl, "feathered serpent," then, analogous with such construction, Nepohual would be "Nephite."

Nepohualtzitzin would, then, mean, "Nephite plates," or "Nephite cords." It is easily understood how knotted cords used as "records" could be called tzitzin, "plates," figuratively speaking, if we remember that our records are still "books" from the time when "beech" staves were used as we use paper.

The word Anahuac, as the country of the Nahuas was called, the authorities tell us, has no relationship to Nahua; it means the country, or any country, near the water. But, notwithstanding the authorities, it is not impossible that it is very closely related to Nahua, and that its true meaning is, "The Land of Nephi, by the Water."

Napa was, further, the name by which a sacred figure of the llama was known by the Peruvians.65113 At a certain festival a number of those animals were sacrificed. The shepherds came with a special llama, draped in red cloth and wearing golden earrings. This llama was the napa. The insignia of the Inca was brought out in honor of that animal, and dancing was performed as part of the sacred ceremonies.

This, I think, shows clearly that the word stands for something sacred, something in a special manner connected with the divine service.

Onidah

This is the name of a hill on which Alma preached the gospel to the Zoramites (Alma 32:4), and the place where Lamanites, later, gathered themselves when they expected to be attacked by Amalickiah. (Alma 47:5.)

It is a genuine Indian word. According to Schoolcraft,66114 its Indian form is, oneotaug, which means "stone people." That would, reasonably, be "hill people," and that would confirm the use of the word in the Book of Mormon as the name of a hill. The proper analysis of the word is Onia, "stone," oda, "people," and aug, a plural ending.

The Oneida Indians formed one of the five tribes (the Onondagas, the Mohawks, the Senecas, and the Cayugas were the others) who united into a federation under the leadership of Hiawatha, for the purpose of abolishing war in the world.

There is an Oneida valley in the state of New York, and a number of other places in America are known by this Book of Mormon name.

Pachus

Pachus was the name of a king who ruled the "dissenters" that had driven the "Freemen" out of Zarahemla and taken possession of the land. (Alma 62:6.)

This word is found in the Peruvian Pacha-camac, which means world-creator, and was the name given to the Deity." The Chibchas, in what is now Colombia, had the same name for God, in the shorter form, Bochi-ca.67115 It is also found in such royal titles as Pacha-cutec Inca Yupanqui, where it seems to be equivalent to "lord." In that case it is identical in meaning with the Pachus of the Book of Mormon, the title assumed by the dissenting king.

Pacha means both "world" and "time," or perhaps an "eternity." That connects it in meaning, though not in form, with the Hebrew olam, which also means both world and eternity.

Sidon

This was the name of the river that is so often mentioned in the Book of Mormon. (Alma 2:15.) Sidon means "fishing," and the River Sidon means, therefore, the same as "Fishing River." It is the same name as that which was given to the river, on the banks of which Zion's Camp was located, in Missouri, June 19, 1834, where the important revelation, Doctrine and Covenants Sec. 105, was given, June 22, the same year.

The name "Sidon" may not have been retained in the languages of the descendants of the people of Zarahemla, but the Lenni Lenape Indians have preserved a tradition in which the name "Fishing River" is mentioned. According to their tradition, the Lenni Lenape, many centuries ago, lived somewhere in the western part of the American continent. For some reason or other they decided to migrate. After a very long journey they arrived on the Namesi Sipu,68116 which in their language means "Fish River," the same as "Sidon." Here they met another tribe, which they called Mengwe. By their scouts they had been informed that the Talligewi, or Alli-gewi who lived east of the Mississippi, were a powerful nation which had built many cities and regular fortifications. The Lenape and Mengwe united and made war upon the Alligewi, though these were a people of gigantic stature.69117 They do not claim that the entire nation crossed the Namesi Sipu. Many, they say, remained in order to assist those who had not crossed over but who had "retreated into the interior of the country on the other side." Those who did emigrate finally settled on the four rivers, Delaware, Hudson, Susquehannah, and Potomac.

Timothy

Timothy is the name of one of the Twelve appointed by our Savior in this country, to carry the gospel message to the people here. On the face of it it appears to be a Greek word, meaning "Honoring God."

But it is also Indian. Dr. Brinton70118 tells us that in the mountain district south of the plains near Maracaibo, in South America, there are some Indian bands, or what remains of them, known as the Timotes.

Zarahemla

Elder George Reynolds71119 suggests that this word means either, "A rising of Light," or, "Whom God Will Fill Up." The latter I consider the better rendering of the two. The word zara is Peruvian for "corn," or "maize." It is also Hebrew for "seed," especially in the sense of offspring. "Hemla" is, probably, the Hebrew hamulah "abundance," and Zarahemla would then mean, applied to the country, "a place where there is a seed abundance"; that is, Bountiful; applied to a person, it would mean one "who has a numerous offspring."

That Bountiful and Zarahemla refer to the same country seems to be clear from these passages: "Thus the land on the northward was called Desolation, and the land on the southward was called Bountiful." (Alma 22:31.) "The land southward which was called by the Nephites Zarahemla." (Ether 9:31.) That the two countries were identical only in part, however, may be inferred from this reference to the two countries: "And the land which was appointed was the land of Zarahemla and the land Bountiful, yea, to the line which was between the land Bountiful and the land of Desolation." (3 Ne. 3:23.) From which it appears that the two countries were adjacent, but that Zarahemla did not extend as far as the boundary line between Desolation and the land on the southward, but that Bountiful did.
