Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2 ( 1956)

The Fine Arts in Ancient America

The Fine Arts in Ancient America

What the Spaniards Found

The following article is based upon statements made in a small brochure published by the Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York City, 1920, and entitled "Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico," by Marshall H. Saville. Mr. Saville is an authority on American antiquities and a student of the cultures found therein. The statements made bear the mark of genuineness, and our use of them attest the reliability we place on his accurate reporting.

"Peter Martyr, the first chronicler of events in the New World, commenting on conditions therein, and especially in the larger islands of the West Indies, writes that, 'Our men's insatiable desire for gold so oppressed these poor wretches with extreme labor and toil, whereas before they lived pleasantly and at liberty, given only to plays and pastimes as dancing, fishing, fowling, and hunting for little conies, that many of them perished even for the very anguish of mind, the which (their unaccustomed labor) are things of themselves sufficient to engender new diseases... But it shall suffice to have said this much of the pestiferous hunger for gold... The ravenous hunger hath hitherto greatly hindered our men from tillage of the soil.'"

The Spaniards first learned of the gold in New Spain when the expedition of Cordoba (Cuba, 1517) reached Santiago (De Cuba) after exploring the coast of the mainland. On this expedition Yucatan was discovered. On his arrival at Santiago, Cordoba presented the governor with golden diadems and others objects of great value. Valasquez, the governor, on seeing their worth and fine workmanship, decided to send his nephew, Juan de Grijalva, to carry on the findings of Cordoba. "Peter Martyr, in the Fourth Decade of his De Orbo Novo, first printed in 1521, in describing the voyage of Grijalva, writes: 'Off the coast of Yucatan and well on the way from the island of Cozumel, the Spaniards encountered a canoe filled with fishermen. There were nine of them, and they fished with golden hooks.'"

When it became necessary that the expedition of Grijalva return to Cuba, the Spaniards there became extremely excited over the gold the expedition had been able to obtain.

"Valasquez now decided to send another expedition to estab [text missing in source document]

"When all this treasure thus brought together was ready to be forth from Cuba under command of Hernan Cortes. After the arrival of the Spaniards on the coast of Vera Cruz, the Indians were not long in ignorance of the consuming thirst of the conquerors for gold. In order to placate the formidable strangers and with childlike confidence that by giving them their wish the invasion of his dominions would be averted, Montezuma sent rich presents to Cortes through Tendile (Teuhtlile), governor of Cuetlaxtla (the modern Cotastla), which was then under (subject to) the Aztecs.

"When all this treasure thus brought together was ready to be sent to Spain, with the report of the voyage, an inventory or list of the objects was drawn up and dispatched with two special messengers, Alonzo Portocarrero and Francisco de Montejo, who were charged to deliver the treasure to the King. These valuable gifts have been briefly described by several members of the expedition who saw them before they left Mexico, and on their receipt in Spain they were described by various chroniclers."

A good and complete translation of this important inventory is made part of this writing.

"This inventory was published by Navarrete in 1842, at the end of the 'Relacion del descubrimiento y conquista de Nueva Espana, hecha por la Justicia y Regimiento de la nueva ciuad de Villa de Vera Cruz, a julio de 1519,' in Coleccion de Documentos Ineditos para la Historia de Espana, pp. 461-472. It was utilized by Prescott in his Conquest of Mexico appearing in 1843; he gives very free translation of a few of the items. It was reprinted by Mora in Mexico in 1844, as an appendix to his Spanish translation of Clavigero's Historia Antigua de Mexico y de su Conquista. Finally, it was included by Cayangos in his edition of the Cartas y Relaciones de Hernan Cortes, published in Paris in 1866."

Inventory

"Report of the Jewels, Shields, and Clothing sent to the Emperor Charles the Fifth by Don Fernando Cortes and the town Council of Vera Cruz with their proctors Francisco de Montejo and Alanzo Hernanez Puertocarrero.

"That which is contained in this report is of the greatest interest, because it manifests what was the state of the fine arts of the Mexicans before they had any communications with the Europeans. D. Juan Munoz collated, on March 30, 1784, the report which follows of the presents sent from New Spain, with another which he found in a book called 'Manual del Tesorero' of the Casa de la Contratacion of Seville.

"The gold and jewels and stones and featherwork which they had in these newly discovered places, after we arrived here, which you, Alonzo Fernandez Puertocarrero and Francisco de Montejo who go as proctors of this rich town of Vera Cruz carry to the very excellent princes and very Catholic and very great princes and lords, the Queen Dona Juanna and Don Carlos her son, our Lords, are the following:

[text missing in source document]council of this town place at the service of their Highnesses, with all the rest that is contained in this report, which belongs to those of this town.

"Item: two collars of gold and stone mosaic-work (precious stones), one of which has eight strings, and in them two hundred and thirty-two red stones, and one hundred sixty-three green stones; and hanging from the said collar from the border of it twenty-seven gold bells, and in the center of them there are four figures of large stones set in gold, and from each one of the two in the center hang simple pendants, and of those at the ends each (has) four doubled pendants. And the other collar has four strings that have one hundred and seventy-two stones that appear to have a green color, and around the said stones twenty-six gold bells, and in the said collar ten large stones set in gold, from which hang one-hundred and forty-two pendants of gold.

"Four pairs of antiparras (leggings), two pairs being of delicate gold leaf, and a trimming of yellow deerskin, and the other two (pairs), of thin silver leaf, with a trimming of white deerskin, and the others of feather-work of divers colors, and very well made, from each one of which hang sixteen gold bells, and all trimmed with red deerskin.

"Another item: a hundred ounces of gold for casting, so that their Highnesses might see how they get gold here from the mines.

"Another item: a box of a large piece of feather-work lined with leather, the colors seeming like martens, and fastened and placed in the said piece, and in the center a large disc of gold, which weighed sixty ounces of gold, and a piece of blue stone mosaic-work a little reddish, and at the end of the piece another piece of feather-work that hangs from it.

"A fan of colored feather-work with thirty-seven small rods covered with gold.

"Another item: a large piece of colored leather-work which is to be worn on the head, which is surrounded by sixty-eight small pieces of gold, each one is as large as a half copper coin, and below them are twenty little turrets of gold.

"Item: a mitre of blue stone mosaic-work with the figure of monsters in the center of it, and lined with leather which seems to be in its colors to be that of martens, with a small (piece) of leather-work which is, as the one mentioned above, of this same mitre.

"Item: four harpoons of feather-work with their points of flint fastened with a gold thread, and a scepter of stone mosaic-work with two rings of gold, and the rest of feather-work.

"Item: an armlet of stone mosaic-work, and furthermore, a piece of small black feather-work with other colors.

"Item: a pair of large sandals of colored leather that appears like martens, the soles white, sewed with threads of gold.

"Furthermore: a mirror placed in a piece of blue and red stone mosaic-work with feather-work stuck to it, and another skin that seems like those martens.

"Three colored (pieces) of feather-work, which are (pertain to) a large gold head like a crocodile.

"Item: some leggings of blue mosaic-work, lined with leather, of which the colors seem like martens; on each one of them (there are) fifteen gold bells.

"Item: two pieces of head armor.

"More, two other (pieces of) colored feather-work which are for two pieces of gold which they wear on the head, made like great shells.

"More, two birds of green feathers with their feet, beaks and eyes (made) of gold, which are put in a piece of one of those shell-like pieces of gold.

"More, two guariques1128 (ear ornaments) of blue stone mosaic-work which are to be put in the big head of the crocodile.

"In another square box of a large crocodile of gold, which is the one spoken of above, where the said pieces are placed.

"More, another head armor of blue stone mosaic-work with twenty gold bells which hang pendant to the border, with two strings of beads which are above each bell, and two guariques of wood with two plates of gold.

"More, a bird of green feathers and the feet, beak and eyes of gold.

"Item, another head armor of blue stone mosaic-work with twenty-five gold bells, and two beads of gold above each bell, that hang around it with some guariques of wood with plates of gold, and a bird of green plumage with the feet, beak and eyes of gold.

"Item: in an haba of reed two large pieces of gold which they put on the head, which are made like a gold shell with their guariques of wood and plates of gold, and besides, two birds of green plumage, with their feet, beaks and eyes of gold.

"Moreover, sixteen shields of stone mosaic-work, with their colored feather-work hanging from the edge of them, and a wide angled slab with stone mosaic-work with its colored feather-work, and in the center of said slab, made of the said stone mosaic-work, a cross of a wheel which is lined with leather, which has the color of martens.

"Again, a scepter of red stone mosaic-work, made like a snake, with its head, teeth and eyes from what appears to be mother-of-pearl, and the hilt is adorned with a skin of a spotted animal, and below the said hilt hang six small pieces of feather-work.

"Another item: a fan of feather-work, placed in a reed adorned with a skin of a spotted animal, after the manner of a weather-cock, and above it has a crown of feather-work, and finally has all over it long green feathers.

"Item: two birds made of thread and feather-work, having the quills of their wings, tails and the claws of their feet, and the ends of their beaks made of gold, placed in respective reeds, covered with gold, and below some feather down, one white, the other yellow, with certain gold embroidery between the feathers, and from each one hang seven strands of feathers.

"Item: four feet made after the manner of skates placed in respective canes covered with gold, having the tails and the organs of respiration, and the eyes and mouths of gold; below in the tails some green leather-work, and having toward the mouths of said skates respective crowns of colored feather-work, and on some of the white feathers are hanging certain gold embroidery, and below each hand six strands of colored feather-work.

"Item: a small copper rod with a skin in which is placed a piece of gold after the manner of feather-work, which above and below has certain colored feather-work

"Another item: five fans of colored feather-work, four of them have ten small quills covered with gold, and the other has thirteen.

"Item: four harpoons of white flint, placed in four rods of feather-work.

"Item: a large shield of feather-work lined on the hack with the skin of a spotted animal; in the center of the field of the said shield is a plate of gold with a figure, like those that the Indians make, with four other half plates of gold on the edge, which altogether form a cross.

"Another item: a piece of feather-work of divers colors, made like a half chasuble, lined with the skin of a spotted animal, which the lords of these parts whom we have seen up to now, place hanging over the neck, and over the chest they have thirteen pieces of gold well fitted together.

"Item: a piece of feather-work which the lords of this land are wont to put on their heads, and from it hang two ear-ornaments of stone mosaic-work with two bells and two beads of gold, and above a feather-work of wide green feathers, and below hang some white, long hairs.

"Again, four heads of animals: two seem to be wolves, and the other two tigers, with some spotted skins, and from it hang metal bells.

"Item: two skins of spotted animals, lined on some mantles of cotton, and the skins seem like that of the gato cerval (wildcat).

"Item: a reddish and grayish skin of another animal, and two skins that seem like deer.

"Item: four skins of small deer from which they make a small prepared glove.

"Moreover, two books of those which the Indians have here.

"Moreover, a half dozen fans of colored feather-work.

"Moreover, a perfume censer of colored feathers, with certain embroidery on it.

"Again: a large wheel of silver which weighed forty-eight marks of silver; moreover, some armlets and some beaten silver leaves, weighing a mark and five ounces, and forty adarmes of silver. And a large shield and another small one of silver which weighed four marks and two ounces; and two others that appear to be silver, weighing six marks, two ounces. And another shield which appears to be also of silver weighing one mark, seven ounces: which (shields) altogether weigh sixty-two marks of silver.

Cotton Clothing—1129

"Another item: two large pieces of cotton woven in patterns of white and black, very rich.

"Item: two pieces woven with feathers and another piece woven in various colors; another piece woven in red, black, and white patterns, and on the back the patterns do not appear.

"Item: another piece woven in patterns, and in the center are some black wheels of feathers.

"Item: two white cotton clothes with some feather-work woven in.

"Item: another cloth with some colored cords attached to it.

"A loose garment of the men of the land.

"A white piece with a great wheel of white feathers in the center.

"Two pieces of grayish guascasa with some wheels of feathers, and two others of tawny guascasa.

"Six painted pieces, another red piece with some wheels, and two other blue painted pieces, and two women's shirts.

"Eleven veils.

"Six shields, each one having a plate of gold, that covers the shield, and a half miter of gold.

"Which things, each one of them, as set forth in these chapters that declare and settle it, we, Alonzo Fernandez Puerto carrero and Francisco de Montejo, the said proctors, (certify) it is true that we have received them, and they were delivered to us to carry to their Highnesses in these parts, and from you, Alonzo de Avila and Alonzo de Grado, treasurer and over-seer of their Highnesses over here. And because it is true, we sign it with our names. Dated, the Sixth of July of the year 1519.

Puertocarrero.

Francisco de Montejo.

"The things above enumerated in the said memorial, with the aforesaid letter and report sent by the Council of Vera Cruz, were received by our Lord, the King, Charles the Fifth, as has been before said, in Valladolid during Holy Week, at the beginning of April, of the year of our Lord, 1520." (At end of inventory.)

Note by Mora

'"The antiparras or antiparas are described in this manner in the first dictionary of the Spanish language, published by the Academy of Languages in 1726, that gives the origin and authorities in which the meaning is founded: 'certain kind of stockings reaching to the knees or leggings that cover the legs and the feet only, for the front part.'"

ANTIPARAH, is a name of a city mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

'"The woven pieces of cotton with designs that do not appear on the reverse side, prove the advancement that they had made, for they knew how to weave with double woof, for that is what this artifice consisted of." (Mora, in his edition of the work of. Clavigero.)

'"The two great discs of gold end silver, likened to cartwheels in size, which figure as the most imposing of the presents given to Cortes at this time, are described by a number of persons who examined the treasure. These notable pieces were seen and commented upon by Bernal Diaz, Andres de Tapia, Francisco de Aguilar, and a serving man, before they left Mexico. It is strange that they are not mentioned in a letter sent to the Queen and Emperor of Spain by the judiciary and municipal authorities of the newly-founded city of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz, which is dated July 10.

"After their receipt in Spain, these wheels, with the rest of the objects, were examined in Seville by Oviedo y Valdes, one Diego Dienz and an anonymous writer, and in Valladolid by Peter Martyr and Las Casas. Descriptions more or less brief of all these persons have been published, and they all agree in the main. Measurements are at hand to establish the immense size of these discs. The gold wheel, according to Peter Martyr, was 28 palms in circumference; Oviedo and Gomero make it 30; In diameter, Oviedo gives it as 9 12 palms wide, Gomero makes it 10, while the servant makes it 7. All the writers say it was the size of a cart-wheel, except Martyr, who likens it to the size of a mill-stone. The palm is about 8 12 inches, hence, from the estimates of the diameter, it is safe to say that it measured between five to a little less than seven feet in width and height. The estimates of the circumference would make it fully 6 12 feet in diameter. The weight in gold is given in the Inventory as 3800 pesos. Peter Martyr writes 3800 castellanos, while Oviedo makes it 4800 pesos, and Las Casas simply thinks that it weighed more than 100 marks, and other writers have different estimates. We are safe in following the 3800 pesos of the Inventory. Only one estimate is given of its thickness, that of Las Casas, who says it was the thickness of a four-real coin, but both Las Casas and Peter Martyr agree in saying that it was massive, hence probably not very flexible.

"There can be no doubt that the Mexican calendar was represented on this golden disc, for we have the specific statement that the sun was depicted, by Bernal Diaz, Andres de Tapia, and Francisco de Aguilar, Oviedo, and Las Casas."

All say it had on it various kinds of pictures: animals, human beings, figures and nocturnal goblins. In the Inventory we find the statement that it had on it the figures of monsters.

"The silver disc is generally described as being about the same size as the one of gold, one statement being that it was a little finger smaller. All agree that it represented the moon. Clavigero writes that according to what Gomara says, the gold disc represents the figure of their century, and the silver wheel, the figure of the year. That these extra ordinary objects were not preserved is a matter of lasting regret."

While Cortes was on his famous journey from the coast to the valley of Mexico, he received from Montezuma, both by courtier and in person, valuable gifts made of gold. This made Cortes more greedy and covetous than ever and instead of quieting his desire for plunder and conquest had exactly the opposite effect. The treasures that he had obtained were little compared to the vast loot he obtained after the invasion of the Aztec capital.

"Cortez does not expatiate in his letter about this hoard of gold and other precious objects which had been accumulated and augmented by the different kings of the Aztecs and handed from monarch to monarch as the property of the people. He mentions in his report to the King of Spain that Montezuma, in refuting the 'fabulous stories' about the vast wealth he possessed, such as 'houses with walls of gold' and furniture and other things of the same material, stated, 'It is true, indeed, that I have some things of gold, which have been left to me by my forefathers. All that I possess you may have whenever you wish.'"

This did not appease Cortes, and what followed forms one of the blackest pages of history. At least five accounts of the conquest were made by eyewitnesses. All attest the brutality and trickery of the Spaniards, and all agree to the stories of pillage and plunder. Detailed accounts are given by them about the great wealth Montezuma had stored in a secret chamber. Bernal Diaz, says that while erecting an altar in their quarters where they were established: "Two of our soldiers, one of whom was a carpenter, named Alonzo Yanes, noticed on one of the walls marks showing that there had been a door there, and it had been closed up and plastered over and burnished. Now, as there was a rumor and we had heard the story that Montezuma kept the treasure of his father Axayaca in that building, it was suspected that it might be this chamber which had been closed up and cemented only a few days before. Yanes spoke about it to Juan Velasquez de Leon and Francisco de Lugo, who were captains and relations of mine, and Alonzo Yanes had attached himself to their company as a servant, and those captains told the story to Cortes, and the door was secretly opened. When it was open Cortes and some of his captains went in first, and they saw such a number of jewels and slabs and plates of gold and chalchihuites and other great riches, that they were quite carried away and did not know what to say about such riches.

"None of the gold specimens of this great loot are now known to exist, and none, undoubtedly, escaped the melting pot."

Continuing the account of Bernal Diaz, who subsequently indicated that Montezuma knew all about the discovery of the secret chamber and its hoard of gold, despite the Spaniards' efforts to conceal the fact of their finding it, he wrote:

"After some more polite conversation, Montezuma at once sent his majordomo to hand over all this treasure and gold and wealth that were in the plastered chamber, and in looking it over and taking off the embroidery with which it was set, we were occupied for three days, and to assist us in undoing it and taking it to pieces, there came Montezuma's goldsmiths from the town named Azcapotzalco, and I say there was so much, that after it was taken to pieces there were three heaps of gold, and they weighed over six hundred thousand pesos, as I shall tell further on, without the silver and many other rich things, and not counting the ingots and slabs of gold, and the grains from the mines.

"We began to melt it down with the help of the natives of Azcapotzalco, and they made large bars of it, each bar measuring three fingers of the hand across. When it was already melted and made into bars, they brought another present separately, which the grand Montezuma said he would give, and it was a wonderful thing to behold, for some of the chalchihuites were so fine that among these caciques they were worth a vast quantity of gold.

"After the weight was taken, the officers of the king said that was of gold, both of which was cast in bars as well as grains from the mines, and in ingots and jewels, more than six hundred thousand pesos, and this was without counting the silver and other jewels which were not yet valued."

Before ending this remarkable story, here is what the leader, himself, said about this spoil.

"This decision and offer of the said lords, for the royal service of Your Majesty having been completed, I spoke to Montezuma one day, and told him Your Highness was in need of gold, on account of certain works ordered to be made, and I besought him to send some of his people, and I would also send some Spaniards, to the provinces and homes of the lords who had submitted themselves, to pray them to assist Your Majesty with some part of what they had. Besides Your Majesty's need, this would testify that they began to render service, and Your Highness would esteem it more as their good will toward your service; and I told him that he should also give me from his treasures, as I wished to send them to Your Majesty, as I had done with the other things.

"He asked me afterward to choose the Spaniards whom I wished to send, and two by two, and five by five, he distributed them through many provinces and cities, whose names I do not remember, as the papers have been lost and also because they were many and divers; and moreover some of them were at eighty and one hundred leagues from the said city of Temixtitan. He sent some of his people with them, ordering them to go to the lords of these cities and provinces, and tell them that I have commanded each one of them to contribute a certain measure of gold which he gave them.

"Thus it was done, and all these lords to whom he sent gave very compliantly, as had been asked, not only in valuables, but also in bars and sheets of gold, besides all the jewels of gold, and silver, and the feather-work, and the stones, and the many other things of value which I assigned and allotted to Your Sacred Majesty, amounting to one hundred ducats and more.

"These, beside their value, are such, and so marvelous, that for their novelty and strangeness they have no price, nor is it probable that all the princes ever heard of in the world such treasures. Let not what I say appear fabulous to Your Majesty, because, in truth, all the things created on land, as well as in the sea, of which Montezuma had ever heard were imitated in gold, most naturally, as well as in silver, and in precious stones, and feather-work, with such perfection that they seemed almost real. He gave me a large number of them for Your Highness, besides others he ordered to be made in gold, for which I furnished him the designs, such images, crucifixes, medals, jewelry of small value, and many other things which I made them copy. In the same manner Your Highness obtained, as the one-fifth of the silver which was received, one hundred and odd marks, which I made the natives cast in large and small plates, porringers, cups, and spoons, which they executed as perfectly as we could make them comprehend.

"Besides these Montezuma gave me a large quantity of stuff, which, considering it was cotton and not silk, was such that it could not be woven anything similar in the whole world for texture, colors, and handiwork. Amongst these, were many marvelous dresses for men and women, bed clothing with which that made of silk could not be compared, and other stuffs, such as tapestry, suitable for drawing-rooms and churches. There were also blankets and rugs, for beds, both made of feather-work and of cotton in divers colors, also very marvelous, and many other things so curious and numerous I do not know how to specify them to Your Majesty.

"He also gave me a dozen cerbatanas (blow guns) with which he shoots, and of their perfection I likewise know not what to say to Your Highness; for they were decorated with very excellent paintings of perfect hues, in which there were many different kinds of birds, animals, trees, flowers, and divers other objects, and the mouth-pieces and extremities were bordered with gold, a span deep, as was also the middle, all beautifully worked. He gave me a pouch of gold network for a ball, which he told me he would also give me of gold. He gave me also some turquoises of gold (set in), and many other things, whose number is almost infinite." (From The Letters of Cortes, edition of Francis A. MacNutt, Vol.. 1, Second letter, pp 253-255, New York, 1908.)

Finally,

"It is a well established fact that the arts and industries of ancient Mexico had come to a high degree of perfection. The historians of the Conquest are full of admiration for the works that Mexican gold-workers executed, as well as the stone workers, the jewelers and the artisans of feather-work." (Professor Eduard Seler, Paris 1890, in a paper read at the Eighth Session of the Congress-International des Americanistes.) "The paper in which this statement is made and with slight changes that have been made in the French translation of the Natuahl text, and some revision is included in his Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur Amerikanischen Sprach-und Alter-tumskunde, Zweiter Band, Berlin, 1904, pp. 620-634.
