Prayerfully select and read from this message the scriptures and teachings that meet the needs of the sisters you visit. Share your experiences and testimony. Invite those you teach to do the same.

D&C 124:40, 42: “Let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein. … I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house.”

President George Q. Cannon (1827–1901), First Counselor in the First Presidency: “Every Temple … lessens the power of Satan on the earth, and increases the power of God and Godliness, moves the heavens in mighty power in our behalf, invokes and calls down upon us the blessings of the Eternal Gods” (Millennial Star, Nov. 12, 1877, 743).

President Gordon B. Hinckley: “Just as our Redeemer gave His life as a vicarious sacrifice for all men, and in so doing became our Savior, even so we, in a small measure, when we engage in proxy work in the temple, become as saviors to those on the other side who have no means of advancing unless something is done in their behalf by those on earth. … I encourage you to take greater advantage of this blessed privilege. It will refine your natures. It will peel off the selfish shell in which most of us live. It will literally bring a sanctifying element into our lives” (“Closing Remarks,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2004, 104).

Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “We need to remember that a covenant is a promise. A covenant made with God should be regarded not as restrictive but as protective. Covenants with Him protect us from danger. … When we choose to deny ourselves of all ungodliness, we lose nothing of value and gain glory known only to those who obtain eternal life. Keeping a temple covenant is not constraining but enabling. It elevates us beyond limits of our own perspective and power” (“Prepare for Blessings of the Temple,” Ensign, Mar. 2002, 21).

Anne C. Pingree, second counselor in the Relief Society general presidency: “My husband and I had traveled to one of the most remote locations in our mission so he could conduct temple recommend interviews. … After all the interviews were completed, as my husband and I drove back along that sandy jungle trail, we were stunned when we saw … two sisters still walking. We realized they had trekked from their village—a distance of 18 miles round trip—just to obtain a temple recommend they knew they would never have the privilege of using. These Nigerian Saints believed the counsel of President Howard W. Hunter: ‘It would please the Lord for every adult member to be worthy of—and to carry—a current temple recommend, even if proximity to a temple does not allow immediate or frequent use of it’” (“Seeing the Promises Afar Off,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2003, 13).
