Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

Preface

George Reynolds (1842-1909) was a leader and writer in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints during a crucial period of its unification and growth. Reynolds was quiet and unassuming and generally did not appear before the public. Nevertheless, he filled numerous callings and assignments that made him one of the most influential people in the Church in the last thirty years of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth. He served as a secretary to the First Presidency for forty-four years, from 1865 through 1909, and from 1890 to 1909 he was a member of the First Council of the Seventy, or one of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventy, as the calling was commonly designated then.

But it was not as a general authority that George Reynolds made his greatest contribution to the Church. He is particularly remembered for his role in the polygamy test case, Reynolds v. the United States, a landmark Supreme Court decision in 1879 that contributed eventually to the abolition of polygamy in the Church. In addition, Reynolds was a prolific author on Church themes and a pioneer scriptural commentator. He began his Book of Mormon commentary work while serving time as a "prisoner for conscience' sake" in the Utah Territorial Penitentiary in 1879-80. In his day he was most beloved by the Saints for his Book of Mormon scholarship and his monumental Concordance of the Book of Mormon.

George Reynolds was twice a missionary in England; an emigration agent in the European Mission; a member of the select Council of Fifty; a home missionary; a seventies quorum president; an assistant editor for the Deseret News, the Millennial Star, the Journal of Discourses, and the Juvenile Instructor; a Salt Lake City councilman; an officer in the Nauvoo Legion, Utah Territory's militia; a regent of the University of Deseret; a member of the board of directors of several businesses; both a local and a general administrator in the Deseret Sunday School Union; a college lecturer; and a polygamous husband and father. This biography will clarify Reynolds's several roles placed in their larger historical settings. His experiences in the vital "Utah period" shed considerable light upon some of the most important events, issues, and individuals in LDS Church history.

George Reynolds was a second-echelon leader in the Church. I define first-echelon Latter-day Saints as the prophets, apostles, and other individuals of such prominence and influence who rival or supersede the effect of many general authorities. Eliza R. Snow and a few other leading sisters would be considered first-echelon Mormons. Second-echelon Church leaders, such as George Reynolds, are lower-level general authorities or individuals whose influence was considerable during their lives but whose names are not easily recognized by most Church members today. Third-echelon Mormons are local leaders who have substantial influence on a community but whose fame does not exist beyond that community. All three types deserve biographical attention but in Reynolds's case, a number of crucial Mormon history issues are addressed in his biography.

I would like to extend appreciation to Professors James B. Allen and D. Michael Quinn for their unwavering support during my graduate school days at Brigham Young University and especially for their help on my study of George Reynolds. Special credit goes to Kathryn Weeks, Linda Hunter Adams, and Val Holladay of the Brigham Young University College of Humanities Publications Center for editing portions of my manuscript and checking the sources cited. I sincerely appreciate the editorial assistance of Suzanne Brady and the design and layout work of Richard Erickson and Craig Geertsen of Deseret Book Company. Thanks also to my friends and colleagues in the Church Educational System and BYU Religious Education for their support, cooperation, and encouragement. I appreciate the willing assistance of the staffs of the LDS Church Historical Archives, Special Collections of the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University, and the Utah State Historical Archives. Descendants of George Reynolds have been most cooperative. I have enjoyed becoming acquainted with them in two George Reynolds family reunions and being accepted as one of their own. My undying debt of gratitude is acknowledged to Grant Reynolds Hardy, a choice friend and co-laborer.
