Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 1

Youthful Conversion

Like so many other Latter-day Saints in the late nineteenth century, George Reynolds hailed from the British Isles. More than half of the Mormons living in Utah after 1865, the year of George's immigration, were either British immigrants or their offspring. [^1] George was born in 1842, four and a half years after the restored gospel was first taken to his native land. He joined the Church in London in 1856, sixteen years after the English metropolis saw its first Mormon missionaries. He arrived in Salt Lake City in 1865, only eighteen years after Brigham Young first identified the Salt Lake Valley as the new headquarters of Zion.

George Reynolds was born at his parents' home on Regent Street in the district of Marylebone, London, England, on New Year's Day, 1842. London was still in the throes of the Industrial Revolution, which had begun at the turn of the century. Young Queen Victoria had reigned for nearly five years. Sir Robert Peel had just become prime minister in a Tory, or Conservative, cabinet that many did not think would heed the concerns of the working class (including women and children), who labored under appalling conditions. The year 1842 was the fourth consecutive year of meager harvests and heavy unemployment; hence, food prices were high and wages low. Chartism, a movement for social and economic reform, reached its peak, sparking agitation for a repeal of the infamous Corn Laws and for cheaper grain. But these gloomy circumstances would change considerably by 1846 with the help of Peel's government. [^2]

Because his was a middle-class family, young George Reynolds was not as adversely affected by these deprivations as most of his countrymen. Indeed, his family's circumstances were improved by the modernization sweeping England. His father, also named George Reynolds, was a master tailor on Regent Street, near the center of London. He ran a lucrative shop because of brisk business from an increasingly wealthy capitalist class. Young George's opportunities for education, both in his homeland and in France, were benefits of the Industrial Revolution.

The elder George Reynolds was born in 1812 in Totnes, Devonshire, a garden spot of England about fifty miles southwest of London. He was a descendent of the brother of the famous painter Sir Joshua Reynolds (1723-1792), who dominated Britain's art world during the middle and late eighteenth century. George's mother was Julia Ann Tautz, born in 1819 in London. She was of German and French middle-class descent. [^3] The date and location of the marriage of George and Julia Ann are unknown.

The first Reynolds child, Frederick, born in 1840, lived only a few days. The first surviving child was George, born 1 January 1842. George later had six younger brothers and three younger sisters, the last born in 1860. [^4]

George was a favorite of his indulgent maternal grandmother, Amelia Tautz, who lived nearby in the district of Paddington. She encouraged his precociousness and his assiduous desire to learn. Primary education was not universally available in England, so she made it possible for him to attend the North London Collegiate School. There he garnered prizes and certificates of merit for arithmetic, geography, and good attendance. George was also a devoted student of astronomy, history, and literature. "The boy had been trained to think anyone stupid who was not well informed in the subjects of history and geography," wrote his daughter Alice Louise Reynolds. [^5]

George also spent considerable time at his father's tailor shop and often observed the tailors and apprentices sitting cross-legged in a circle surrounding a large, upright gas burner on the shopboard. The apprentices treated the intelligent boy as a pet. George, at age seven, overheard the men making cynical comments about supernatural religious claims. George remembered feeling disgust at hearing what was for him a sacrilegious discussion. Among other things, he heard the tailors discussing a young man in America named Joseph Smith who had discovered some buried metal plates that he had translated by means of the Urim and Thummim. George remembered hearing in school that the Urim and Thummim mentioned in the Bible had been carried by Roman soldiers from Jerusalem to Rome and had been lost in the Tiber River. As he sat that day in the tailor shop, he marveled at the discovery of those holy instruments in America. [^6] This incident shows that young George was sober, respectful toward sacred and religious subjects, and inquisitive—traits that would prove significant throughout his life. Two years later, in 1851, George chose boys as companions who lived close to a playground near his house. " 'Buttons' was a favorite game: a number of buttons—the big ones called 'two-ers' and the small ones, 'one-ers'—were placed on the ground in a ring and each boy in turn threw at them. The best marksman won the most." George, who was small for his age, often took bright, shiny silver buttons from his father's shop in an attempt to ingratiate himself with his fellows. Eventually he realized that he was stealing, but the boys' praise prompted him to continue. George became annoyed by their constant begging and finally refused to get more buttons for them. He promised himself never to commit this "wrong doing" again. The boys immediately threatened him with a thrashing from the neighborhood bully. Outwardly courageous but inwardly frightened of being exposed to his father for fighting, he avoided his usual haunts. Eventually he was forced to defend himself in a scuffle but suffered no lasting injuries. [^7]

When telling the story for young readers many years later in Utah, George moralized, "Children, you also can learn one lesson through this short story. If you have been doing wrong, do it no more, leave it off at once and for ever. It is better to face the consequences now, than when your sin has grown worse. Trust in God, plead with him for his aid to strengthen you to do right." [^8]

In 1851, at age nine, George met his first Mormon. He often visited his grandmother, Amelia Tautz, and because her home was so large, he fearfully imagined ghosts hiding in the darkness. One day he courageously spoke with a maid. "Mary, are you afraid of ghosts?" Mary, whose real name was Sarah White, took an interest in him. George asked Mary if she went to church and, discovering that she did, obtained permission from his grandmother to go with her. She took him to the Paddington Branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^9] When George heard the principles of the gospel taught there, he accepted them as truth immediately and applied for baptism, but the elders refused to baptize him without his parents' consent. George's parents, who were nominal adherents of the Anglican Church, refused permission because they considered the Mormon Church an obnoxious American sect. George pleaded again and again for permission but without success. Still, George arranged secretly to attend many meetings of the Saints. [^10]

In September 1854, George, then twelve, was sent to Paris to live with his mother's relatives. His grandmother and his parents had two motives for sending him there: they hoped he would forget his foolishness about Mormonism, and they hoped that while in Paris he would have educational opportunities in French and other languages. "The first three months of my life here were wretched in the extreme," George remembered. [^11] Homesickness, diarrhea and other sicknesses, his inability at first to communicate in French, and the unkindness of other boys plagued George, but he studied for a year, mastered French, and learned the rudiments of six other languages and of classical literature. Throughout his life George built upon those studies. The secular knowledge he gained as a youth served him well in his later literary contributions to the LDS Church.

In France, George did not forget about Mormonism. Remembering that the missionaries in his newfound faith had preached the imminent return of Christ, George devised an elaborate mathematical calculation that indicated Christ would come again before George reached twenty-one years of age. George was thus afraid he would not have a chance to be baptized. Upon his return to London, and during his frequent visits to his grandmother, George began attending the Somers Town Branch, near his grandmother's new home, where he was unknown by Church members. There, at age fourteen, he applied for baptism and was accepted. He was baptized Sunday, 4 May 1856, by an Elder Hillier and was confirmed the next Sunday by George Teasdale, the branch president. President Teasdale and George developed a friendship that endured throughout their lives. Both eventually worked at LDS Church headquarters, and both became general authorities of the Church. In December, George was ordained a deacon. He reminisced later that he had never magnified any other Church office as well. "[I] took pride in never being absent from meeting, and in being there the very first to open the doors and prepare the rooms." [^12]

During his teenage years George participated fully in the LDS Church, despite his parents' learning of his baptism. Some of his father's customers suggested that the elder Reynolds thrash Mormonism out of his son, or that George be committed to an asylum, or that he be taken before a magistrate and confined to prison. Nevertheless, by degrees George's father adjusted to the course his son was taking and took no punitive measures. [^13]

George became involved in the Somers Town Branch Sunday School, serving first as teacher and then as secretary. Thus began his lifelong dedication to the Sunday School of the Church.

One year after his baptism George was ordained a priest and appointed an outdoor missionary. Men and boys having this calling preached together at key locations in the city. In his autobiography, George recalled, "This was one of the severest trials of my life, being only fifteen years old, quite small for my age, and very timid and bashful, but, trusting for strength in the Lord, I overcame these difficulties, and from that time for several years I preached in the highways of that huge city on the Sabbath, and when I had opportunity on week day evenings after my work was done." His listeners frequently jeered that he should place "a piece of brown paper under his feet so he might be seen." He wore an Eton jacket when he preached, but he soon decided to wear a man's coat in order to gain respect. Finding no coat that would fit, he purchased one several sizes too large. In time, however, he found pleasure going week after week to the street corners to preach. [^14]

Meanwhile, George's father placed him as an apprentice with a dry goods merchant. George did not remain there long, however, and soon undertook eighteen months of cashier's training, which ended abrubtly when he was unjustly accused of stealing. He took on another job as a clerk until May 1861, when, at age nineteen, he resigned. The bookkeeping skills he gained as a youth were later used in many Church businesses and assignments after his emigration to Utah.

George's heart was not in his bookkeeping training. He had been ordained an elder in the Church the previous August and was awaiting a promised full-time calling as a missionary. As soon as he received his call from the British Mission presidency, George happily bade adieu to both employer and family and entered the ministry. He was assigned immediately to his home conference in London. [^15] Thus began the diligent and scarcely interrupted full-time service of George Reynolds in the kingdom of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This prophecy, known at that time as the "Revelation and Prophecy on War," was given on Christmas Day 1831 in Kirtland, Ohio, and is now found in the Doctrine and Covenants as section 87.
[^2] Star 23 (11 May 1861): 299-300; see also 23 (28 December 1861): 829-31.
[^3] Richard L. Evans, A Century of "Mormonism" in Great Britain (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1937), pp. 242-47; Millennial Star 23 (17 August 1861): 506-8.
[^4] Star 23 (1 June 1861): 337.
[^5] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, 8 May-18 May 1861; Millennial Star 23 (10 August 1861): 507-8; "Autobiographical Sketch of George Reynolds," p. 2.
[^6] Richard L. Jensen, "Without Purse or Scrip: Financing Latter-day Saint Missionary Work in Europe in the Nineteenth Century," Journal of Mormon History 12 (1985): 3-14; Goldwin Smith, A History of England, 3d ed. (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1966), p. 628.
[^7] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, 1861.
[^8] Ibid.; for a review of reasons why Mormon officials historically have excommunicated members, see Lester E. Bush, Jr., "Excommunication and Church Courts: A Note From the General Handbook of Instructions," Dialogue 14 (Summer 1981): 74-98.
[^9] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, 25 July 1861.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 2, 31 December 1861 and 5 January 1862. No existing British Mission records give the statistics mentioned here by Reynolds or in his year-end reports later in his mission. Historians have often relied on Reynolds's journal for British Mission statistics. For example, see Richard D. Poll, "The British Mission during the Utah War, 1857-58," in Richard L. Jensen and Malcolm R. Thorp, eds., Mormons in Early Victorian Britain (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989), pp. 226-27, 240-41.
[^12] 12. T. Z., "Lives of Our Leaders," p. 386; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, p. 5; A. L. Reynolds, "Sketch," pp. 1-2; A. L. Reynolds, "Biography," p. 7.
[^13] 13. "Autobiographical Sketch," p. 2; A. L. Reynolds, "Sketch on the Life of Grandfather George Reynolds," p. 2; A. L. Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 7; T. Z., "Lives of Our Leaders," pp. 368-87; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, pp. 5-6.
[^14] 14. Ibid.
[^15] 15. Ibid., pp. 4-5.
