Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 2

First Mission in His Native Land

George Reynolds became a full-time missionary in May 1861 just after the American Civil War began. Naturally that conflict engendered great interest among the missionaries, because many elders were Americans and most British Saints planned to emigrate to America. George pondered the importance of this conflict throughout his mission. Coincidentally, his mission concluded in the summer of 1865, just as peace was achieved, bringing an end to the worst human conflict to that point in world history.

Elder George Q. Cannon of the Church's Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, second counselor in the British Mission Presidency and editor of the Church's British magazine, the Millennial Star, editorialized on 11 May 1861 that the American Civil War, beginning as it had in South Carolina, fulfilled Joseph Smith's prophecy received twenty-eight years earlier. [^1] "We [the Latter-day Saints] knew, therefore, that, negotiate, arrange, and compromise as the opposing parties might please, the war would have to commence at South Carolina, and not in Florida, where Fort Pickens [another potential hotspot] was situate," Elder Cannon explained. "This is the first act in the bloody drama—the precursor of wars that shall spread over all nations, and bring death and misery to many souls, and cause the inhabitants of the earth to mourn."

Elder Cannon warned European Saints to repent when they witnessed such obvious signs of the times:

The consumption decreed, which is to make a full end of all nations, has begun. It was to commence at South Carolina; but it was to spread until all nations were to be involved in it. The nations of Europe cannot escape from it, if they continue as they are. But the Lord has provided a place of refuge for those who will accept it. All who desire to avail themselves of this place of security [Utah, or the Mormon Zion] can do so, if they be diligent. [^2]

Thus George Reynolds and fellow missionaries had a crucial message to declare: Repent of your sins while there is still time, and flee to Zion (Utah) for refuge and peace. There is not and will not be peace in Babylon (most of the United States and Britain). The end of time is near!

Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles served in England as joint presidents of the European Mission beginning in August 1860. In January 1861 they were joined by their younger colleague, the articulate George Q. Cannon. Elders Lyman and Rich departed from Britain in May 1862, leaving Elder Cannon to serve as mission president until July 1864. George Reynolds had started his labors in May 1861, just as most American missionaries were being released to accompany emigrants to Utah. Throughout the rest of 1861 only six new American elders (known as "Valley Elders") were sent to Britain. This sharp decrease was caused by the need for men to lead the "church trains" across the plains, a part of the immigration system that was begun that year. The British Mission, therefore, had to call more native missionaries, Elder George Reynolds being one of them. [^3]

Apparently, the increase in native elders threatened missionary harmony. George Q. Cannon wrote in the Millennial Star, "We have heard of it [national prejudice] in this country manifesting itself among native Elders, in jealousy of the Elders from Zion. . . . Those who manifested this illiberality have been afraid that their influence would outweigh their own." [^4] George Reynolds probably was not one of these grumbling native elders; his surviving papers indicate only profound respect for American missionaries.

Britain's London Conference had three districts in 1861. Elder Reynolds was assigned as a traveling elder to the third district, where he had responsibility under the direction of Elder John Brown, an original Utah pioneer, to supervise five branches in the west and south of London. Elder William C. Staines, an early British convert who before his return to England as a missionary had distinguished himself as a Utah businessman, was president of the London Conference. [^5] Elder Staines and George Reynolds began a lifelong friendship.

Shortly before George became a full-time missionary, the Church changed its policy of financing missionaries. For several years, the missionaries in Britain had drawn a small allowance from collective tithing funds. After discovering some abuses in that system, Brigham Young insisted that tithing collections have more supervision from Utah and that the missionaries proselyte "as did the Elders anciently," that is, without purse or scrip. Food and lodging could be obtained from members who were able to provide them. Unfortunately many Church members were suffering themselves on account of the Industrial Revolution, the overcrowding in the cities, and the adverse economic effects of the American Civil War. English factories struggled because of the lack of cotton received from the Southern States. [^6]

So, without purse or scrip, George traveled to every branch in his district, preaching the gospel to prospective converts, often baptizing people in local bathhouses. Keeping the Church branches in order brought George both his greatest fulfillment and his deepest frustration. He preached frequently, helped establish productive Sunday Schools, collected and recorded tithes and other donations, organized successful social activities, and helped many of the Saints prepare to emigrate to Utah. He relished working with other "men of God," both those who were his mission leaders and his local priesthood branch leaders. [^7] He drew especially close to the forty-five-year-old president of the Lambeth Branch, Joseph L. Barfoot. Often both men spent long hours counseling over Church and personal matters, and later, when Elder Reynolds labored in Liverpool, the two corresponded as often as twice a week. They both emigrated to "Zion" in 1865 and maintained close ties. Barfoot became curator of the Deseret Museum, where George frequently assisted.

Elder Reynolds became frustrated with some priesthood leaders and even more so with squabbles between members. Occasionally, as presiding officer in "council meetings," as Church disciplinary councils were called then, he ruled on individuals' memberships and excommunicated some for sexual immorality, unruly behavior, or speaking fanatically and erroneously in public meetings. These latter responsibilities wore heavily on the nineteen-year-old missionary. As a result of this stress, he suffered bouts of headaches and diarrhea. [^8]

George recorded his feelings about a number of his co-workers after a series of conference meetings in July 1861. Those feelings reveal as much about George Reynolds as they reveal about the subjects. Regarding Elder Amasa Lyman, president of the mission, George said, "When in council [he] can look you through and I believe tell the secrets of your heart. If I had done wrong I feel as though I could not but confess it as it must come out." George observed about Elder Charles C. Rich, first counselor, "He is very conscious, very severe on evil doers, yet kind & affectionate as a husband, father or friend." George's growing admiration for Elder George Q. Cannon was obvious as he noted, "Br Cannon is most homely, affable & pleasing wears a constant smile and you forget the apostle in the friend and brother." He commented about other brethren with whom he worked:

Br John Brown our district president one of the pioneers is a thorough good man, but with very few striking characteristics. . . . Br Wm. C. Staines is beloved by all from his familiar at-home-everywhere spirit from his preaching being like chatting with the people full of anecdotes and amusing recitals of his experiences in the Church. . . . Br [Francis M.] Lyman [a young elder at the time and future Apostle], a severe commanding spirit, full of the go-ahead Yankee with uncompromising resolutions to overcome evil, a Mormon every inch. . . . Br Barfoot is one of the greatest spirits I have met with. Great in his humbleness and complete subjection to the priesthood. [^9]

At the same time, George recorded a perceptive evaluation of himself:

With regard to myself I find considerable difficulty in presiding, being better able to do as I am told than to tell others what to do, feeling my youth experience and various other things working against me. I sometimes feel bound and broken down with the responsibilities of my position, yet realizing all the time that I have been placed in it by gods servants and to do any less than walk into that position would be dishonoring Him. I know I desire to obey council, yet sometimes find a difficulty in guarding my tongue from telling things that should not be told, and find no difficulty in obeying it, but the difficulty lies in governing controlling and bringing my own feelings passions and desires into complete subjection to my will and of making Gods will my will and his spirit my spirit.

George reflected that his quiet disposition often worked against him when he visited the Saints. "I have little to say and let them do the talking. In this respect I expect to change. I try and be as kind as I can and want to see the brethren & sisters live to their positions & callings." [^10]

At the end of 1861 George recorded forty-two baptisms in the district and the emigration of eighty Saints. Twenty-six hundred Britons had been baptized throughout Great Britain that year, bringing the Church population to approximately fifteen thousand. Evaluating his own performance to that point in his mission, George wrote: "On the whole during the past year I have learned much of human character gained much experience in the nature of things and the laws of the kingdom of God, & I believe during no year of my life has my character been so changed as during this past finished." [^11]

Throughout 1862 Elder Reynolds continued his duties in the London Conference. He lodged at the homes of various members or in the district office. He recorded in his journal numerous spiritual experiences, particularly those in which he felt "free" while speaking. A standard acknowledgment of the time was that one's tongue was loosed with the aid of the Holy Spirit. About once a month he visited his nonmember parents in their London home, where he witnessed the gradual physical decline of his father, who died 17 November 1862. Being the eldest son, George took time at the end of the year to settle his father's estate.

Just as he completed that task in early February 1863, President George Q. Cannon called the twenty-one-year-old Elder Reynolds to be his private secretary and the emigration clerk of the European Mission in Liverpool. George's trustworthiness and untiring devotion to his leaders qualified him for these posts. His first twenty-one months as a missionary were successful in every sense. He had completed his "rite of passage" and now was in a position of trust, working with an illustrious leader in the Latter-day Saint movement. For the rest of their lives, George Q. Cannon and George Reynolds were closely bonded as brothers in the kingdom of God and coparticipants in some of the most dramatic events in Mormon history.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Philip A. M. Taylor, "Why Did British Mormons Emigrate?" Utah Historical Quarterly 22 (July 1954): 249-70; Richard L. Jensen, "The British Gathering to Zion," in Ben Bloxham, et al., ed., Truth Will Prevail (Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987), pp. 165-98.
[^2] Information for this chapter, unless otherwise noted, comes from George Reynolds Journal, vols. 3 and 4, covering the years 1863-65.
[^3] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 1, p. 6, and 13 July 1862.
[^4] Ibid., 13 December 1861 (verb tense and possessive standardized).
[^5] Star 25 (21 March 1863): 184.
[^6] Star 25 (20 June 1863): 392-93.
[^7] Ibid., 25 (31 October 1863): 696.
[^8] Ibid., 25 (12 December 1863): 792-93.
[^9] The number of British members who were excommunicated was high for both 1863 and 1864, the years Reynolds kept the records in the British Mission.
[^10] Millennial Star 27 (25 February 1865): 117.
[^11] Ibid., 27 (15 April 1865): 227.
