Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 4

Marriage and Early Career

George and Polly may have thought they were going to get married within a week of George's arrival in Salt Lake City, but Sarah Burrell, George's former fiancee, would not hear of it. When she learned that George was in the city, she went immediately to Church headquarters and created "a fuss." Because Brigham Young was out of town, first counselor Heber C. Kimball asked George to postpone his marriage until Brigham returned. Sarah wrote a letter to President Young, insisting that George should fulfill his "covenant" with her because her happiness depended on his truthfulness to her. When Brigham returned, Sarah went to him to plead her case. George Q. Cannon, who also was at the meeting, explained George Reynolds's side of the story, so President Young advised Sarah not to follow George about but rather to marry the first good man who offered himself. "This released me of a great amount of anxiety as I did not know what the push to this affair would be," George recorded in his journal. [^1] This event occurred too early in George's Utah experience to be resolved by plural marriage, but when George did eventually enter into plural marriage, he did not marry Sarah.

This untidy matter now resolved, on 21 July 1865 George and Polly went to the Endowment House, the temporary temple in Salt Lake City, and were rebaptized to renew their covenants after their immigration, a common practice for recently arrived immigrants to Zion. The next day, in the same sacred edifice, Heber C. Kimball married them. George was twenty-three and Polly nineteen. Excitedly George recorded in his journal that he was now sealed to his beloved "for time and all eternity" and that he and Polly were offered "every other blessing depending on our faithfulness."

George and Polly were very happily in love. They were not deterred by their lack of means; indeed, they began their marriage with only fifteen cents in their pocket, for earlier in the week they had paid six months' rent on a small house in the Thirteenth Ward near downtown Salt Lake City and "had put in a supply of groceries." [^2]

Seven months after moving into the Thirteenth Ward, George was called to the priesthood office of seventy. Most returned missionaries in the Church at that time were seventies, and it is likely that, as was the practice of the period, some members of the sixth quorum of seventies, the quorum to which he was called, had requested that he be called to join their unit. On 18 March 1866, Israel Barlow, himself an original member of the 1835 First Quorum of Seventy and ordained directly by Joseph Smith, ordained George to his new priesthood office. [^3] George spent the rest of his life as a seventy, his service culminating in his calling as one of the Seven Presidents of Seventy from 1890 to 1909.

The winter of 1865-66 was unusually severe, and both George and Polly suffered considerable ill health. Because of the fierce weather and their sickness, George and Polly remained mostly confined to their apartment, where the lack of good ventilation perhaps contributed to their sickness. They went out only to visit the nearby Grahams (a couple they had known in England), Polly's family, and the Salt Lake Theatre. Polly became pregnant during that winter, and shortly thereafter she caught a cold that probably turned into pneumonia. For a few days her life hung in the balance. George "administered to her in the name of Jesus while her mother held her," and she recovered.

In the spring, Polly narrowly missed being struck by a collapsing wall on Main Street. This event precipitated her baby's premature birth in May. The baby appeared to have been stillborn, but through the expert attention of the midwife and George's faith, the baby survived. Little George Tuddenham Reynolds, whom the parents called "Georgey," was retarded and frail. He never learned to walk or talk. At sixteen months of age, Georgey died of "canker," some form of infection, and dysentery. George and Polly grieved sorely at the loss of their firstborn. He noted in his diary, "Home seems very lonely without a baby."

Salt Lake City, in mid 1865 when George and Polly were married, enjoyed an optimistic spirit because of the end of the Civil War and the consequent reduction of federal troops under the hostile direction of General Patrick Connor. Before leaving Salt Lake City to fight Indians on the plains, Connor vowed to return to establish mining as a viable enterprise and promote "gentile," or non-Mormon, competition with the Church-dominated economy. The Church, in turn, called for a boycott of gentile merchants to force them out of business and for even stricter economic control. [^4]

In this setting George met and was employed by William Jennings, the wealthiest merchant in the territory and a devout Latter-day Saint. He owned the burgeoning Eagle Emporium on Main Street, and having lost his bookkeeper, he hired the highly recommended George Reynolds. George worked at the Eagle Emporium until 2 December 1865, when, through the recommendation of George Teasdale, he was given a post at the Church Tithing Office. Reynolds recorded the following about his first job in Zion: "I left [Jennings], it being a good situation in all respects but one & that was Mr. J's irritable temper caused great unpleasantness to those who worked for him, & his outbursts of passion often scared me & rendered me very nervous." George had worked at the Tithing Office for only a few days when Brigham Young employed him in the Office of the President of the Church, where he remained for the rest of his life. George began working as an understudy bookkeeper with Brigham's son Heber.

In 1866 George enlisted in the Nauvoo Legion, the Utah territorial militia, which was under firm LDS control; it was commanded by General Daniel H. Wells, George's former mission president and friend. He felt invigorated during the four-day training period; the outdoor exercise improved his health. Later George joined the Third Infantry Regiment and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in Company H. In addition, he served as secretary of the regiment. Still later, in November 1870, when Governor J. Wilson Shaffer, who had been appointed by United States President Ulysses S. Grant, challenged LDS control of the militia, George's company participated in the "Wooden Gun Rebellion." Eight officers, not including George, were arrested "for treason and rebellion" and confined for a few months at Camp Douglas. [^5]

Meanwhile, George Reynolds continued his writing that he had first tried in England. George Q. Cannon, one of the first pioneers in the Church's Sunday School movement, determined in 1865 that he would fill the void of Church reading material for youth. He enlisted some former British missionaries, including George Reynolds, to assist with this project. Elder Cannon began publishing the Juvenile Instructor to be used in the Sunday Schools that were being created in Church wards. Despite great difficulty in obtaining sufficient paper, the first issue of the Juvenile, as it was affectionately called, came out in early 1866. [^6] George kept the books for the periodical, although he remained employed at the Office of the President. He also consented to contribute articles. He wrote thirteen articles as well as several acrostics and charades (riddles) in the Juvenile's first year; he wrote more than one hundred more articles before leaving on his second mission to England in 1871. The variety of subject matter of these contributions is impressive: Bible stories, natural history, animals, geography, political history, original stories, essays, editorials, and poems. He readily combined secular with prophetic history. Frequently George's articles were the lead articles and contained the most vivid illustrations. His writings in the Juvenile Instructor identified him as one of the most learned and well-read men in Utah Territory. [^7]

A few months after Georgey was born in 1866, the family moved across the street into an apartment in the house of a Mr. and Mrs. Shelmerdine. They were now in the Eighth Ward, where George's services were more needed. He was immediately called as a block teacher, an assignment to look after the needs of the families on a city block. When the ward established a Sunday School in the spring of 1867, George was called to teach the boys' Bible class and to be secretary. Once again he was in his happy element as a teacher of the gospel and scripture.

In January 1867 George took sick with chills and fever that brought on violent vomiting lasting twenty-four hours. He wrote in his journal:

While thus vomiting I lay on one side which caused me to tear or sprain some part of my inside and it was nearly three weeks before I could go to work again. I suffered considerably from rheumatism during this spell and was brought very low, some of my friends fancied I should not get over it but I had no such idea. Bro [George Q.] Cannon in administering to me promised me I should live to a good old age. The cause of my sickness I ascribe to administering to Bro Shelmerdine when I was unwell myself. He immediately recovered and I commenced to get sick.

In April George received his patriarchal blessing from John Smith, son of Hyrum Smith and patriarch to the Church. Brother Smith promised George that he would be "numbered among the chosen sons of Zion," an appellation that George undoubtedly treasured, considering his loyalty to the work. He was further promised that he would receive an inheritance in the New Jerusalem, that his posterity would be numerous and his sons would sit in council with the just, that he would be an instrument in bringing to the knowledge of the truth many who grovel in darkness, that he would be a savior to many of his kindred dead, that he would travel in foreign lands to preach the gospel, and that many people would flock to him for counsel. George later received an appointment to the select Endowment House prayer circle and to the theological class of the School of the Prophets in 1867. [^8]

Beginning in August 1867, George had a small, three-room house built (probably by his father-in-law, John Tuddenham, a contractor) on a large lot he had purchased on the "north bench" of Salt Lake City (now "D" Street in the Avenues section). This location was in the Twentieth Ward, where George's family had many worthwhile experiences for the next several decades. George and Polly moved into their new dwelling in December just as winter was arriving. On 5 January 1868 Polly gave birth to her second child, a daughter, who was small at birth, but nevertheless strong and healthy. They named her Amelia Emily, but she was always known as Millie, the same name as one of George's sisters in England.

George and Polly had much to be happy about. Though small, their house was their own, and the Twentieth Ward was a good place to live. Millie was a strong, beautiful child, who, even though she was having difficulty teething, George wrote in 1869, was "a bright, plucky, mischievous, brave little girl, and we hope to raise her to womanhood, to be an honor in the Kingdom of God." The young parents spent a great deal of time with Millie, teaching her new words and finding delight in everything she learned to say. [^9]

George thoroughly enjoyed his associations in the Twentieth Ward after moving there in 1867. Because many of his neighbors were educationally progressive—Bishop John Sharp, the renowned Karl G. Maeser, as well as George Reynolds himself—this ward pioneered several Church programs. The Twentieth Ward ran a successful branch of the cooperative store. As secretary and treasurer of the branch store, George received a small pension.

George served first as Sunday School teacher and librarian and then, in 1869, became superintendent of the Twentieth Ward's Sunday School, a position that demanded considerable attention. Later he was also called to be the tithing clerk. He was assisted in his Sunday School organization by thirteen men and nine women at a time when few, if any, women worked in most other Sunday Schools of the Church. During his first year as superintendent, he worked to increase attendance. One effort was a party, to which he invited mothers of prospective students to help capture their interest. Attendance shot up from approximately fifty to more than two hundred children.

In 1869 George began assisting President Daniel H. Wells in administering sacred ordinances in the Endowment House. A journal entry reads: "I attended the endowment house as a recorder, also taking parts in the endowment. I also assisted Bro Wells."

At the April 1869 general conference, John Tuddenham, George's father-in-law, was called to return to England on a mission. Tuddenham arrived in England in May and was assigned to the London Conference, where he taught George's mother, brothers, and sisters the gospel, hoping to convert them. George's mother became interested, and after some persuasion, she allowed her two youngest sons, Charles and Harry, to emigrate to America and live with George. The boys, aged fourteen and twelve respectively, arrived in Utah in the summer 1870, were baptized, and went to live with George and Polly in their three-room home.

George, Polly, and daughter Millie were joined by little Heber, born on 12 July 1870. Thus the little house suddenly became quite crowded. "Charley" went to night school and did chores around the house. Harry went to the Twentieth Ward Day School, one of the best in the city, under the direction of Karl G. Maeser. Harry, undisciplined for his age, created frustration for George and Polly, who were now responsible for the boys' upbringing. "Neither [of the boys] are mentally well developed for their age," George recorded.

One afternoon Charley unwittingly placed some bedding on top of baby Heber. Five minutes later Polly went into the bedroom, looking for her baby, and discovered Heber, who was already getting black in the face from suffocation. George felt that the baby had "strained itself" trying to get free and was harmed. After this incident, Heber was always sickly.

George's professional life was varied during the years from 1866 to 1871, when he went to England on his second mission, because Brigham Young frequently rearranged assignments to office personnel. George continued to work in finances until August 1868, when he was assigned to fill Albert Carrington's vacancy as Brigham's confidential private secretary, Carrington having been called as president of the European Mission. At the end of 1868 George was replaced as private secretary by David McKenzie and was assigned as bookkeeper to the general Church accounts. In May 1870 he switched positions with McKenzie again. When Brigham Young returned from Saint George in early 1871, Reynolds was asked to index Endowment House sealings, with McKenzie returning as private secretary. In addition to his work in the Office of the President, he worked as a half-time assistant editor of the Deseret News under the direction of George Q. Cannon until May 1870.

During the 1860s Brigham Young was clearly the most influential person in political, economic, social, and spiritual aspects of life in Utah Territory. He guided the economic affairs of the Church as it delved deeply into numerous self-sufficiency enterprises. President Young's fervent desire was for the Church to be totally economically independent of all gentile influences. His secretaries and clerks were assigned both ecclesiastical and secular tasks, all of which were interchangeable in the minds of Church leaders. Secretaries did not have prescribed duties and could easily rotate assignments. [^10] Perhaps Brigham did that purposely to avoid giving any one secretary too much authority or depending exclusively on any one.

They performed staff responsibilities and, in the Office of the President, did not exercise any priesthood or ecclesiastical authority. After Elder Cannon was relieved of secretarial duties in 1868 to perform other apostolic responsibilities, the dichotomy between "priesthood" and "staff" became even more pronounced. Yet the First Presidency hired only trusted priesthood holders as secretaries and clerks where confidential and highly significant documents, discussions, and decisions were involved. Each secretary held his own ecclesiastical calling apart from his office work. George Reynolds, for example, was a seventy and Sunday School worker.

Out of his close association with the Church hierarchy in the Office of the President, George received appointments throughout his life to responsible positions in education, government, and church-run businesses. In territorial Utah, Brigham Young and his advisors in private councils determined who should fill these important posts, although the appointments formally came from the appropriate government agencies. George received his first appointment in February 1869 at age twenty-seven when he was elected unanimously by the territorial legislature as a University of Deseret regent. Soon he was functioning as executive committee secretary of the board of regents. He continued in that position for several years, being released only temporarily during his second mission. In 1870 he was also appointed as secretary to the Utah statehood committee.

George Reynolds had obviously risen in the estimation of the First Presidency as one who was reliable, versatile, and trustworthy. At the end of 1869, he noted wryly in his journal, "It will thus be seen my hands were full in having so many honorary callings."

George was excited in late 1870 to buy a modern Singer sewing machine for his wife. That turned out to be a good investment, for in just a few months George was called to go to England on his second full-time mission and Polly was able to take in sewing to help sustain the family in his absence.

In an 1870 letter to his father-in-law, George revealed his feelings about current Salt Lake City events. George repudiated the "Godbeite" faction that had begun to attract attention. George had known key figures of this "new movement," but he was not persuaded. At this time the "gentile Ring," a group of anti-Mormon businessmen and lawyers, banded together to oppose Mormonism through the legal system. United States President Ulysses S. Grant supported this faction and made appointments to territorial offices that annoyed the Mormons. George wrote: "We do not feel like being pissing posts for every hell hound that is sent here as governor, judge, marshall &c. But we should all, I hope, be on hand to do just when the Lord requires, be it in accord with our feelings or not. Perhaps the Lord is preparing a scourge, on account of our unbelief, lukewarmness &c." [^11] Little did George realize that in a few years his name would be in the center of this controversy between the Mormons and the gentiles.

George Reynolds, twenty-nine years old in 1871, had become a trusted lieutenant in the Mormon kingdom. As a secretary in the Office of the President, he was near the seat of power. Still, in his humility, which came naturally to him, he sought neither position nor honor. He felt deep allegiance to the anointed prophets and apostles of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Information for the paragraphs about Reynolds's mission preparation and arrival in England are drawn from George Reynolds Journal, vol. 4, 1871.
[^2] These figures, compared with other evidences of income for residents of Salt Lake City at the time, indicate that Reynolds earned about an average wage. An examination of the tax rolls for Salt Lake City indicate that Reynolds's property holdings were also average to slightly less than average. Later in life he supplemented his income by writing, publishing, and investing in Mormon-owned businesses.
[^3] Reynolds kept a letterpress book of his correspondence during his mission of 1871-72. That is now in the hands of Vessa Hood Johnson, a granddaughter of Reynolds, in Springville, Utah. A photocopy is labeled as No. 32 in the Reynolds Collection in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University. Reynolds wrote more than once weekly to his wife and frequently to others in his extended family. Information and quotations in the rest of this chapter, unless otherwise noted, come from the many letters in the letterpress book or George Reynolds Journal, vol. 4, 1871-72.
[^4] "Editorial Thoughts," Juvenile Instructor 6 (30 September 1871): 156.
[^5] Star 33 (3 October 1871): 632.
[^6] Thomas G. Alexander and James B. Allen, Mormons and Gentiles: A History of Salt Lake City (Boulder, Colo.: Pruett Publishing Co., 1984), pp. 94-95.
[^7] G.R., "Our Highest Interest," Millennial Star 34 (25 June 1872): 408-9.
[^8] Information about prayer circles is found in D. Michael Quinn, "Latter-day Saint Prayer Circles," BYU Studies 19 (Fall 1978): 79-105. Information about the School of the Prophets is found in Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom (Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press, 1958), pp. 145-51; John R. Patrick, "The School of the Prophets: Its Development and Influence in Utah Territory," master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1970.
[^9] George Reynolds to "Dad" (John Tuddenham), 7 April 1870, letter in possession of Emily Jensen, Provo, Utah.
[^10] Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Knopf, 1985), pp. 336-41.
[^11] George Reynolds to "Dad" (John Tuddenham), 7 April 1870.
