Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 5

Second Mission to Britain

In April 1871 George was unexpectedly called on another mission. Shortly before April conference, 1871, Elder Albert Carrington of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had been called to serve a second term as president of the European Mission. The call included the editorship of the Millennial Star. Carrington suggested to the First Presidency on 9 April that George Reynolds accompany him to England to be the associate editor of the Star. The next day the First Presidency approved the call and notified George, as they did so many other missionaries, by reading his name in general conference. The day after conference, Elder Wilford Woodruff set George apart, blessing him to be inspired to write "for the benefit and comfort and edification of the Saints of God" and promising that he would return to his family in safety. [^1]

During the ensuing month George put his financial affairs in order so that Polly, their two children, and his two brothers would be cared for in his absence. He helped set up Polly's home sewing business. He sold a part of his lot, on which there were trees, to a friend and neighbor, Septimus W. Sears, for sixty dollars. With the money he bought his wife a washing machine and a sack of sugar. He arranged for Polly to pick up flour as needed from the George Q. Cannon family farm. He obtained jobs for his brothers: Charley began work in the construction trade with George's father-in-law, John Tuddenham, and Harry obtained employment in the Deseret Museum under Joseph Barfoot. George was sincerely grateful to his friends for helping him get ready for his mission. "I left home clear of debt to all men," he noted in his journal.

George also resigned from most of his positions—Sunday School superintendent in the Twentieth Ward, secretary to the Twentieth Ward Cooperative Store, clerk to the ward bishopric, secretary to the North Bench Water Ditch Company, member of the executive committee of the University of Deseret Board of Regents, and officer in the territorial militia. He did not resign from his job in the Office of the President. Carefully he calculated how much pay he had drawn since he was hired in December 1865: $8,902.41, or $1,618.62 per year. [^2]

Before his departure, the Twentieth Ward Sunday School children presented George with a silver pen holder, a gold pen, and an engraving of Brigham Young framed in walnut. The presentation of these gifts touched him deeply. He recorded the name of each child who had contributed to the gifts.

George arrived in Liverpool 21 May 1871, almost exactly six years after he had emigrated from that port. He confided in his journal, "Everything in England looks strange, the high houses, the narrow streets, the cumber of dark children & particularly the office the rooms there only look half their proper size." George went immediately to London to visit his family and former friends.

This mission was an opportunity to strengthen family ties. His mother had missed him, and, now in her advancing years, she was in need of George's attending to family matters. Recently she had turned for assistance to the next oldest son, Arthur, who was now married and a father. George found his mother to be "a little cranky" and noted that her "head is full of all sorts of notions." He was pleased that his twenty-three-year-old sister Julia had converted to the Church. He arranged for Julia to emigrate and then to reside with his wife in Salt Lake City. After three weeks in London, George returned to Liverpool with his brother, nineteen-year-old Walter, who had also joined the Church and who would serve as a printer's assistant in the mission office.

Throughout his mission, George kept in close contact, either in person or by mail, with his mother, brothers, sisters, and some aunts and cousins. [^3] He counseled his sister Millie about what to expect in her prospective marriage. He helped Arthur settle the Reynolds family estate in Devonshire. Of immense satisfaction to George was his obtaining vital data about his ancestors on both paternal and maternal lines when he went to numerous villages to gather records.

George was patient, but frustrated, with his mother. He yearned for her to emigrate, feeling that in Utah she would convert to the Church, transform her life, and drop her traditional attitudes. He succeeded in helping her quit drinking beer so that she would not miss it after she emigrated.

In the Liverpool office, George busied himself editing the Millennial Star, which was published weekly, and the Journal of Discourses, which was usually published monthly. Every Monday he made a journal entry saying he "got out" such and such a number of the Star. That referred to his work of proofreading and final editing, for the magazine was dated as of every Tuesday. George continued to aid his friend George Q. Cannon with the Juvenile Instructor, writing fifteen articles and procuring and sending to Utah numerous engravings and woodcuts.

About a month into his calling, George described his new routine and his feelings about it:

The work in this office is very much like any other kind of work, one day's labor very much resembles that of its fellows. It is like laying up adobies. There is a great sameness, it lacks the interest of going round visiting the saints, proclaiming the gospel, visiting fresh scenes and forming the acquaintance of new faces, particularly here in Liverpool, where the work of the Lord has for several years been at a standstill. It is not considered wise to preach in the open air, we have no week night meetings, and we only get about twenty five saints even to the Sunday evenings meetings. So you see there is not much society or exchange. Still I am well satisfied with my calling and am striving with the aid of the Lord to do my duty and make the "Star" interesting and instructive, and in that I have much pleasure.

In time President Carrington invited George to represent him at various conferences, thus allowing him to visit paternal relatives in Devonshire and to obtain more genealogical information. While on a trip to Manchester in late August 1871, he contracted a severe case of smallpox; a number of other missionaries were also ill. Twenty-three thousand people died of the disease in Britain in 1871. For several days George lingered between life and death before beginning to recover. George later described his illness for George Q. Cannon:

In my sickness I remembered your promise made to me when sick at Sherlmardines in the 8th ward [in 1866], that I should live to a good old age, also my blessing when set apart that I should "go in peace and return in safety." But I can assure you when the disease was at its height I cared little about this world or anything else. I knew I was an individual called George Reynolds, and that this individual had the smallpox and that was all. I was in a state of dreamy stupor much of the time, caused I believe considerably by the sleeping draughts I had given me. I can understand now something of the "Reveries of an Opium eater" for my mind was always terribly active, thinking in pictures, often strange and beautiful, sometimes shocking and horrible.

George was embarrassed to be seen in public because of the unsightly pock marks on his face, and he was slow to regain his strength. To speed his full recovery, it was eventually decided he should return to Utah earlier than he had originally planned.

The following item was published in the Juvenile Instructor relative to George Reynolds:

We [George Q. Cannon and company] were grieved to learn from the Millennial Star, and also from private correspondence, that Elder George Reynolds now on a mission to England, and a very constant and valued writer for the Juvenile Instructor, was attacked with that loathsome and dangerous disease, small-pox, on the 27th of August. The Star said that strong hopes were entertained of his recovery.

The friends and family of Brother Reynolds were anxious, after this news reached here, to learn more respecting his condition, so a dispatch was sent by telegraph from here to him in England, inquiring how his health was. An immediate reply was received, dated Liverpool, September 26th, by Brother Septimus W. Sears [George's neighbor and former missionary companion], in which Brother Reynolds stated that he had quite recovered. This good news relieved the anxiety of his family and friends. They all felt thankful for the use of a telegraph wire, by which news could be sent from one continent to another, thousands of miles distant, in so brief a space of time. The reply of Brother Reynolds left Liverpool on the 26th and reached this city in time to be published in the Deseret Evening News on the same day. [^4]

Soon after George returned to the mission office, the missionaries were shocked when a telegram came from Salt Lake City summoning President Carrington immediately; no reasons were given. He departed on 29 September, after appointing Elder George Reynolds as acting head of the European Mission. [^5] George functioned in that position until Carrington returned nearly eight months later.

One unfortunate task that George had to assume responsibility for during President Carrington's absence was caring for the remains of Elder Caleb W. Haws, who succumbed to smallpox, leaving a wife and three children in Utah. George purchased silk and linen to have burial clothes made, dressed the body in temple robes, and arranged for the burial.

President Carrington had been called back to Utah because of a rapidly festering conflict between extremist gentiles and the Mormon hierarchy. Territorial Chief Justice James B. McKean had been threatening the Church leaders with arrest since early September. A few days after summoning President Carrington, Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells were arrested for "lewd and lascivious cohabitation and adultery for living with their polygamous wives." Later they were arrested again, this time on murder charges arising from rumors dating back to the Utah War. The Mormon leader was forced to spend the months from September 1871 until 25 April 1872 under house arrest before McKean's indictments were dismissed by the United States Supreme Court. [^6]

As George Reynolds learned of events transpiring in Utah, he informed the European Saints through the Star. Speculation was rampant in Britain that Brigham Young would be hanged by United States officials. The news of President Young's arrest caused great persecution in England, particularly by the press. Reynolds wrote to George Teasdale, "Our newspapers here are pretty much filled with the 'End of Mormonism.' "

As acting mission president, Elder Reynolds wrote weekly editorials in the Millennial Star. Some titles were "The Decline of Mormonism?" "Hints to Emigrants," "Signs in the Heavens," "Be Not Discouraged," "Train Up a Child in the Way He Should Go," "Our Amusements," "The Weight of Our Calling," and "Tithing a Privilege and Blessing." As an experienced Church leader, he sincerely strived to teach the less mature European converts. Straightforward in style, he also seemed somewhat condescending. His correspondence with family and friends in Utah shows his frustration with the lackadaisical attitude of the British Saints who had not yet decided to gather to Utah. Those thoughts are also reflected in this editorial:

The interest of "the kingdom of God and His righteousness" should be, at all times, the first great consideration with every Latter-day Saint. All personal, selfish or inferior considerations should be subservient to this one great object. No motive which falls short of this should inspire the life of a Saint. . . . He who considers he has interests apart from those of God's kingdom has interest in which there is no satisfaction, no salvation; interests in which truth and righteousness have no part, but in which death, hell or the grave will claim co-partnership. [^7]

The European Mission over which Elder Reynolds temporarily presided included England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Holland, Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark. He did not visit the missionaries and members on the continent but kept informed about them through frequent correspondence. He visited the Saints in the British Isles regularly and was not always pleased with his observations:

"Things are not as they used to be some years ago." Many of the folks have degenerated into good old singsong sectarians. Apparently not a spark of the true living spirit of the gospel with them. They would make mighty good Methodists perhaps. They are always glad to see an elder, will give him something to eat, live good moral lives etc, but there's not the true ring about them, they are so fast asleep you can't wake them up. They have been preached to so much that they are tired of it.

At the end of 1871 George recorded that in Britain that year there had been some 7,206 British members, 594 baptisms, and 593 emigrations; in Scandinavia, 4,907 members, 1,020 baptisms, and 467 emigrations. The Swiss-German Mission had 597 members and 40 baptisms, and Holland had 31 members. The European Mission was but a shadow of its former self because of massive emigration and also because proselyting was less successful.

During this time George renewed ties with a former fellow worker in the Office of the President. Elder George Gibbs had returned to his native Britain to oversee the mission's financial affairs. On 27 October 1871 Elder Gibbs measured Elder Reynolds: he was five feet, six and one-quarter inches in height; thirty-six inches around the chest; and thirty-three inches around the waist.

Throughout his mission, Reynolds paid close attention to what was occurring with his family in Utah. He wrote his beloved Polly more than one letter per week, and each was several pages long and filled with much news and kind words. In the early months he gently chided her for not writing more often to him. He yearned for her letters, and his days were bright only when he received a letter from his "sweetheart." He was apologetic when he learned that caring for little Heber, who seemed to be crying all the time and needed much attention, so sapped her strength that she could do little else. He fretted about her situation. Did she have enough money, enough milk, enough flour, enough help? He wrote to others in the city, asking them to look out for her in various ways where they had some specialty. In one letter he referred to friends of the family who were having marital problems. "Heaven preserve me from such a life," he said. "I think one of the greatest blessings pronounced upon my head by the Patriarch was that I should have peace in my family."

Frequently he closed his letters to Polly with such sentiments as the following:

"May God preserve you from all evil, may the wicked have no power over you. May your joy be full in the Lord Jesus, and may God grant that when we meet it may be in happiness, in health and in satisfaction and may our love forever increase for each other is the prayer of your loving husband."

Once he was revelling in memories of the old days a few years previous in the British Mission but quickly added, "I was never happier than now. My married life has been its happiest days."

George referred to his wife with many terms of endearment. "My dear girl" seems to have been his favorite. At the end of the year 1871, George felt especially homesick for Polly: I have been thinking of you, Polly, all this day long, of many little incidents of our past wedded life and before we were "one flesh." Of the "Yes, George" in Florence St, the parting on the "Hudson," the 22 July 1865 [their wedding date], of many endearments, of much love, of the pleasures of house, of the fondness of a wife, of the happiness of trust and faith in those who to us are more than all the world beside, and of many other things that fond recollections will no doubt bring to your mind as to mine. Of these joys, I may say with the poet—"Oh had I the wings of a dove, how soon I would taste them again." But it cannot be so, so I must not think too much of home, wife and babes, but wait patiently until that day dawns which in the providence of the Lord will restore us to each other.

George took great interest in his children, Millie and Heber. He sent Millie many books, most of which were well illustrated, and he hoped that she would learn to read as well as to look at the pictures. He also sent her other mementos and Christmas presents from England. Millie responded by telling her Aunt Julia what she wanted to say in return letters to her "papa." Once Julia held Millie's hand with the pen and helped her write a letter to her father. For her fifth birthday, George wrote Millie a special letter, one that she cherished all her life. He asked her all kinds of things, about the house, about her learning, about the pets and chickens. He expressed his wish for her: "May you grow to be a good and wise woman and live long on the earth to be loved and cherished. I hope now, that you are a good girl. Mamma tells me you are getting to be a big girl, so I hope you are also kind and truthful."

In his letters George expressed deep sorrow to Polly about the deteriorating condition of their little Heber. He fasted and prayed for the benefit of his son and counseled Polly to do the same and also to look to her father and kind brethren in their neighborhood for counsel and comfort. Finally, in May 1872, after George had been gone a year, little Heber died. Several Church and civic dignitaries attended the infant's funeral. The news of his son's death brought George considerable grief and contributed to his returning home somewhat early from his mission. George's sister Julia and his brothers Charley and Harry continued to live with Polly. Julia was a tremendous help in every respect, and Charley seems to have behaved maturely, but Harry was a source of trouble for Polly and nearly anyone else with whom he came in contact. He had troubles in school. He was fired from the Deseret Museum. Septimus Sears hired him at the Twentieth Ward Co-op Store, but Harry also caused trouble there. George formed definite opinions about members of his family. He liked working with Walter in the Liverpool office and commended him for his progress. Nonetheless, he reported to a cousin, "He is a queer stick. So are most of the Reynolds'." To his wife he wrote, "It seems to me there are two races in our family, one of which will make Latter-day Saints and the other have no affection or sympathy for the gospel. On the one side are myself, Julia, Walter, and Charley, on the other Arthur, Milly, Ned & Harry. I hope the result will be higher than my expectations."

Albert Carrington returned to Liverpool on 21 May 1872, and on the following day, George learned of little Heber's death. During the early months of 1872 George had often mentioned in his journal and letters the incessant rainy weather that was adversely affecting his health. Because of his declining health, George was to be sent to London for a month's "holiday" to recuperate, but after further consideration, President Carrington released George to go home. On 26 June Elder Reynolds sailed for America on an emigrant ship carrying Scandinavian Saints.

The voyage lasted thirteen days. After seven more days by railroad, he arrived in Salt Lake City, where he was greeted by an anxious family on 17 July. George and Polly had sorely missed each other and were grateful to be together again. He was also pleased to be reunited with his daughter Millie and his sister Julia.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unless otherwise noted, information for this chapter is drawn from George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, 1872-74.
[^2] See Doctrine and Covenants 132:34, 61-65; Orson Pratt, The Seer 1 (March 1853): 41; Richard S. Van Wagoner, Mormon Polygamy: A History (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1986), pp. 246-47.
[^3] "Autobiographical Sketch of George Reynolds," p. 3.
[^4] "Editorial Thoughts," Juvenile Instructor 6 (30 September 1871): 156.
[^5] Star 33 (3 October 1871): 632.
[^6] Thomas G. Alexander and James B. Allen, Mormons and Gentiles: A History of Salt Lake City (Boulder, Colo.: Pruett Publishing Co., 1984), pp. 94-95.
[^7] G.R., "Our Highest Interest," Millennial Star 34 (25 June 1872): 408-9.
