Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 6

Home Again

Although he was very pleased to be home again, George still continued to suffer from fever and nervousness; likewise, Polly remained ill. But a month later, in mid August, they were feeling much better. George's sister Julia accompanied them to the Endowment House, where they officiated in numerous baptisms for the deceased relatives George had learned about while in England. [^1]

On 27 August 1872 George returned to work as a recorder of baptisms and sealings in the Endowment House. That assignment lasted only two days, for Brigham Young asked George to act as treasurer of the Salt Lake Theatre. Later that year Brigham promoted George to be general manager and theatre supervisor as well.

George enjoyed his assignment with the theatre because of his interest in drama, but he experienced difficulty as a manager because of conflicting advice from previous managers and the sheer mass of duties. During the winter, attendance suffered from foul weather, a smallpox scare, and an epidemic afflicting horses, which caused fewer people to attend because they could not ride in their buggies. George later arranged for his daughters Millie and Alice to act in bit parts in dramatic productions, even after he no longer worked in the theatre. George continued as manager until June 1873, when Brigham Young sold the theatre to a private group. George then returned to the Office of the President and worked as a clerk on Church records.

In late 1872 the Reynolds family received word that George's mother and two more brothers had joined the Church and would emigrate to Utah the next spring. Knowing his house could not hold three more people, George contracted with his father-in-law to build a substantial addition, which was ready when his mother and brothers arrived on 24 July 1873.

Meanwhile, George was called anew as superintendent of the Twentieth Ward Sunday School and secretary of the ward cooperative store. He was also reelected to the board of regents of the University of Deseret. George Reynolds was back in the mainstream of Utah and Church affairs.

George Reynolds loved the Sunday School cause. He agreed with his mentor George Q. Cannon that Zion would not flourish unless her youth were properly trained in the principles of the gospel. Just before Reynolds returned from his second mission in the summer of 1872, Elder Cannon had brought all of the emerging ward Sunday Schools in the Church, most of them still in Salt Lake County, into a centrally administered Deseret Sunday School Union. Every ward in the Church was charged to start a Sunday School. Elder Cannon's Juvenile Instructor served as the semiofficial organ for the Union, and teachers often drew material for their classes from it. Before his mission, George had written 144 articles for the magazine, mostly either Bible stories or descriptions of various animals. Now he assisted Elder Cannon by compiling the editorials, particularly when the apostle went to Washington, D.C., as Utah's territorial delegate.

As superintendent again of his own ward's Sunday School, George sought ways to create student interest and rapport. He pioneered an idea that soon caught on in other wards. He devised an out-of-class activity and fund-raiser on Pioneer Day, 24 July 1873, at a beach on the Great Salt Lake. More than seven hundred students and parents attended.

Exactly a year later the Deseret Sunday School Union hosted a "Juvenile Jubilee" in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in honor of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first Sunday School in Utah. George Reynolds was one of twenty-three executive committee members who planned the event. He was in charge of the finances. Nearly ten thousand Sunday School children from four counties—Salt Lake, Utah, Davis, and Weber—crowded into the Tabernacle, filling the aisles. Numerous choirs and bands organized for the occasion. George eventually left his ward Sunday School program, but he remained with the general Deseret Sunday School Union his entire life.

Professionally, George continued as a clerk, cataloging Church records for the First Presidency. In 1873-74, Brigham Young spent the first of several winters in "Utah Dixie" at his new home in Saint George. Reynolds helped keep the work current in the Office of the President in Salt Lake City. In 1874 President Young returned to Salt Lake City, exuberant about renewing the united orders in Zion, based loosely on the economic program introduced by Joseph Smith in the 1830s. He commenced organizing city wards into separate united orders, beginning with George's Twentieth Ward. George was elected secretary of his ward's order on 29 April 1874. In a letter to Joseph F. Smith, counselor in the First Presidency, George bore witness of the united order:

When President Young . . . proclaimed to us the necessity of entering into the United Order of Zion, I received a testimony of its truth, I realized that it was the only means by which we could be saved from the evils that were encompassing us around and taking deep root in our midst. . . . The further we hold off from this the greater openings we give for wrong doing, and the longer shall we be at arriving at the unity of the faith.

For several years after his immigration to Utah, George remained monogamous. But because he worked closely with Church leaders, who in public and private frequently advocated that most worthy and loyal Mormon men enter what was known as the "principle," George inevitably considered marrying a second wife. No doubt George involved Polly in the decision, for he would have been fully conversant with the "law of Sarah," [^2] which provided that the first wife agree to the second marriage and help select the second wife.

By January 1873 George had concluded to enter polygamy. He wrote to Amelia Jane Schofield, daughter of the Church's branch president in Manchester, England, asking her to become his second wife. Amelia immediately accepted his proposal and would have emigrated that year to America if Albert Carrington had not objected to the match and delayed her emigration. Carrington may have objected because by now he disliked or distrusted Reynolds. In private correspondence, George had shown that he was put off by Carrington's obvious pompousness, so there probably was mutual antipathy.

Meanwhile George entered plural marriage in another way that was becoming common: he was married by proxy to deceased women. On 24 February he was sealed in the Endowment House to Rosalie Cundle, a second cousin and his "childish sweetheart," and to distant cousins Alice Tautz, Kate Tautz, Eliza Ann Tautz, and Henriette Francis Tautz. George's sister Julia acted as proxy for these women in the ceremonies. George firmly believed that he would have claim to these women in the hereafter.

George and Polly were blessed with two more daughters during this period: Alice Louise, born 1 April 1873, and Florence Mary (Florry), born 13 July 1874. Both were premature births and the girls were small, but both fortunately became healthy children.

In early 1874 Amelia Jane Schofield chose to emigrate to Utah in spite of any protests and marry George. On 3 August President Daniel H. Wells married George and Amelia in the Endowment House. George took this step "most thoroughly convinced that Plural marriage was the Law of the Lord, to fulfil that law and escape condemnation and His displeasure." He added, "This I did conscientiously and to carry out my most deep seated religious convictions." [^3]

Amelia moved into the Reynolds household, which consisted of George, Polly, their three daughters, George's mother, his sister, and his four brothers. Once again the house was bursting at the seams with three adult men, four adult women, two teenage boys, and three children. Obviously there would have been some strain. Another addition was started on the house.

In October 1874, just as George Reynolds was settling into his new domestic arrangements, he suddenly became an important public figure in Utah: the First Presidency of the Church called upon him to be the polygamy "test case." Before this case played itself out, George would suffer through three court trials, his name would become a household word nationwide as George Reynolds v. United States was argued and decided before the United States Supreme Court, and he would be imprisoned for eighteen months.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gustive O. Larson, The "Americanization" of Utah for Statehood (San Marino, Calif.: Huntington Library, 1971), p. 59.
[^2] Ibid., p. 60.
[^3] Ibid., p. 65; Gustive O. Larson, "Government, Politics, and Conflict," in Richard D. Poll, et al., eds., Utah's History (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), pp. 250-51.
