Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 7

Chosen as the Polygamy "Test Case"

The "polygamy question" had been heating up between the federal government and the Latter-day Saint hierarchy for several years. Beginning with the first notice taken of the Mormon marriage practices in the early 1850s and the Church's official acknowledgment of the practice by Orson Pratt in 1852, antagonism increased in America. Throughout the 1850s the Saints defended their practice of polygamy on religious, moral, and political grounds, while national politicians mounted an offensive against it. The Republican Party, in its 1856 presidential platform, and immediately thereafter the Democrats, launched an antipolygamy propaganda campaign. The "institution of polygamy, and the temporal power of the Church which insured its survival, became the focal points of attack in the federal crusade to 'americanize' the Mormon community." [^1] Although the Morrill Anti-Bigamy Bill, signed by President Abraham Lincoln on 8 July 1862, was designed to punish and prevent the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory, President Lincoln did not enforce that law during the rebellion of the southern states. And Mormons responded to the law by performing numerous new polygamous marriages. [^2]

After the Civil War, federal officers found it useless to make arrests for polygamy offenses; the Utah Territorial Legislature had extended criminal jurisdiction to the territorial probate courts and appointed trusted Mormon leaders as probate judges. Furthermore, plural marriages were performed secretly: no public records were available. Consequently, no convictions were obtained under the 1862 law, and there would be none as long as Mormons retained control of the courts through the elective and appointive processes.

This church-state issue received national publicity in 1869 when United States Vice President Schuyler Colfax visited Salt Lake City. There a member of the Church's Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, John Taylor, engaged Colfax in public debate. Colfax insisted that Mormons were defiantly breaking the law; Taylor asserted that they were practicing a religious belief protected under the first amendment to the Constitution. The debate ended in a stalemate, each side believing he had convincingly stated his case.

Meanwhile, several bills strengthening the Morrill Act of 1862 were introduced in Congress. Though none was enacted, the 1870 Cullom Bill came close. This legislation would have empowered the president's choice of governor to appoint local judges, notaries, and sheriffs. Polygamists would have been barred from naturalization, voting, and holding public office. Wives would have been permitted to testify against husbands. Furthermore, the president could have employed the military to enforce this law's provisions. And because the bill echoed recent measures to reconstruct the South, it aroused nationwide attention.

To the surprise of Eastern Mormon-watchers, three thousand Mormon women, including George Reynolds's wife Polly, gathered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle to draft a protest against the Cullom Bill. Even though the House of Representatives passed the bill, it was kept off the Senate floor by an outcry in leading newspapers against a repeat of the Utah War fiasco and by the lobbying of those with transcontinental railroad financial interests. [^3]

Throughout his term, President Ulysses S. Grant, frustrated by the failed Cullom Bill, continued to push the Congress to act. He appointed General J. Wilson Shaffer as governor of Utah and James B. McKean as chief justice. Shaffer died after a few months, but not before challenging Mormon control of the territorial militia. McKean, a New York lawyer associated with the earliest Republican opposition to polygamy, launched what he considered to be a holy crusade against plural marriage. He proceeded to adjudicate as if the Cullom Bill were indeed the law. By allowing the United States marshal to impanel juries, he made possible numerous convictions. He indicted Brigham Young for "lascivious cohabitation" in 1871 and announced that the case was really one of "federal authority versus polygamic theocracy." [^4]

Judge McKean was encouraged by zealous Utah anti-Mormons, who were collectively labeled the "gentile ring" [^5] by Church leaders. McKean's crusade was temporarily derailed, however, when the United States Supreme Court ruled in April 1872 that juries had been illegally drawn. McKean was ridiculed in the nation's press. It was during this tense time that Albert Carrington was recalled from the European Mission presidency, leaving George Reynolds to serve in his stead as acting president.

McKean's failure emphasized the necessity of congressional support if there were to be a successful attack on the Mormon theocratic dominion. Representative Luke Poland of Vermont introduced compromise legislation in 1874 that gave United States district courts exclusive civil and criminal jurisdiction; it also provided that jury lists be drawn by the district court clerk (usually a "gentile") and the judicial district probate judge (usually a Mormon), thus assuring equal representation. The bill passed and was signed by President Grant in June 1874. [^6] In October Judge McKean organized a grand jury under the provisions of the Poland Act.

William Carey, United States prosecuting attorney for Utah, began seeking indictments against polygamists. He threatened arrest and trial of several leading Church authorities. The lack of public records of polygamous marriages and the fact that most prominent polygamists had entered the practice before the passage of the 1862 Morrill Act stifled Carey. The matter came to a head on 21 October 1874 when George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young's counselor and Utah Territory's delegate to the United States House of Representatives, was arrested on charges of polygamy. If Cannon had been required to go to trial, he would have been prevented from returning to Congress. [^7] Federal harassment once again hit close to home. Church officials had to act quickly to avoid additional embarrassment as well as the difficult court cases involving the hierarchy, as had occurred in 1871 and 1872. Their solution lay in establishing a "test case" of the 1862 Morrill Act.

As early as 1866 Brigham Young had discussed with federal officials the possibility of deciding the constitutionality of the 1862 Morrill Act. Church officials were confident that if they could plead their position before the United States Supreme Court, the antipolygamy law would be ruled unconstitutional. [^8] George C. Bates, who preceded Carey as United States district attorney in Utah, had advocated in 1872 that three or four leading Mormons be indicted for polygamy so that the question could be settled through the courts. [^9] After negotiating with Mormon authorities in the summer of 1874, Carey agreed that if a test case were provided, other proceedings would be dropped. [^10] These secret negotiations were successful, and on 21 October 1874, the evening of George Q. Cannon's arrest, Cannon, representing the First Presidency, asked his friend and protégé George Reynolds to act as the test case for the Church.

In his autobiographical sketch written two years later, George wrote:

In October 1874 it was agreed between the U.S. Prosecuting Attorney [William Carey] and the Presidency of the Church that a case should be gotten up, to test the constitutionality of the law of 1862 (the Anti-Polygamy Act) and that other prosecutions should be stayed in the mean time. I was asked to step to the front. I willingly complied and afforded the prosecution such information with regard to my marriages and the names of important witness as I thought could prove the facts desired. [^11]

The myth persists that George Reynolds volunteered to stand in as the test case. In reality he "volunteered" only in the sense of willingly accepting the desires of his leaders in the Church. Loyalty to Church leaders was always one of George's chief attributes. He wrote of how he was approached:

On the evening of Wednesday Oct. 21st, I, accompanied by my wife Amelia visited bro Edwin Dowden, on my return, whilst passing the south side of the temple block I met bro Cannon, who informed me (in substance) that it had been decided among the brethren of the Presidents Council to bring a test case of the law of 1862 (Anti-Polygamy Act) before the court and that it had been decided to present my name before the grand jury. [^12]

Selecting Reynolds was President Cannon's idea, [^13] and since he was intimately acquainted with the thirty-two-year-old Church employee, it was he who approached Reynolds. So responsive was George Reynolds to the brethren's desires that he provided President Cannon with the names of witnesses by early the next morning. By prearrangement, on Friday, 23 October 1874, the district attorney examined George Reynolds and the designated witnesses; Reynolds was indicted for bigamy, a felony. On Monday, 26 October, George pleaded not guilty and was released on a twenty-five-hundred-dollar bond provided by Salt Lake City businessmen. [^14] According to historian Orson Whitney, both the bond and the bail were established by previous agreement between United States Attorney Carey and the defendant's counsel, one of the few Mormon lawyers, J. G. Sutherland. [^15]

The Reynolds trial would have perhaps proceeded quietly if it had been held immediately, but an extremely tense situation had developed by the time George's trial began on 31 March 1875, five months later. During those months George Reynolds changed from a cooperative defendant, willing to risk conviction so that the law might be tested in the courts, to an uncooperative defendant, anxious to be acquitted. Private discussions and decisions in the Office of the President of the Church during this time are not available, so the reasons for a change of tactic on the part of Church leaders can only be surmised. But it is obvious that numerous provocative acts by the district attorney's office and by the federally appointed judiciary contributed to the Church leaders' change.

First was the continued harassment of George Q. Cannon. Despite the agreement to drop charges against other Church leaders after the indictment of George Reynolds, Carey, influenced by the "gentile ring," arranged for the arrest and indictment of George Q. Cannon on 12 November 1874. When Cannon and his attorneys asked that he be given a speedy trial so that he would be able to serve in the Congress that December, Carey claimed that the docket was filled and he would be unavailable for a few weeks. Even though Cannon was freed on bail to serve in the Congress during winter term, he and other Church leaders undoubtedly smarted over the violation of their agreement with the district attorney.

Second was the persecution of Thomas E. Ricks of Logan. Ricks, a leading Mormon in Logan and former Cache County sheriff, had been impanelled on McKean's October 1874 grand jury. Probably having learned of Ricks's polygamous marriages through their contact with him on that jury, Carey and his associates indicted him for polygamy. While searching for bondsmen, Carey "resorted to a ruse" and had Ricks arrested for first-degree murder. In 1860 Ricks, as sheriff, had killed a renegade horse thief, according to Ricks, while the prisoner was trying to escape. Ricks was held in the Utah penitentiary without bail to await trial, which did not come up until March 1875, just before the Reynolds case. In early November, Ricks and his attorneys sought abatement (annulling or quashing) of the charges against him on the grounds that the grand jury that had indicted him had been improperly impanelled, but Judge McKean refused to grant the abatement. [^16]

By early December, Church leaders determined to try to obtain abatement of the charges against George Reynolds as well, and on identical grounds as those of the Ricks case. [^17] This effort marks the change in attitude of George Reynolds and Church leaders in the "test case." Thereafter, no cooperation existed between the prosecution and the defense.

Because of this ordeal, Brigham Young transferred George out of the Office of the President to the accounting office of ZCMI (Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution), the Church's cooperative retail store. George had first been offered the position of tithing clerk in Logan, but after consulting with his family, he decided to remain in Salt Lake City.

Life was stressful for the Reynolds family during the period between October 1874 and March 1875. There was considerable strain with two wives, one of them, Amelia, having just joined the family, and many in-laws living in the same house. Amelia suffered through her first pregnancy during this public furor. George's mother became increasingly difficult.

Through it all, George did not complain, at least not publicly nor in his private journal. His first loyalty was to God and the Church's leaders. He was obedient, even if the costs were heavy.

Footnotes

United States of America v. Geo Reynolds, located in National Archives-Denver Branch (hereafter referred to as Reynolds Case Papers); Salt Lake Daily Herald, 17 October 1874, p. 3; George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, 26 October 1874.

---
Notas:
[^1] Robert N. Baskin, Reminiscences of Early Utah, pp. 5-22, 156-58; Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon and Sons, 1898), 2:674-77, 731.
[^2] Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 9 vols. (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983-85), 7:221.
[^3] Salt Lake Daily Herald, 1 April 1875, p. 3.
[^4] Salt Lake Tribune, 1 April 1875, p. 4.
[^5] Ibid.; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 1 April 1875, p. 3.
[^6] Baskin, Reminiscences of Early Utah, pp. 62-63, 66.
[^7] As cited in ibid., p. 66.
[^8] Evening News, 3 April 1875, p. 3; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 1 April 1875, p. 3; Salt Lake Tribune, 1 April 1875, p. 4.
[^9] Salt Lake Daily Herald, 2 April 1875, p. 3; Salt Lake Tribune, 2 April 1875, p. 4; Deseret News, 3 April 1875, p. 2.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Salt Lake Daily Herald, 3 April 1875, p. 3; Deseret News, 6 April 1875, p. 2; Whitney, History of Utah, 2:773-74.
[^13] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, April 1875.
[^14] Ibid.; Junius F. Wells, "A Living Martyr," Contributor 2 (February 1881): 154-55.
[^15] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, April 1875; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 11 April 1875, p. 3; Reynolds Case Papers.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, April 1875.
