Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 8

On the Defense

By March 1875 animosity had risen to fever pitch between Mormon officials and federal appointees Judge James B. McKean and United States Attorney William Carey. Church leaders, who once had wanted to cooperate with a test case, now wanted to get George Reynolds off the hook. Concurrent circumstances that drew considerable national attention to Utah contributed to the ill will and the circus atmosphere.

First was the hostility between George C. Bates, the non- Mormon district attorney previous to Carey, and Robert N. Baskin, Salt Lake City attorney and chief intellectual leader of the gentile ring. In 1872, when Bates became frustrated with Judge McKean's zeal to embarrass Brigham Young in the courts, he had traveled to Washington to consult with the United States attorney general. McKean followed Bates to assert his side. President Grant favored McKean's view, and when Bates would not resign, he was fired and replaced by William Carey on 10 December. When Bates returned to Utah, the Church hired him to defend those indicted as a result of McKean's crusade.

Robert N. Baskin, a lawyer who had come to Utah in 1865, was as eager as McKean to rid Utah of theocracy and polygamy. Baskin desired peace in Utah so that he could help develop Utah's vast mineral wealth. He was a staunch advocate of the separation of church and state and of laissez faire. He was a coauthor of the Cullom Bill and served as an assistant district attorney under Bates. When Bates became sympathetic to the Mormon cause, however, the two men became inveterate enemies. Unquestionably, their mutual distrust contributed to the pervasive tension that existed when Reynolds came to trial. Both Bates and Baskin played key roles in the Reynolds case. [^1]

Two other trials involving Church leaders and affecting their reputations were taking place about the same time as the Reynolds case. The first was the divorce case between Brigham Young and Ann Eliza Webb, one of his plural wives. Unknown to Brigham, Ann Eliza was still legally married to her first husband when she and Brigham married in 1868. In 1873 she filed for divorce in Judge McKean's court, thus creating sensational national news, especially because she asked for alimony. On 25 February 1875, McKean ordered President Young to pay Ann Eliza ninety-five hundred dollars for attorney's fees, alimony, and the education of her children. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the territory. Brigham Young legally should not have been required to pay until the appeal was decided, but McKean charged Brigham with contempt of court when he failed to pay the fee by the appointed date. McKean sentenced President Young on 11 March to twenty-four hours imprisonment and fined him twenty-five dollars. President Young submitted to the overnight stay in the penitentiary along with hundreds of armed disciples to ensure his safety. Members of the Church did not want another Carthage.

The nation's press ridiculed McKean's decision, and even President Grant lost patience with this overzealousness. Within days the chief justice was removed from office. "Glory Hallelujah the Lord has heard and answered our Prayers," exulted Mormon apostle Wilford Woodruff. "McKean has been the most unjust tyrannical Judge ever sent to Utah and we have prayed for his removal for a long time." [^2] Thus Judge McKean was discharged before he had a chance to preside over the Reynolds trial. Associate Justice Philip H. Emerson, from Michigan, who over the years had developed a reputation for fairness, presided instead.

The second related trial took place in the Second District Court in Beaver immediately after Reynolds's Salt Lake City trial. John D. Lee, who had participated in the Mountain Meadows Massacre in 1857, had finally been found and arrested. The case obviously was important to the anti-Mormon judicial crusade because of its national propaganda value. Lee's trial was postponed until Carey and Baskin finished with the Reynolds case so they could go to Beaver as prosecuting attorneys; George C. Bates was Lee's defense attorney, as he was for Reynolds.

Hence, the Reynolds trial took place in the midst of a verbal war between the adamant and politically influential gentile ring and the Mormon hierarchy, represented now by George Reynolds, a relatively unimportant employee in the Office of the President. George's trial lasted two days: Wednesday, 31 March, and Thursday, 1 April 1875. President Grant sent General Benjamin R. Cowen, assistant Secretary of the Interior, to be an observer at the trial. Attorneys for the defense were J. G. Sutherland, George C. Bates, and Zerubbabel Snow.

During the first morning a jury of seven Mormons and five non-Mormons was selected, but not without some labored discussion with prospective jurors. Some Mormon jurors indicated their belief that the 1862 antipolygamy law was unconstitutional, but that if the court ruled the law constitutional and if the evidence warranted it, they would return a guilty verdict. [^3]

The calling of witnesses for the prosecution began in the afternoon. The prosecution naturally had a full slate of close friends and relatives of George Reynolds because of the voluntary list given the district attorney in October when Reynolds was indicted. Carey indicated that his purpose was to prove that Reynolds married Mary Ann Tuddenham in 1865 as his first and lawful wife and that he married Amelia Jane Schofield while still married to his lawful wife. Fourteen witnesses were called and each was "unfriendly" to the prosecution, as Carey tried to elicit definitive information about George Reynolds's marriages, particularly his second one. [^4]

Each witness said as little as possible and avoided giving proof of George and Amelia's marital relationship. Indeed their testimonies bordered not merely on evasion but on lying. For those devoted Latter-day Saints, the welfare of the Church was the most important consideration. For example, George's sister Julia testified that she lived in the Reynolds household and that there was another woman besides Mary Ann (Polly) in the house, but that she did not know if the defendant and the other woman cohabited as husband and wife. Another witness, George's neighbor James Evans, reported that he had seen another woman in the house but had never heard the defendant speak of her as his wife. Daniel H. Wells, Reynolds's friend and officiator of his marriage to Amelia in the Endowment House, testified that he could not remember performing a marriage for George Reynolds on the third of last August and that he had no record. When Orson Pratt was asked if he knew whether marriage records were kept in the Endowment House or in the separate branches of the Church, he answered that he did not know and, furthermore, he did not know whose duty it was to keep such records. [^5]

During Daniel H. Wells's examination, Baskin, Carey's unofficial aide, quietly discussed with the United States marshal that Reynolds's second marriage was not being proved. At this point Baskin obtained a subpoena for Amelia Reynolds and instructed Arthur Pratt, a deputy marshal who had apostatized from the Church, to procure a buggy and bring the witness to the courthouse immediately. In the meantime, the prosecution had exhausted its resources and Carey appeared befuddled. Mormons in the courtroom jubilantly leaned over the railing, congratulating Reynolds on his easy victory. Baskin then indicated to Carey that Reynolds's second wife was en route. Carey requested and received a short recess. [^6]

The marshal soon escorted the obviously pregnant Amelia in by the side door where she could be easily seen. General Cowen, the government observer, wrote, "As the marshal stepped aside from the door and revealed the person of Mrs. Reynolds No. 2 framed in the doorway, the consternation of the Mormon crowd was startling. The ghost of Joe Smith would scarcely have produced a more profound sensation." [^7] Because Amelia had not been previously subpoenaed, she had not been instructed on how to evade giving the prosecution relevant information. Amelia calmly testified that she had been married to George (pointing to him) the previous August by President Daniel H. Wells. [^8] Following her testimony, the court adjourned in pandemonium.

During the intervening hours prior to the next morning's session, Church leaders apparently decided to concede without further argument that George was plurally married and to make a case that the principle of plural marriage was a religious rite and that Reynolds entered into his second marriage as a religious duty. When the court convened, William Carey of the prosecution rested his case. Defense Attorney J. G. Sutherland explained that Daniel H. Wells, who was not present in the courtroom, could now remember marrying George and Amelia on 3 August, and that this admission established two marriages. Sutherland then read a lengthy statement discussing the history of plural marriage as a principle in the Church, including:

They [the Mormons] believe it [polygamy] to be a divine institution, and they will be indebted for their highest happiness in another life to their fidelity and obedience to it in this; that this defendant holds their faith . . . and [is] a sincere believer in the verity of said revelation [about plural marriage], and that it was his solemn duty to obey it. . . . They [the Mormons] are willing to bear [pains and penalties of the law] rather than lose the high estate in another life to be gained by celestial marriage. [^9]

The prosecution objected to the testimony as irrelevant, and Judge Emerson sustained the objection. The defense offered no further evidence. Judge Emerson charged the jury, indicating that Congress had the constitutional right to pass the Morrill Anti-Bigamy law and that a person's religious belief "can have nothing to do with this case." He explained that "religious liberty is not violated when the citizen is called upon to answer for his external acts, which are in violation of a valid law of the land." [^10]

The jury then retired and returned thirty minutes later with a verdict of guilty. The defense counsel moved that the court set aside the verdict on grounds of a mistrial, the defendant not having been arraigned or given opportunity to plead to the indictment. For a few moments, confusion reigned. The judge then determined that Reynolds, indeed, had not been allowed to plead either guilty or not guilty. Judge Emerson ruled that the verdict be set aside. District Attorney Carey then insisted upon a new trial immediately. Once again, there was confused discussion. Finally Reynolds approached his counsel, whispering. Sutherland withdrew his motion and requested that the defendant now enact the irregularity of pleading not guilty so that the case could eventually be heard by the Supreme Court of the United States. The court took the question of the validity of the proceeding under advisement until the next Tuesday, 6 April. [^11]

Immediately after this trial, the more famous George Q. Cannon was brought to trial in the same Third District Court. Following arguments, the court dismissed his case because of the United States statute of limitations. [^12]

On Tuesday, 6 April, George Reynolds learned that the prosecuting and defense attorneys had altered his court documents to avoid holding a new trial. [^13] Judge Emerson did not make a judgment against Reynolds, however, because, in his opinion, the Poland Law did not require such judgment. But Carey and Baskin, chagrined by their mismanagement of aspects of Reynolds's trial and their loss of Cannon, pressed the court for a judgment against Reynolds, asking that he be imprisoned pending the appeal to the higher court. [^14]

Judge Emerson called Reynolds into court on Saturday, 10 April, and sentenced him to one year of hard labor in the territorial penitentiary, commencing that day, and the payment of a three-hundred-dollar fine. When Reynolds's attorneys made an appeal to the territorial supreme court, the judge accepted Reynolds's bonds and the prisoner was given liberty. In this tense atmosphere, rumors spread that George had been taken to the penitentiary and had been rescued by a body of Saints. [^15]

On the following Wednesday and Thursday, Reynolds's case unexpectedly came before the court again. George was apprehended in the Office of the President and was taken to the courtroom, but he later received an apology from the judge. Carey and Baskin continued their insistence that Reynolds serve his prison term. Judge Emerson finally ruled that Reynolds would remain free until his appeal came before the territorial supreme court. [^16]

At last, temporary peace came to George and his family. The stress had had a telling effect upon them. Later that month, April, George was transferred from the ZCMI accounting office to the store's new building as cashier in the retail department. [^17]

By June George's mother had had enough of Utah and decided to return to her homeland, taking Ned and Harry with her. "Neither of the three had any comprehension of the gospel and my mother could not reconcile herself to the difference of the surrounding of Salt Lake City as compared with what she was used to in London," George confided in his journal. He added that Harry was actually opposed to the Church. Yet both boys spoke of returning to Utah. [^18] George's mother died six years later in London. Both young men returned to Utah after her death, with Ned dying a year later himself. Harry never became an active member of the Church.

Soon the Utah Supreme Court, consisting of the three federally appointed district judges in Utah Territory, were to rule on the appeal. George, his family, and his friends awaited the outcome.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, June 1875; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 20 June 1875, p. 3.
[^2] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, June 1875.
[^3] Ibid., July-August 1875.
[^4] Ibid., October-November 1875; Reynolds Case Papers.
[^5] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, November 1875.
[^6] Ibid.; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 24 November 1875, p. 3; seal of George Reynolds appointment to the Salt Lake City Council, Reynolds Collection, no. 11.
[^7] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, December 1875.
[^8] "Interview of W. Cox with George Reynolds," handwritten manuscript in Reynolds Collection, no. 25.
[^9] Reynolds Case Papers; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 10 December 1875, p. 3.
[^10] Reynolds Case Papers; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 11 December 1875, p. 3.
[^11] Deseret Weekly News 15 (December 1875): 732.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] Ibid.; Reynolds Case Papers.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] "Interview of W. Cox with George Reynolds."
[^18] Reynolds Case Papers; Salt Lake Daily Herald, 11 December 1875, p. 3.
