Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 9

Awaiting the Decision

On 7 June 1875, the Utah Territorial Supreme Court, consisting

of the three district judges, convened to hear the appeal of Reynolds v. the United States. Reynolds's lawyers, this time better prepared, successfully argued that the grand jury of the original indictment was illegally constructed of twenty-three men. Territorial law required fifteen. On 19 June, the court ruled in favor of Reynolds and set aside his indictment, [^1] causing joy among faithful Latter-day Saints. "The result of the opinion is a signal triumph for Territorial law, and oversees the pet schemes of the ring of over-riding all laws passed by the [Mormon-dominated] Territorial legislature when it suited their purpose in persecuting the people of God," reads Reynolds's journal. [^2]

Carey, Baskin, and their friends of the gentile ring were angered by this ruling of the court and immediately vowed to bring Reynolds to "justice." Throughout the summer, there was surface calm and joy among the Saints.

On 6 July 1875, George's second wife, Amelia, gave birth to her first child, a boy named Sidney. On 5 August, George Reynolds, as part of a general Church reformation movement, was invited to join a united order branch of fifteen men who worked closely with Brigham Young on business matters. Then, on 23 August President Young asked George to return to his office to serve as private secretary, replacing Albert Carrington, who was returning to England as European Mission president. [^3] George was rewarded for having served as the Church's sacrificial lamb. All now seemed normal in the Reynolds household; George's two wives took separate summer vacations. The future seemed secure. But this calmness did not last.

In October 1875 a new grand jury was created that conformed to the legal guidelines of fifteen men (seven Mormons and eight gentiles). Abandoning compassion for Reynolds, who one year previously had voluntarily submitted to indictment as a "test case," United States attorney William Carey brought a new indictment on 30 October. Two days later George was arrested as he was working in the office of President Young. He pleaded not guilty and was admitted to bail until his trial in the United States Third District Court came up on 7 December. [^4]

George, meanwhile, became more closely connected with the Church's hierarchy. On 5 November 1875 he recorded in his journal, "I was rebaptized at the Endowment House, in accord with the general reformation in the Church. Elder Geo Q Cannon baptized me and Elder John Taylor was mouth at my confirmation." [^5] He accompanied Elder Cannon to Pleasant Grove, establishing a united order according to the Church's reformation principles then in effect.

On 20 November, George was appointed to a vacancy on the Salt Lake City council occasioned by the resignations of Theodore McKean and Feramorz Little. [^6] Appointments to local governmental positions, including placement on the ticket of the People's Party (the Church's political party), were decisions of Brigham Young and leading Church councils. The irony of appointing a person to governmental leadership whom the federal government considered a lawbreaker was undoubtedly not lost on George Reynolds and Church leaders. In addition, George Reynolds was called, on 4 December, to be one of seven presidents of the Twenty-fourth Quorum of Seventies and was set apart by members of the First Council of Seventy. [^7]

By December Alexander White of Kansas had arrived in Utah to replace Judge McKean as chief justice and justice of the Third District Court, but his appointment had not yet received Senate confirmation. White replaced Philip H. Emerson as judge for the Reynolds trial. Later, in a reminiscence, Reynolds offered his opinion: "I have always considered that the Judge [White] thought that convicting a polygamist would secure his confirmation to his office by the U. S. Senate, which, however, it did not do; he was not confirmed." [^8] In preparation for Reynolds's second trial, Church leaders employed different legal counsel: P. L. Williams, distinguished attorney for the Oregon Shortline Railroad Company and two prominent non-Mormon (but not unfriendly) Salt Lake City attorneys. Realizing that the prosecution intended to show criminality and demand punishment for Reynolds, the defense determined to prove innocence.

When the trial commenced on Tuesday, 7 December 1875, Williams attempted to have Reynolds's case dismissed on grounds of irregularities surrounding the formation of the latest grand jury. The court then recessed until the next morning to give Carey time to answer the allegations. After lengthy arguments Judge White ruled against each of the defense pleas and ordered Reynolds's trial to proceed.

On Thursday, 9 December, jurors were selected while the deputy marshal sought in vain to locate the prosecution's prime witness, Amelia Reynolds, who had gone into hiding. The court recessed in the late afternoon. At 7:00 p.m. the court reconvened. The prosecution had no difficulty proving George Reynolds's first marriage but offered to prove through testimony of the first trial's court reporter that George was married to a second wife, Amelia Jane Schofield. The defense objected to such novel procedure, and Judge White indicated that he would hear arguments the following morning as to the admissibility of the absent witness's testimony. [^9]

Both sides anxiously awaited White's crucial decision. White allowed the prosecution to introduce the evidence, and after hearing the objections of the defense, ruled that such evidence was valid. Deputy Marshal Arthur Pratt testified that while he was searching for Amelia Reynolds, he encountered the defendant (George Reynolds), who told Pratt that he could search anywhere but he would not find Amelia and she would not testify. With additional cooperative rulings from the court, the prosecution then closed its case. [^10]

Daniel H. Wells took the stand as the defense's first witness. He testified at length of the doctrinal nature of plural marriage and of the importance that entering polygamy had for someone like Reynolds. Wells said that "when male members came to a thorough understanding of the revelation on and principle of plural or celestial marriage, and other circumstances being favorable, if they failed to obey it they would be under condemnation, and would be clipped in their glory in the world to come." [^11]

Orson Pratt then testified "that he knew by the revelations of the Holy Ghost that Joseph Smith, the man through whom the Lord revealed the doctrine of celestial marriage, was a prophet of God." [^12] John Nicholson, a close friend of George Reynolds since their childhood in England, testified that he had heard George favorably preach of plural marriage, that he was a "practical polygamist," and that "an honester man to his convictions of right did not exist." [^13] Reynolds's bishop, John Sharp, indicated that he had given George a certificate indicating that he was worthy to marry a second wife. [^14] After this witness the defense rested its case.

In their final arguments, Reynolds's attorneys took turns arguing that the essential element rested upon the defendant's criminal intent: that Reynolds did not have such intent but was impelled to act under potent religious conviction; that if he refused to enter polygamy, condemnation awaited him hereafter; that polygamy was not a crime but a religious practice; and that the Constitution guaranteed religious freedom to all. [^15]

Judge White then gave a charge to the jury, reminding them that the first trial testimony was valid. He insisted that the central issues to the case were whether Reynolds was married and whether he took a second wife. The jurists' personal opinions as to whether marrying a second wife was a "crime" or not had no relevance. Moreover, White continued, the issue of "criminal intent" was invalid. On the issue of religious freedom, White asserted that there "must be some limits to this high constitutional privilege." [^16]

Some years later, in 1879, in looking back on this experience, George Reynolds insisted that he did not have a fair trial, that prosecuting attorney Carey "was a very poor lawyer, and Judge White turned in and helped him to prosecute." [^17]

The jury returned in two hours with a verdict of guilty. Reynolds's lawyers asked for a ten-day stay of judgment to allow time for preparing an appeal. [^18] On 21 December 1875, Judge Alexander White sentenced George Reynolds to two years of hard labor at the federal house of corrections in Detroit, Michigan, and to pay a five-hundred-dollar fine. [^19] The "hard labor" penalty went beyond the full extent of the law, a judgment that undoubtedly pleased William Carey and Robert Baskin. In his last journal entry for 1875, Reynolds wrote in characteristic understatement, "This year has been one of the most eventful of my history." [^20]

After the verdict was rendered but before the sentencing, Elder John Taylor respectfully took issue with Justice White regarding White's arguments on religious freedom and more particularly on comparing the evils of Hindu suttee with Mormon polygamy. "It is absurd to compare the suttee to polygamy; one is murder, the destruction of life; the other is national economy and the increase and perpetuation of life. Suttee ranks truly with infanticide, both of which are destructive of human life. Polygamy is salvation compared with either and tends, even more than monogamy, to increase and perpetuate the human race." [^21]

George's appeal did not come before the Territorial Supreme Court until 13 June 1876. Meanwhile George was nominated by the People's Party caucus and elected to the Salt Lake City Council. ZCMI shareholders elected him as a director, and Brigham Young appointed him to handle business affairs while he went to Saint George, Utah, for his health. [^22]

Reynolds v. United States was argued before three federally appointed justices of the Utah Territorial Supreme Court in the June term. After hearing arguments from both sides on 13 June, the Court sustained the guilty verdict. The bench ruled that Reynolds was not required to provide witnesses for the state, such as his second wife Amelia, but since he had tried to conceal her, her initial testimony could be admitted as evidence. Antipolygamy bias, typical of the United States at large, was also evident in the territorial supreme court. The original court was not held in error in explaining that polygamy was a crime, "especially too when we remember that this crime has a blighting and blasting influence upon the consciences of all who it touches, as is everyday and everywhere witnessed throughout the Territory." [^23]

George Reynolds and his counsel appealed to the United States Supreme Court in October, but more than eighteen months passed before the case came up. During that time George remained close to Church affairs. When Brigham Young was in Salt Lake City, George was usually at his side. While President Young was staying in Utah's Dixie, he entrusted George with major business responsibilities. George accompanied the prophet on his last trip to Brigham City and on his last carriage trip. When Brigham died on 29 August 1877, George was at his bedside.

George Reynolds then became clerk to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. [^24] This body led the Church until 1880 under the leadership of John Taylor, quorum president. George grew close to President Taylor, as he had to President Young. George continued other assignments: member of the city council, a director of ZCMI, regent of the University of Deseret, superintendent of the Twentieth Ward Sunday School, Deseret Sunday School Union treasurer, a director of the Deseret Telegraph Company, secretary to the board of Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company, and Omaha Bee special correspondent. He resumed writing articles for Sunday School children in the Juvenile Instructor. At the October 1877 general conference, George was called as a home missionary, a calling that required him to address a different ward each Sunday. [^25]

In his own home, George Reynolds presided over a young, rapidly growing plural marriage household. Each wife gave birth to two more children: Polly to Amy on 16 April 1876 and Eleanor (Nellie) on 21 September 1878, and Amelia to Marion (May) on 7 November 1876 and Charles (Charlie) on 6 June 1878. In all, eight young children were in the household: six girls and two boys. Four adults still lived in the home: George, his two wives, and his sister Julia. George wanted to build another house to divide the two families. He had the property but not the funds to construct the dwelling. And his complicated legal battles diverted his attention from his domestic needs.

Sickness also plagued the Reynolds household during this trying period. Little Florry was stricken with pneumonia during the 1875 court trials and did not grow properly during that period. In 1876 everyone in both families came down with serious coughs and colds. Polly suffered from inflammation of the womb and Amelia from inflammation of the bowels. Later the same year all the children caught the measles. This was not a time for optimism in the family. Then, during the height of their dismay in late summer, Polly rallied and became more healthy than she had ever been during her married life. The others also recovered, although Florry remained "quite delicate." [^26]

In 1878 the children all contracted whooping cough and later scarlatina. In 1877 Amelia had a bout of rheumatism. In 1878 Polly had "dropsy" (swollen legs and feet caused by retaining too much water) during her pregnancy and severe pneumonia after the delivery. More than half the time there was some kind of serious sickness in the house. [^27]

These difficulties did not hamper the intellectual development of the children, however. George was eager to give his children the best education available. He had enrolled Millie in Brigham Young's private school along with Young's children. This elite school employed private tutors from England. [^28] When President Young died in 1877, the school was closed, but George worked relentlessly to provide his children with a strong education. Alice Louise recounted her first educational experiences:

My first school was a private school, taught by Miss Izzie Calder, daughter of David O. Calder. I was only four years of age at that time [1877]. My father being English, believed that children might be sent to school very young if the right sort of training was given them. I was wheeled to school in a baby buggy by my mother's maid. This thing did not last very long, for I had only been in attendance three months when the teacher married, and that was the end of the school. Then I was at another private school taught by Hyrum Barton. Neither did this school last long, the only definite recollection I have of it is that the teacher took me in his buggy to see the circus. At six I started regularly to public school [the Twentieth Ward District School]. [^29]

The children received a first-rate education at the district school. Professor T. B. Lewis, a well-educated Virginian and one of Utah's most respected educators, was the teacher. Alice expressed her gratitude for the love of literature and good books instilled in her by Lewis. George Reynolds was not as pleased with the Twentieth Ward School after the departure of Professor Lewis in 1885. [^30]

George's sister Julia took a major role in caring for the children during the 1870s. Alice Louise reminisced:

My childhood was exceptionally happy for I had the constant care of my father's sister, Julia A. Reynolds, who lived in my mother's home for thirteen years before her marriage. My father's sister was very fond of children, and seemed to anticipate most of my wishes. Consequently, I spent much time roaming the hills, picking wild flowers, and watching city creek, in the Canyon, go bubbling down into the heart of Salt Lake. We always had in our home many house plants with which I was familiar. [^31]

Alice's experiences were probably typical of those of the other children in the family during this period. Theirs was a loving home, but one under great stress from the drawn-out legal process leading to a momentous decision that would affect the future course of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and America's doctrine of separation of church and state.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 101:77, 80.
[^2] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, 27 October 1878.
[^3] Ibid., February 1878.
[^4] As cited in ibid.
[^5] As cited in ibid., March 1878.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Ibid., April 1878.
[^9] Ibid., 1878; see Appendix A under Millennial Star for publication information on these series.
[^10] As cited in ibid.
[^11] "The Reynolds Case, Supreme Court of the United States, No. 180—October Term, 1878, George Reynolds, Plaintiff in Error, vs. The United States," a pamphlet in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^12] C. Peter Magrath, "Chief Justice Waite and the 'Twin Relic': Reynolds v. the United States," Vanderbilt Law Review 18 (1965): 523.
[^13] Reynolds Supreme Court Case.
[^14] Magrath, "Chief Justice Waite and the 'Twin Relic,' " pp. 525-27. Ironically, the most influential associate justice of the Supreme Court for this period, Stephen J. Field, agreed with Waite's interpretation of freedom of religion. Field became renowned during the 1870s for advocating natural law and natural rights and declaring that the inalienable rights mentioned in the Declaration of Independence had been incorporated into the Constitution by means of the Fourteenth Amendment.
[^15] Robert G. Dyer, "The Evolution of Social and Judicial Attitudes towards Polygamy," Utah Bar Journal 5 (Spring 1977): 35-45.
[^16] See James L. Clayton, "The Supreme Court, Polygamy and Enforcement of Morals in Nineteenth Century America: An Analysis of Reynolds v. United States," Dialogue 12 (Winter 1979): 54.
[^17] As cited in ibid., p. 53. See also Richard S. Van Wagoner, Mormon Polygamy: A History (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1986), pp. 111-12, 249.
[^18] "Interview with John Taylor and O. J. Hollister in the President's Office 13 June 1879," pamphlet in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library.
[^19] Deseret Evening News, 21 January 1879, p. 2.
[^20] "Interview of W. Cox with George Reynolds," handwritten manuscript in Reynolds Collection, no. 25.
[^21] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (3 May 1879): 142-43.
[^22] Junius F. Wells, "A Living Martyr," Contributor 2 (February 1881): 155.
[^23] George Q. Cannon, A Review of the Decision of the Supreme Court in the Case of Geo. Reynolds vs. the United States (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Printing and Publishing Establishment, 1879).
[^24] As cited in George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, March 1879.
[^25] Ibid., vol. 5, May 1879; Wells, "A Living Martyr," p. 155; petition to President Hayes, 14 May 1879, Reynolds Collection, no. 24.
[^26] "The Petition for Clemency," Millennial Star 41 (16 June 1879): 378.
[^27] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, June 1879.
[^28] George Q. Cannon to John Taylor, 5 June 1879, cited in ibid.
[^29] Charles R. Williams, The Life of Rutherford Birchard Hayes, 2 vols. (New York: Da Capo Press, 1971), 2:225.
[^30] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, June 1879; Christian August Madsen to George Reynolds, 21 June 1879, Reynolds Collection, no. 14; Omaha Bee, 14 June 1879, p. 2.
[^31] Edwin Brown Firmage and Richard Collin Mangrum provided a thorough summary of "the legal contributions of Reynolds" in their Zion and the Courts: A Legal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830- 1900 (Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1989), pp. 151-59. See also Jeremy M. Miller, "A Critique of the Reynolds Decision," Western State University Law Review 11 (Spring 1984): 165-98, and Richard S. Van Wagoner, Mormon Polygamy: A History (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1986), pp. 221-22.
