Bruce A. Van Orden, Prisoner for Conscience' Sake: The Life of George Reynolds ( 1992)

CHAPTER 11

Prisoner for Conscience' Sake

John Taylor, George Q. Cannon, and others of the Church hierarchy felt deep sorrow that their friend George Reynolds would be required to suffer in prison. They were certain that he would be pardoned or released early and not have to serve the full two years of his sentence, but they also believed that his sacrifice would benefit the entire Church. Throughout his eighteen-month incarceration, George was recognized by other Latter-day Saints as a "living martyr to the cause of Zion" who served as "a representative prisoner suffering for the conscientious faith of the whole people." The Morrill Act, under which he had been indicted, posed little legal threat to his brethren: the law required proof of a second marriage, and federal officers found witnesses scarce indeed among the Saints. Most Mormons believed that once the Reynolds case was over and George had successfully sacrificed himself for the sake of the kingdom, there would be few, if any, further prosecutions for polygamy. [^1]

Throughout George's imprisonment, Congressional delegate George Q. Cannon worked tirelessly to commute or reduce his two-year sentence. At length an act of Congress reduced his sentence by six months. The Church provided George's family with every needful resource in his absence; in fact, his family members realized that they would not "fare as well" financially after his eventual release. [^2] Moreover, the Utah Sunday School children donated nick- els to pay George's five-hundred-dollar fine.

Church members, especially children, offered regular prayers in his behalf during worship services. Leading Church and community officials visited George frequently after he returned to Utah to complete his sentence in the Territorial Penitentiary. He also received countless encouraging letters from friends and admirers. When he was released in January 1881, George was hailed as a returning champion and honored with reporting his "mission" in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square.

Despite attempts by the Church and its members to mitigate the severity of George's confinement, prison life for him was not an easy cross to bear. His family missed him, and several family members, including his first wife, Polly, suffered from ill health. Two of his children died during his imprisonment. George himself endured primitive and extremely unpleasant conditions in the vermin-infested Utah penitentiary in Sugar House, four miles from the heart of Salt Lake City. Ironically, George suffered worse conditions in the penitentiary in Utah than he did in Nebraska. In the long run, however, George's stint as the sacrificial lamb for the Church firmly entrenched him as a hero among the Latter-day Saints and helped set the stage for further service in the Church he loved.

As soon as it was obvious that George would not be pardoned by United States President Rutherford B. Hayes, Church head John Taylor directed on 14 June 1879 that George instruct L. John Nuttall in the responsibilities of chief secretary in the Office of the President. [^3] George's association with Nuttall, begun under such unhappy circumstances, remained close throughout the rest of their lives. Later the same day President Taylor and Elder Franklin D. Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve laid their hands on Reynolds's head and pronounced a blessing upon him:

Bro. George Reynolds, in the name of Jesus Christ and by authority of the Holy Priesthood, we lay our hands upon thy head to bless thee under the peculiar circumstances under which thou art placed at the present time, having offered up thyself as a substitute of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this test case. . . . We bless thee and ask our Heavenly Father to cause his Holy Spirit may rest upon thee to enlighten thee and enlighten us and all who are interested in the interests of the church and kingdom of God and pertaining to those great revelations which he has given to us for our guidance in our social relations. . . . That thou mayest have dreams and visions and the manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord to be with thee daily, and that thou mayest feel to rejoice that thou has been accounted worthy to place thyself in jeopardy because of the wickedness and corruption of the world (being in conflict with the laws of God). . . . And set thee apart to this office, as a sacrifice in behalf of Israel. [^4]

Some of the promised blessings came during George's prison stay.

After spending a last Sunday on his own recognizance with his family (some of the rabid anti-Mormons had demanded that he be put in chains until Monday), George bade his saddened family farewell early on Monday morning, 16 June. His household consisted of Polly and her five children, Amelia and her three children, his sister Julia, and his brother Charles. By this time George had added two rooms to the back of the house for Amelia and her children, but obviously there was still insufficient room for such a large household. Sadly George trudged alone the mile to the Union Pacific depot, arriving at 7:00 a.m. [^5]

George surrendered himself to two federal marshals at the depot. A large group of Saints gathered to send him off "with a hearty God bless you." [^6] Then, in special sleeping berths provided by his bishop, John W. Sharp, who was the Utah superintendent of the Union Pacific Railroad, George and the two federal marshals began their comparatively pleasant journey to the Nebraska State Penitentiary in Lincoln, where he had been ordered by the United States Department of Justice and where federal prisoners from the territories were housed. George wrote to his loved ones from railroad stops in Cheyenne and Omaha. Several newspaper reporters interviewed him in Omaha about his recent Supreme Court case. George also wrote his friend John Nicholson, then serving as assistant editor of the Millennial Star in Liverpool: "I am here in Omaha, a prisoner, bereft of liberty for Christ's sake. The issue is direct; for it is for obeying what I most assuredly know to be a revelation from God," he explained. "I feel proud (not too proud, I trust,) and happy to think that I have been deemed worthy to represent His word and will in this important particular." [^7] The prisoner arrived at the Nebraska State Prison on the outskirts of Lincoln on 19 June 1879.

Prison officials took George to a room for a bath at once. They took all his possessions from him and gave him a prison suit, consisting of a striped tick shirt, a pair of shoes, a cap, and a striped jacket and pants. Reynolds bemoaned, "I had not a stitch or a thread to remind me of home." But he received his worst indignity when at the cellhouse a barber shingled his hair and cut off his beard. [^8]

Rules were strict, and life was difficult in Lincoln. Letters could be written only once every two weeks and then only to family. Inmates were not allowed paper and pencil in their cells, a situation that was greatly disappointing to him. No prisoner was allowed to talk outside of his cell, not even to the guard, without permission. At six each morning officials marched the prisoners out of their cells, each man placing his right hand on the shoulder of the man in front of him, closing up as near as possible and keeping his eyes to the left. In this manner the inmates were marched around the food table and back to their cells where they ate their food in solitude. The same process was repeated for lunch and supper. Each prisoner was assigned to a branch of work that he pursued for ten hours a day, so George was grateful to be assigned as a bookkeeper for the foreman of the prison knitting shop. On Sundays the prisoners stayed in their cells most of the day, except when they attended an abbreviated Episcopal service in the prison chapel. "Its brevity is its great excellence in the eyes of the convicts," George reported. [^9]

Shortly after George was settled in Lincoln, he reported to his family, "Yesterday I was made very happy by receiving my garments. [^10] I feel myself again now; it is no part of the policy of the prison to interfere with a man's religion." George also indicated that he was treated with respect as long as he abided the prison rules. Since he could write only once every two weeks, he asked that his two families pass his letter around and then show it to President John Taylor and other authorities. In this letter he also apparently coined a phrase that for the next ten years was used as a refrain by future Mormon polygamous prisoners: "Be assured there are many worse places in the world than in prison for conscience' sake. It cannot take away the peace which reigns in my heart." But he added, "The day of deliverance, however soon it may come, will be gladly welcomed, with exceeding joy." [^11]

Time passed slowly for George in Nebraska, but he felt that he was treated fairly there. "I will say that I never had a word of derision or contempt offered to me from anyone, from the time I left Utah to the time I returned," he told John Nicholson. "One gentleman, as I left the prison, told me that though I had been a prisoner in their charge there was none of them that could regard me as a criminal." George left a good impression with the foreman at the knitting shop, for during the time he was in the prison in Lincoln he straightened out the man's books and accounted for the finances to the moment he left. [^12]

Reynolds received numerous letters from family, friends, and general authorities, and lamented that he could not return the favor. In the letters he was allowed to write to his family, he reported his own good health, his homesickness for his family, and his confidence that there was a "bright side" to his confinement. He asked how the new kitchen was working and how the summer garden was progressing.

During the first week of George's confinement, United States Attorney General Charles Devens, who was personally vindictive toward the Mormons, nearly sent George to the federal prison in Detroit, Michigan. But through the efforts of George Q. Cannon, Reynolds was assigned to spend the remainder of his prison term in the Utah Territorial Penitentiary. [^13] George's stay in Lincoln, Nebraska, lasted only one month.

He wrote and urged his family to meet him at Ogden and take with them portraits of all the family members to help him recollect the children through his extended stay in the Utah penitentiary. [^14] Accordingly they met at the Ogden depot the afternoon of 17 July 1879. Bishop Sharp had sent a special railroad car to carry George's family and friends to collect him. It was a bittersweet reunion because some of the younger children did not recognize their father without his beard. "I don't wonder at it," he remarked. "The lower part of my face is marked with much stronger lines than I expected. Florry [five years old] was very distant. She was very anxious to see her Pa, but when she did see him he did not look like the Pa she expected." [^15] Reynolds was taken that same evening to the Utah Penitentiary, usually referred to as the "Pen," at Sugar House, some five miles from the Reynolds residence on the north bench of the city.

During the summer the federal government attempted to transfer him back to Lincoln. On 16 August 1879, about a month after he arrived in Utah, he received a copy of the Omaha Bee, for which he had been an occasional contributing correspondent. The newspaper stated that President Hayes and his cabinet had decided to send him back to Lincoln on the grounds that he was only nominally imprisoned in Utah, that he often went home to see his family, and that he rode around town with the federal marshal. [^16] Apparently the Hayes administration believed these false rumors from Utah. Major Willard Chase, the government prison inspector from the Justice Department, was sent to investigate before sending Reynolds back to Nebraska. The United States marshal and the Utah prison warden, annoyed at the rumors, gave affidavits to Chase that Reynolds had never been home and had not been driven around town, which was the truth.

Chase made two visits, one in late August and another in late September to check on the visits Reynolds was receiving. Because of Chase's report and the work of George Q. Cannon in Washington, Reynolds was allowed to stay in Utah. George concluded that it would be wiser to receive fewer visitors than before and noted, "All that can truthfully be said about me is that I have seen more visitors than the other prisoners, but the visits of my friends have been strictly under the prison regulations, and if any other man in this penitentiary had as many friends to come see him as I have, they would have had the privilege of seeing him." [^17]

For three weeks in August 1879, George was joined by three other Mormon notables in the territorial prison. Judge Jacob Boremen, who, like Judge McKean, used his position on the bench to crusade against polygamy and theocracy, ordered George Q. Cannon, Albert Carrington, and Brigham Young, Jr., to the penitentiary on charges of contempt of court relating to their acting as executors of the Brigham Young estate. While in prison, these brethren, especially Cannon, continued to conduct Church business. The outgoing Cannon seemed to enjoy himself as he entertained many visitors and responded to inmate requests to "preach to the spirits in prison." [^18] On 28 August the Utah Supreme Court overturned Boreman's order and released the three. George Reynolds settled back into the sameness of his routine at the Pen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (29 September 1879): 621; Omaha Bee, 14 July 1879, p. 1.
[^2] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, 30 April 1880; Alice Louise Reynolds, "Biography of George Reynolds," p. 20.
[^3] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (29 September 1879): 621.
[^4] George Reynolds to Polly Reynolds, 10 October 1879, in Reynolds Collection, no. 32.
[^5] Junius F. Wells, "A Living Martyr," Contributor 2 (February 1881): 157; see also George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, 31 March 1880.
[^6] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (29 September 1879): 622.
[^7] Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 9 vols. (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983-85), 7: 572.
[^8] George Reynolds Journal, vol. 5, June 1880.
[^9] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (29 September 1879): 622.
[^10] John Taylor to George Reynolds, 3 July 1879, in Reynolds Collection, no. 5.
[^11] Christian August Madsen to George Reynolds, 21 June 1879, in Reynolds Collection, no. 14.
[^12] Christian August Madsen to George Reynolds, 17 December 1880, in Reynolds Collection, no. 14.
[^13] George Teasdale to George Reynolds, 6 September 1879, in Reynolds Collection, no. 8.
[^14] See Appendix A, "Identifiable Writings of George Reynolds."
[^15] Grant Underwood, "Book of Mormon Usage in Early LDS Theology," Dialogue 17 (Autumn 1984): 35-74; see also Gordon Irving, "The Mormons and the Bible in the 1830s," BYU Studies 13 (Summer 1973): 473-88. A scholarly study similar to Underwood's has not been conducted for the 1850-80 period. Nevertheless, a perusal of the contents of Mormon periodical literature during that time suggests a pattern similar to that of the pre-1850 period. The only person before George Reynolds to describe systematically the contents of the Book of Mormon was James A. Little, a historian and writer from Kanab, Utah. He wrote "Book of Mormon Sketches," a series that appeared in thirty-six issues in 1878-80 in the Juvenile Instructor.
[^16] "Correspondence," Millennial Star 41 (20 October 1879): 669.
[^17] Ibid., p. 668.
[^18] George Q. Cannon to George Reynolds, 13 February 1880, in Reynolds Collection, no. 7.
